The letter I remember most vividly was "the fruit one". The correspondent had confessed to Dolly Doctor the details of a masturbation habit that – from memory – involved not only the somewhat expected banana but entirely surprising nectarines. My best friend, reading the magazine aloud, attempted to intone the seriousness of the young woman's concern between bouts of hysterical giggles. Am I normal? pleaded the letter. We roared. By the time it came to read the doctor's soft advice, my best friend was laughing too hard to keep reading. There were maybe four of us, in various combinations of pyjama, rolling about the floor of my best friend's father's flat, stuffed with cake and overflowing with the full flavours of teenage nastiness; judging others without mercy, inflating the self by deflating the other, engaging in a competitive "normalcy" that would avow a solid, conformist puritanism within seconds of pretending to some detailed, wild experience. We were 14, maybe 15, and many times we splayed ourselves on that floor and other floors across our suburban wilderness, reading Dolly magazines aloud to mock the readership we imagined for them: girls less cool than us, less funny, younger, stupid, too dumb to guess what boys were doing to them, paranoid and insecure around sex, taste, love and clumsy at masturbation. We were, of course, that precise audience ourselves; awkward and uncomfortable, personalities squeezed and misshapen by bodies fast outgrowing the selfhood demanded to manage them. It's extraordinary to consider the amount of pretending that teenagers do at the same time they fail to recognise it in others. Our adolescent narcissism insisted on "the fruit one's" veracity, even as we subsequently spent hours comprising our own made-up Dolly Doctor letters in response to it, outdoing one another's suggestions for dirtiness. I clearly remember, "What about 'I fuck Lego'?" shouted across the room. Now, Dolly magazine, having falling victim to the digital world, is ceasing to print after 46 years. Recalling that precise evening in the early 90s, the slick pages of the magazine, the taste of cake, the fibres of the carpet, I am provoked to profound respect of the adult writers and editors who engaged all those years of teenage nonsense. No matter how outrageous the teenage suggestion, Dolly's voice was always steady: yes, you're normal, but if it's causing pain or problems in your life, please see a doctor. As kids, we thought the advice was individual but the lesson was collective. I was never too preoccupied with fruit, but when only a couple of years later it took me a couple of weeks too many to recover from a broken heart, the repeated, gentle message to seek out some extra help was soundly heeded. Please remember, the feminist revolution took place in the space of a historical blink – my own generation were offered experiences our mothers had never imagined. These magazines guided us through new social-sexual territories our own parents couldn't know – and of which we could not tell them. Australian writer Casey Bennetto was opining on Facebook recently his concern that the "morality plays" of gentle sitcoms that taught our generation of young people mores and consequences has been superseded by years of reality television that instead rewards behaviour at its most entertaining and extreme. I contemplate the end of Dolly magazine and I ponder similar consequences in magazine media, and its specific effect on young girls. There was a message consistency that came from Dolly – of respect, self-care, boundaried behaviour – that we learned from their careful editorial even as we thought we were laughing at it. The self-selected, click-bait channels of post-truth internet swap it for chaos. Dear fruit-lover, you may indeed be normal, but whose voice can you now trust to tell you so? What was the best lesson you learned from Dolly Doctor? Tell us in the comments

Donald Trump has claimed an agreement to keep 1,100 manufacturing jobs in Indiana from being shifted to Mexico would be a harbinger of deals to come and is proof that he could deliver on his bold campaign promises. "Companies are not going to leave the United States any more without consequences," he told workers at the Carrier furnace and fan coil plant in Indianapolis. "It's not going to happen. It's simply not going to happen." But critics warned that the arrangement struck with Carrier – which had planned to shift its operations at the plant to Mexico before Trump's intervention – is unsustainable on a large scale and could set a dangerous precedent for companies looking for tax concessions. Trump was returning to public speaking for his first major appearance since his election victory. He will begin a so-called "thank you tour" of key states where he won in November on Thursday night in Ohio. "These companies aren't going to be leaving any more. They're not going to be taking people's hearts out," he said in Indianapolis. "They're not going to be announcing, like they did at Carrier, that they're closing up and they're moving to Mexico." Carrier's parent company United Technologies had planned to close the plant and shift production of about 1,400 jobs from Indianapolis to Monterrey, Mexico, by 2019, along with a United Technologies factory in Huntington, Indiana, with 700 employees. Under the new deal, Carrier will keep 1,100 jobs at the Indianapolis plant, where the highest-paid employee can make as much as $26 an hour, or $70,000 a year with overtime. Seth Martin, a spokesman for Carrier, said that Indiana offered the air conditioning and furnace manufacturer $7m in tax incentives after negotiations with Trump's team, which covered "multiple years, contingent upon factors including employment, job retention and capital investment", the Indianapolis Star reported. The Huntingdon plant will still close. On the stump, Trump campaigned aggressively for preserving and restoring manufacturing jobs to the United States, and promised to persuade Carrier to keep its operations in Indianapolis or punish the company with fines if they refused. Trump had said he would impose a 35% tariff on companies who exported operations to countries where labor is cheaper. On Thursday neither Trump or Pence expanded on the vague details of the arrangement. During his roughly 15-minute remarks, some of which rambled off course, Trump told his audience that his interest in the plant's fate was piqued by a news segment featuring a Carrier employee who believed Trump would save their jobs. Vice-president elect Mike Pence, the outgoing governor of Indiana, who played a key role in shaping the deal, praised Trump "for picking up the phone, for keeping his word" and he called deal the beginning of a "renewed day for manufacturing in America". "When Donald Trump was running for president he said that if he was elected president of the United States America would start winning again," Pence said. "Well today, America won and we have Donald Trump to thank. "I got a feeling, working beside this extraordinary man, this is just the beginning." While Trump notches up a victory for delivering on a campaign promise before being sworn in as president, the impact will be narrowly felt. Since 2000, Indiana has lost 150,000 manufacturing jobs. Nationally, 5m manufacturing jobs disappeared over the same period. The White House on Thursday applauded the deal but noted that it was small in scope – and hardly comparable to the number of manufacturing jobs created under President Obama, which he put at 804,000. "That's obviously good news and an announcement that we would welcome," said White House press secretary Josh Earnest. "But ... Mr Trump would have to make 804 more announcements just like that to equal the standard of jobs in the manufacturing sector that were created in this country under President Obama's watch." Economist Paul Krugman said on Twitter that Trump would have to negotiate a similar deal with manufacturing companies every week for the next four years to restore just 4% of the total US manufacturing jobs lost since 2000. The deal drew criticism from some Democrats, who said it set a dangerous precedent that corporations can threaten to move operations abroad and would be rewarded with tax concessions. In an op-ed for the Washington Post on Wednesday, Senator Bernie Sanders, of Vermont, slammed the president-elect for using tax breaks and incentives to rescue a small fraction of Indiana's manufacturing jobs from being sent to Mexico. Sanders, who railed against the country's trade policies on the campaign trail, said Carrier's parent company, United Technologies, "took Trump hostage and won". "Just a short few months ago, Trump was pledging to force United Technologies to 'pay a damn tax,'" Sanders said. "He was insisting on very steep tariffs for companies like Carrier that left the United States and wanted to sell their foreign-made products back in the United States. Instead of a damn tax, the company will be rewarded with a damn tax cut. Wow! How's that for standing up to corporate greed?" In a statement on Wednesday, Carrier said the incentives offered by Indiana were "an important consideration" in its decision. "This is all terrible for a nation's economic vitality if businesses make decisions to please politicians rather than customers and shareholders," James Pethokoukis, the DeWitt Wallace Fellow at the conservative thinktank American Enterprise Institute, wrote in The Week Magazine. "Yet America's private sector has just been sent a strong signal that playing ball with Trump might be part of what it now means to run an American company." Trump spoke after touring the factory with vice-president-elect Pence. Trump observed the machinery, waving and flashing thumbs up to employees who lined the industrial concrete pathway to capture photos of the incoming president. Some wore his trademark red hats while others wore campaign T-shirts. Trump relished the moment. He walked over to one employee named Mario and squeezed the man's shoulders. Turning to reporters, Trump said: "They're going to have a good Christmas."

Many football clubs in the UK have liability insurance that covers them for claims from victims of child sex abuse, which has resulted in payouts. As the scandal continues to engulf the sport, insurers have pledged to improve the compensation process. Police reported on Thursday that 350 people have now come forward to report attacks and, as the scope of inquiries grows, the role of insurance companies has come under the spotlight. The Association of British Insurers (ABI) said: "Recent revelations regarding abuse in football are very distressing and at the heart of it are the victims and survivors who have been abused. "The insurance industry is fully engaged with the current independent inquiry and has submitted constructive suggestions about how the civil justice compensation process could be improved." Patrick Collinson, the editor of Guardian Money, notes that major clubs take out combined employers' and public liability policies, which collectively covers a huge range of eventualities, including allegations of sexual assault. He says: "The public liability part covers the club for claims when, say, a fan is hurt in the stadium. The employers' element covers claims relating to members of staff. One major insurer said there were circumstances, such as the allegations of sexual assault, in which claims could possibly be made against the employer's liability, and a payment be made, and such a payment could be subject to a non-disclosure agreement." On Wednesday it emerged that Chelsea sanctioned a compensation payment at boardroom level to a former youth team player who approached the club to complain about abuse at the hands of the club's former chief scout, Eddie Heath, who worked at the club between 1968 and 1979. Heath died in the late 1980s. The compensation was offered without an acceptance of liability. Collinson added: "Legally speaking, any employer, such as a football club, can be held liable for personal injuries inflicted by a member of their staff, where the employee's actions have been carried out during the course of their employment. "Ultimately, if the employer is held to be liable, then the victim can make a personal injury claim which will then be covered by the club's employer's liability insurance." The ABI statement continued: "Compensation paid by an organisation to a victim could be covered by liability insurance. As part of the settlement process, confidentiality clauses are sometimes requested by victims or the organisation insured. They are not part of the insurance contract and we are not aware of any insurers who currently request them."

The former Newcastle United footballer Derek Bell, who was subjected to years of sexual abuse by a boys club coach who subsequently worked at Newcastle, has accused the St James' Park club of a cover-up for their limited response after Bell raised the alarm in 1998. Bell was sexually abused by George Ormond, his coach at the local Montagu and North Fenham boys club, from the age of 12 to 16 in the late 1970s, until Bell signed as an apprentice at Newcastle United in 1979. He believes that after he joined Newcastle, Ormond had to "wean himself" off Bell, and he fears that Ormond must then have targeted other young players at the boys club for similar abuse. Almost 20 years later in 1998, Bell discovered that Ormond was working in the youth system at Newcastle and had been seen frequenting a hotel where young players stayed. Bell says he immediately told a youth-team coach that Ormond had sexually abused him as a boy and the club appear to have then informed Ormond he was no longer welcome to work at Newcastle. However, inquiries at the club today have not found that any further investigation was carried out, nor do the police appear to have been informed, and Ormond remained free until Bell himself went to the police and Ormond was finally arrested in January 2001. Another former Newcastle player, David Eatock, has now said he, too, was abused by Ormond, at the hotel in 1995, thought to be at the beginning of an approximately three-year period during which Ormond was involved with young players at Newcastle. "After I told Newcastle United about Ormond, they got him out of their club but the club hierarchy did nothing else," Bell told the Guardian. "They had the information but they do not appear to have passed it on or held any inquiry. Instead they covered it up and finally it was me who went to the police." Newcastle, owned since 2007 by Mike Ashley, are still trying to establish precisely when Ormond became involved in the club's youth system and the circumstances in which he left. The current managing director, Lee Charnley, has worked closely with Bell and supported him since he came forward to the club last week, and Newcastle have said they will assist any new police or other investigation. It is believed so far that Ormond worked for approximately three years in an unpaid capacity, which according to Eatock, included driving boys around and having access to them at the hotel. When Bell informed the youth coach in 1998 that Ormond was an abuser, the youth coach is understood to have immediately told the club's then secretary, who in turn is believed to have passed the information about Ormond further up the club's hierarchy. The then director and co-owner of the club, Freddy Shepherd, told the Guardian that he does not remember being informed about Ormond, and that the then chief executive, Freddie Fletcher, who died in 2012, may have dealt with the Ormond issue. The club hierarchy appear to have given an instruction that Ormond be told he was no longer wanted at Newcastle United, and he then ceased working there from October 1998, the club has established. However, there is no evidence that Newcastle United did anything further such as internally investigate Ormond's activities at the club over three years' involvement and the police do not appear to have been informed until Bell himself blew the whistle, separately, on Ormond, in 2000. Ormond appears to have remained free to be involved in coaching youth football during that period of longer than two years, until Northumbria police arrested him in January 2001. In 2000, Bell went to Ormond's house with a tape recorder to try to secure an incriminating confession, after seeing Ormond loitering behind a tree at a Newcastle city council hostel where vulnerable teenage refugees were being accommodated. He then worked with the police for 18 months to find other witnesses who could support a prosecution and finally, in November 2002, Ormond was sentenced to six years in prison after being found guilty of 12 indecent assaults. Seven former Montagu and North Fenham boys club players gave evidence, including Bell, all claiming anonymity. Bell waived that anonymity this week, saying that he has wanted to speak publicly about the "horrendous, horrific" abuse for years, and not "live a lie," and he talked to the Guardian about the abuse by Ormond and his life of trauma ever since. At the time of the police investigation and trial, he felt that the Newcastle United hierarchy again wanted to minimise publicity and any impact on the club, and to "push it under the carpet". There was little publicity even locally for the trial and conviction, and the club did not make a public statement afterwards saying they would welcome people who may have suffered abuse to come forward. Bell says that he personally, a former player until his career was ended due to a knee injury in 1983, did not receive even a telephone call from the club hierarchy through the investigation and trial, which left him feeling "let down". Shepherd, a Newcastle director and major shareholder in the club throughout the 1990s and until he sold his shares to Ashley in 2007, said that he does not remember being told about Ormond in 1998, or during the trial in 2002. He said he has looked through his own records and not found anything about Ormond, who was never formally employed by Newcastle. "I don't remember it being brought to my attention, and I don't know what happened," Shepherd said. "We are not the type of people to hold back; it would have been dealt with if I had been informed." Shepherd said he thought that Fletcher may have dealt with it himself and that he did not remember the case when it came to court. Bell is also critical of Northumbria police, arguing that the prosecution was limited mostly to his experiences and limited supporting testimony mostly from people he contacted himself, and that the police did not thoroughly investigate the boys club, where Ormond had been a senior coach with access to young boys since at least the mid-1970s. "There was no full investigation into the boys club," Bell said. "The emphasis in the police investigation was on me trying to find other people who I knew had played for the boys club, who I suspected may have been abused as well, to see if they would give evidence." He recalls that the police did talk to the former chairman of Montagu and North Fenham boys club, Dick Almond, who is now dead, and that Almond had said he was not aware of any abuse. Bell believes no thorough investigation was then conducted into Ormond's activities and the culture at the boys club over more than two decades. Northumbria police has not yet responded to the Guardian's questions about Bell's criticisms of that investigation. Newcastle United are now cooperating with the police on any new investigation into Ormond and historical sex abuse following a complaint they are understood to have received. A club spokeswoman said that on police advice, they consider it would now not be appropriate to respond publicly to questions about past handling of allegations. On Thursday two former Southampton schoolboy players, Dean Radford and Jamie Webb, waived their right to anonymity to voice to the BBC allegations of grooming and sexual assault against a former club employee. The pair say they were in their teens when the incidents took place. Webb said boys were asked to write the club employee love letters, and described an incident where "he tried to move down and put his hand in between my shorts and my tracksuit that I was wearing and I just blocked him". Radford described his experience as "the first I'd had of that sort of closeness and whatever else you want to call it", adding that he was made to snuggle up to the employee with another youngster. "The reasons he gave were that we needed to trust him, he needed to be like a second father to us – if we trusted him, and it worked both ways, then the chances were there that we could become a professional footballer." Radford added that he held the club "partly responsible" for the abuse. Southampton said they would cooperate fully with any police investigation. The NSPCC's hotline is 0800 023 2642 and ChildLine for children and young people can be contacted on 0800 1111. The National Association for People Abused in Childhood can be contacted on 0808 801 0331. In the UK, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Hotline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is on 13 11 14.

What is remarkable about Wednesday's Parliament House protest against detention of asylum seekers is that there has not been a lot more of it. In the history of protest it was a minor event, minimally disruptive and not especially creative. The media attention it grabbed was due less to its intrinsic reportability than to press gallery boredom and the fact it happened under their noses while the cameras were rolling. When the law-and-order brigade demanded that the book be thrown at the protesters it was dutifully following its part of the script. Protests have been inseparable from Australia's social and political history – from the Eureka Stockade and the conscription rallies of 1916 to Captain de Groot's dramatic unofficial opening of the Sydney Harbour Bridge in 1932. Yet when we think about the story of protest in Australia, we usually think first of the 1960s and 1970s, for it was then that powerful waves of dissent broke over the nation. The protest movements transformed our society in ways unimaginable then and often forgotten by young people now. The dissenters met fierce resistance from a mostly stolid, conservative nation still in the shadow of the patrician post-war prime minister, Robert Menzies. But Australians who entered the 1960s feeling comfortable and relaxed soon felt an earthquake beneath their feet. Progress does not just happen. It occurs because a few individuals began to demand change. They have to be determined, obstinate and willing to suffer, because those opposed to change are more powerful and typically react with ridicule, anger and, at times, violence. It's faded now, but in the 1960s and 1970s one of the most powerful institutions resisting social change was the RSL. Every social movement had to take on the returned soldiers' organisation. In the 1960s the Walgett RSL Club enforced a colour bar that extended to Aboriginal diggers. The sleepy club provoked a storm controversy when in 1965 the Freedom Riders arrived and picketed it with signs reading "Good enough for Tobruk. Why not Walgett RSL?" Then as now, the RSL was the keeper of the Anzac tradition, but the armed forces' values of regimentation, discipline and conformity represented everything the counterculture rejected and which young people were yearning to escape. The military's entanglement in the Vietnam war and the horrors committed against the Vietnamese people tarnished the armed forces for decades, something conveniently forgotten in the recent rehabilitation of Vietnam vets and the mawkish sentimentality that now smothers Anzac Day. Anzac was also the symbol of Australian masculinity, and so incomprehension mixed with outrage when a vanguard of young feminists arrived at the 1977 Anzac Day parade in Sydney waving placards denouncing rape as a weapon of war. After all, as one placard read, US soldiers admitted to mass rape in Vietnam, and some of those marching down George Street had fought with them. Gay Liberation too had to confront the RSL. In 1982 the League's pugnacious Victorian president Bruce Ruxton stood in the path of members of the Gay Ex-servicemen's Association to prevent them from laying a wreath at the Shrine of Remembrance. "I don't remember a single poofter from world war two," he growled. The RSL was not the only bastion of the old world's homophobia, racism and male privilege. The police forces were just as guilty. When the politicians wanted to teach protesters a lesson they only had to let the police off the leash. Back then "police brutality" and "Queensland" were almost synonymous. But not only there. The Vietnam Moratorium march in Sydney in September 1970 ended in disarray as police bashed protesters indiscriminately. And much of the battle for gay rights was a battle against the police, most notoriously in the premeditated violence by police at the first Gay Mardi Gras in 1978. This year the New South Wales police force and the parliament apologised. Looking back now, the protest movements take on a romantic aura; but, at the time, protesting often had the emotional ugliness of a schoolyard fight. The Age cartoonist Michael Leunig, among the earliest to take to the streets against the war in Vietnam, remembered it like this: It was a very sinister and disillusioning time. Something really dirty happened back then, and I have never forgotten it. ... I saw how paranoid, conservative and insensitive this culture really was. In those days, transgression was a potent political tool – gay men challenged the law with a public "kiss-in", feminists chained themselves to the foot rail of a men-only bar, and Aboriginal militants pitched a tent embassy on the lawns of Parliament House, daring politicians to take it down. As this week's "glue-in" attests, the story of protest has no end. There was a sense that the protesters had reached the point of desperation, so frustrated had they become with the policy of bi-partisan cruelty. No one expects the parliamentary disruption to change anything, and yet many protest movements are marked by long phases of apparent futility, until history shifts and makes it all worthwhile. * Clive Hamilton is the author of What Do We Want? The story of protest in Australia, published by the National Library of Australia.

The common advice to drink plenty of water when ill is based on scant evidence and can actively harm chances of recovery, doctors have warned. Medics at King's College hospital NHS foundation trust, in London, raised the alarm after they treated a patient with hyponatremia – abnormally low sodium – from drinking too much water to help with a recurring urinary tract infection. In the case highlighted, a 59-year-old woman consumed several litres of water based on medical advice she recalled from previous similar episodes to "flush out her system". She became progressively shaky, muddled, vomited several times and had significant speech difficulties. Dr Maryann Noronha, the co-author of the study published in BMJ Case Reports on Thursday, said: "When people are ill they don't tend to drink very much water because it's the last thing they want to do and you can become dehydrated very quickly. "To counteract that risk, doctors have said 'Make sure you drink lots of water.' That has perpetrated the myth that you must drink gallons of water. Most people don't do that but in this case they did it to the letter." Tests revealed her high intake of water had resulted in dangerously low sodium levels – 123 mmol/L – classifying it as a medical emergency. A mortality rate of almost 30% has been reported for patients with sodium levels of less than 125 mmol/L. Doctors restricted her fluid intake to 1 litre over the next 24 hours. By the following morning her blood tests were normal and she was discharged later that day. In a previous case a woman with gastroenteritis developed hyponatremia and died from drinking excessive amounts of water. Fatal water intoxication has also been reported in people engaged in endurance exercise and using the drug MDMA (ecstasy), when they have sweated heavily and overcompensated with fluids. The authors stress that it is rare to develop water intoxication with normal renal function but warn that some illnesses drive up levels of antidiuretic hormones, which reduce normal excretion of water. "Doctors should try to be more specific in their advice," said Noronha. "I say to people, while they are ill they should at least consume their normal fluid intake and up to half again [ie, up to 150%]. If you drink three litres, you shouldn't drink six litres when you are ill." Public Health England recommends people should drink six to eight glasses of fluid a day, including water, lower fat milk and sugar-free drinks including tea and coffee. Noronha said the amount needed by different people varies, but the main message is not to change your consumption too greatly when you are ill. "If you are someone who doesn't drink much water and then suddenly fill your body with masses that's going to have a very big effect," she said. She hopes the paper might prompt research in the area so that objective guidance can be drawn up. Dr Imran Rafi, the chair of clinical innovation and research at the Royal College of GPs, said: "Drinking enough water is important in keeping healthy, both physically and mentally, and patients should keep their fluids up when unwell, particularly in conditions that can cause dehydration. "There is no steadfast recommendation as to how much water people should drink in order to stay healthy, but the key thing is to keep hydrated – and passing clear urine is a good indication of this. "This case report highlights that excessive water intake can have important consequences for patients, and this is something that healthcare professionals, and patients, should be mindful of." What is the advice? Public Health England recommends drinking six to eight glasses of fluid a day, including but not limited to water. There is no official guidance as to how much to drink when ill, but Noronha advises no more than 1.5 times the amount you would usually drink. Noronha says water is generally fine but recommends a rehydrations sachet if suffering from gastroenteritis.

One of the students who made the life-saving medicine Daraprim in a school laboratory has accused Martin Shkreli of being "an attention-seeking businessman" who forgets there are "people's lives and livelihoods at stake" in the row over predatory drug pricing. Former hedge fund manager Shkreli last year bought Turing Pharmaceuticals and almost immediately increased the price of the drug – which has been off-patent since the 1970s – from US$13.50 to US$750 a tablet. The drug is used to treat certain types of malaria as well as toxoplasmosis, a rare and life-threatening infection caused by the Toxoplasma parasite which particularly affects people with weakened immune systems, such as those with HIV. To show how exorbitant Shkreli's pricing of the drug was, a group of year 11 students aged 16 and 17 from Sydney Grammar aimed to recreate the drug molecule in their school laboratory under the guidance of Dr Alice Williamson and Associate Professor Matthew Todd from the Open Source Malaria consortium. They succeeded, making the drug for a mere $2 a pill. The story went global overnight, with headlines such as "High schoolers punch Martin Shkreli in the face, figuratively" in Forbes and "Sydney high school students 'show up' Martin Shkreli" in the Washington Post. On Twitter Shkreli dismissed what the students achieved, saying "how is that showing anyone up? Almost any drug can be made at small scale for a low price". One of the students, Leonard Milan, told Guardian Australia that Shkreli "saying to us that anyone could do what we could do is certainly true". "If you follow his overpriced method using toxic chemicals in an industrial lab it's easy," Leonard said. "But the fact that we were able to substitute some really toxic gasses with simple school-available chemicals and do it so cheaply demonstrates the absurdity of some of his justifications for the price. "I think Martin is an attention-seeking businessman, the way he responds to every Twitter post made threatening him, bragging about how he can do whatever he wants reflects this. "Whilst there are mitigating factors, namely the percentage of returns he puts back into research and development, I think he has made it a personal matter. If he were to get 'pushed around' by schoolkids, it'd be a bad look. "I feel like Martin can forget that there are people's lives and livelihoods at stake." Williamson told Guardian Australia that showing how cheap and easy the drug was to produce was part of the point of the project, as it highlighted how unfair Shkreli's pricing of the drug was. She refused to weigh into Shkreli's Twitter tirade, saying only: "I like to let the work speak for itself." Shkreli later posted a video to Twitter boasting of his own achievements when he was younger. He also reminded Twitter users that "I have patents and stuff". He later tweeted that "lab scale manufacturing" and "manufacturing costs millions to maintain". The students were undeterred by Shkreli's comments, telling Guardian Australia the project had instilled a passion in them for science. "It has made me want to do a science degree," James Wood said.



More than 100,000 people in the UK have had their internet access cut after a string of service providers were hit by what is believed to be a coordinated cyber-attack, taking the number affected in Europe up to about a million. TalkTalk, one of Britain's biggest service providers, the Post Office and the Hull-based KCom were all affected by the malware known as the Mirai worm, which is spread via compromised computers. The Post Office said 100,000 customers had experienced problems since the attack began on Sunday and KCom put its figure at about 10,000 customers since Saturday. TalkTalk confirmed that it had also been affected but declined to give a precise number of customers involved. Earlier this week, Germany's Deutsche Telekom said up to 900,000 of its customers had lost their internet connection as part of the same incident. No one has claimed responsibility for the attack, which both Deutsche Telekom and KCom said was part of a worldwide effort. Security experts said the hackers may have been Russian but they had no proof. The speculation led the German chancellor, Angela Merkel, to say that, while she could not be sure who was responsible for the strike, "such cyber-attacks, or hybrid conflicts as they are known in Russian doctrine, are now part of daily life and we must learn to cope with them". The Mirai worm takes control of devices running the Linux operating system and uses them to knock services offline. This attack has targeted certain types of broadband routers, damaging their internet connection. A similar attack on the US-based Dyn web domain provider in October knocked a host of prominent websites offline, including Spotify, Twitter and Reddit. Security experts have suggested the aim of the attack may have been to simply cause disruption. "When the modified Mirai attack hit Deutsche Telekom over the weekend, many guessed that the fact that it simply shut down the devices it hit was a mistake by the bad guys trying to steal data," said Jonathan Sander, from the security firm Lieberman Software. "Now that Post Office routers are falling victim to the same type of attack shutting them down, it begs the question if the shutdown is the goal. Most cybercrime is about money. But every now and then there are bad guys who just want to watch the world burn." TalkTalk said: "Along with other internet service providers in the UK and abroad, we are taking steps to review the potential impacts of the Mirai worm. A small number of customer routers have been affected and we have deployed additional network-level controls to further protect our customers." A spokeswoman declined to put a number on the number of people affected. She said: "Only a small percentage of our customers have the affected router and, of those, only a very small number have experienced connection issues as a result." A Post Office spokesperson confirmed a "third party disrupted the services" of its broadband customers on Sunday. "Although this did result in service problems, we would like to reassure customers that no personal data or devices have been compromised," he said. "We have identified the source of the problem and implemented a resolution which is currently being rolled out to all customers. No other Post Office services were affected." KCom said it had been affected since Saturday but the vast majority of its customers were now able to connect to and use their broadband service as usual. A spokesperson said: "Our core network was not affected at any time and we have put in place measures to block future attacks from impacting our customers ... We have provided formal notification of the attacks to the communications regulator, Ofcom, and will continue to work with other UK communications providers to ensure a consistent approach to mitigating this threat."

Matildas star Caitlin Foord has been awarded Asia's top accolade for an individual player, the AFC player of the year at the Asian confederation's awards in Abu Dhabi. Foord was one of a three-woman shortlist that also included Matildas co-captain Lisa De Vanna and China's Tan Ruyin. It's the first time two Australians have been nominated for an individual award, drawing praise from head coach Alen Stajcic. "To have two out of three nominations in such a strong confederation where we have some of the best players and football countries in the world is a real testament of how well our team performed in 2016," Stajcic said. Foord battled back from a broken collarbone to play a central role in Australia's Rio Olympics campaign, scoring against eventual gold medallists Germany to help the Matildas to the quarter-finals. She has won 50 international caps since debuting at the age of 16. Foord becomes the third Australian woman to win the award in recent years after Katrina Gorry (2014) and Kate Gill in (2010), but the first to win both the senior and youth accolades, after winning the young player of the year in 2011. "I wasn't expecting this ... I accept the award on behalf of all the Matildas," Foord said. "It's obviously a massive achievement. Looking back at the young player award, I was so young and just took the award. I didn't really expect it, or think too much of it. "Now when I look back, I'm privileged to have done so well and I will do the same when I look back on this trophy and combine the two." In other categories, the W-League's Kate Jacewicz confirmed her vaunted reputation as she picked up the gong for Asia's best female referee with Renae Coghill acknowledged with the best assistant's award. For the second year in a row a player from United Arab Emirates has won the top men's award with Al Ain's playmaker Omar Abdulrahman receiving the male player of the year gong. Beaten to the 2015 award by compatriot Ahmed Khalil, the prodigiously talented 25-year-old made up for that disappointment by topping this year's shortlist ahead of Iraq's Hammadi Ahmed and Wu Lei from China. Abdulrahman's recognition comes after the diminutive midfielder played pivotal roles in guiding Al Ain to this season's AFC Champions League final, and the UAE to a strong position in Group B qualifying for 2018 FIFA World Cup in Russia.

Even a likable and authoritative performance from Tom Hanks can't keep this movie in the air. It's a solemn and low-flying hagiopic from director Clint Eastwood about Captain Chesley "Sully" Sullenberger, the remarkably courageous airline captain who in 2009 managed to land his damaged plane on New York's Hudson river after geese flew into both his engines – and then got all his passengers off unharmed. This oddly feels like a pious version of Robert Zemeckis's rather better and more complex film Flight (2012) with Denzel Washington as the captain who saves lives with a risky move but gets stabbed in the back by corporate types who want to pin the blame on him. It may also remind you of comedian Bob Newhart's famous routine about the captain answering passengers' safety questions: "How long would the plane remain afloat if we ditch? Uhh ... some of them go down like a rock, and some stay up for ... I don't know ... two or three minutes." Sully's "miracle on the Hudson" is tacitly offered to us in the same way as the news media presented it at the time – an inspirational example of leadership and a Hollywood ending to salve the trauma of 9/11. Hanks is the quietly heroic Sully and Aaron Eckhart is once again landed with a dull supporting role playing Sully's stolidly supportive co-pilot, Jeff Skiles. Unlike Zemeckis's Flight, which boldly put the crash right up front, this film hangs back, letting us at first just have Sully's bad dreams and PTSD hallucinations before finally giving us the calamity for real – the exciting crash and then the tense rescue – and some of it again in flashback during the official inquiry hearing, in which duplicitous managers try to blame Sully to cover their asses. It winds up being anticlimactic, and the CGI for the big splashdown isn't top-notch. Laura Linney plays Sully's tearful wife (another waste of talent), who has fraught conversations with him on the phone but, bizarrely, never has a face-to-face scene with Hanks. Did Sully really never lay eyes on his wife in the weeks following the crash? Of course, the implied message is that Sully is not merely a hero for the way he landed the plane, but also for the way he stood up to the pompous top brass afterwards. That's probably true. But it all diverts us from the bigger, common-sense questions, such as whether there's a serious, apparently uncorrected design fault that means a humble flock of geese can bring down a plane. There's a good gag when a bartender tells Sully he has named a drink after him: Grey Goose with a splash of water.

It is good to see Hollywood veteran Ed Harris and his wife, Amy Madigan, gracing the London stage for the first time in Sam Shepard's 1978 slice of American gothic. Shrewd casting also brings us the youthful Jeremy Irvine from Steven Spielberg's War Horse and Charlotte Hope from Game of Thrones in their West End debuts. Yet, haunting as Shepard's play is, a faint air of portentous reverence overhangs Scott Elliott's production. What fascinates me is Shepard's ability to play variations on the classic US family drama. Down on a decaying farm in Illinois, the patriarchal Dodge is an old wreck slugging whiskey and gazing fixedly at the television. His wife, Halie, is a sanctimonious babbler who dreams of erecting a town statue to a dead son. Of the pair's living progeny, Tilden is a sad halfwit and Bradley a one-legged sadist. It is a sign of the general dysfunction that when Tilden's son, Vince, turns up with his Californian girlfriend, he goes unrecognised. The family is palpably paralysed by some past event involving the buried child of the title. You could easily list the influences at work on Shepard: Arthur Miller's Death of a Salesman, Edward Albee's Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf? and even Harold Pinter's The Homecoming. You also feel Shepard shrouds the play in symbolism: why the sudden fecundity of the mysterious field at the back of the house? But what keeps one riveted is Shepard's attack on the familiar household gods. The close-knit American family, long cherished as a political ideal, is shown to be filled with dark secrets, poisonous guilt and loveless inertia. It is also, Shepard suggests, an institution from which there is no escape. Much as I admire the piece, the detailed naturalism of Elliott's production downplays the comedy that Matthew Warchus found in his 2004 National Theatre revival and slows the pace: every leak in the roof and overhead footstep is minutely registered. But at least there is ample time to dwell on the performances. Harris is totally compelling as Dodge. He captures the second childishness of old age as he pummels the sofa in a tantrum demanding another bottle of whiskey. Harris also catches perfectly the contradictions of a man who denies the past – claiming the present is "the whole shootin' match" – while being oppressed by it. It is a fine performance that suggests a once-fruitful titan reduced to a hollow-eyed husk. Madigan as Halie deftly mixes self-delusion with downright flirtiness in the presence of the local pastor. The young actors also impress: Irvine is all angry perplexity as Dodge's unacknowledged grandson and Hope, as his girlfriend, wittily conveys the bafflement of the outsider who suspects she has wandered into a madhouse. Barnaby Kay as Tilden has a touch of the pathos of Lennie in John Steinbeck's Of Mice and Men and Gary Shelford is suitably brutal as Bradley, even if you wonder precisely what led him to hack off his leg with a chainsaw. But that is one of the touches of grotesquerie that are part and parcel of Shepard's vision. Loving as Elliott's production is, you get the anguish without the absurdity that for Shepard is inseparable from family life. At Trafalgar Studios, London, until 18 February. Box office: 0844-871 7627.

President-elect Trump is taking a victory lap of the midwest, jetting to Indiana to visit the Carrier factory. Trump claims to have saved more than 1,100 jobs at the heating and air-conditioning company from being outsourced overseas. However, at least 1,000 Carrier jobs are still heading to Mexico. The company got $700,000 in tax breaks annually from the state of Indiana to stay. If I lost, would you have picked up the phone? Trump says he will leave his family business and announce the full details of his plans to do so on 15 December. Our interactive team put together a visual guide to the conflicts of interest still facing the Trump Organization. Trump's conflicts of interest: a visual guide More than 2,300 scientists, including 22 Nobel prize winners, wrote an open letter to Trump and Congress calling on them respect science and to encourage research and the collection of scientific data. 'The federal government must support and rely on science' Ivanka wants to make climate change – which her father has called a hoax perpetuated by the Chinese – one of her signature issues, a source close to her told Politico. Ivanka Trump: champion of liberal causes? Earlier this week Trump tweeted that "millions" of people voted illegally in the election, despite providing no evidence to substantiate the claim. Trump's random tweet seems to have been inspired by another random tweet on 12 November by a little-known Republican official. He also offered no evidence. The random tweeter: 'This is not false news' Newsweek advance-printed 125,000 copies of its "Madam President" edition before the election, so confident were they of a Clinton win. The magazine got removed from shelves – but not before some were sold, creating a collector's edition now being sold on eBay. One auction nears $400

The ban on Russia's track and field athletes will continue into 2017 after the taskforce responsible for assessing the country's fight against doping confirmed it would wait until February to outline a road map for a return to international competition. However, there was a chink of light for Russia, with Rune Andersen, the Norwegian heading the IAAF's taskforce, conceding that Russian Athletics had started making structural reforms after being banned from the Olympics in June. "Rusaf has made further progress since June, including anti-doping education modules and securing the cooperation of the Russian criminal authorities and parliament in criminalising the supply of doping products," Andersen told a news conference. "But one of the key remaining issues is how to demonstrate the IAAF and Rusada [Russian Anti-Doping] will be able to carry out testing without interference, which is a key part of their reinstatement. The taskforce will go to Moscow in January to assess the response to part two of the McLaren report on 9 December and to monitor progress." Andersen said the taskforce would report back to the IAAF's council in February, when it hoped to "identify a clear road map" for Russia's return but he declined to give any further likely timeframe. Sebastian Coe, the IAAF president, agreed with Andersen's evaluation but said he would not be making any judgments about whether there had been a cultural shift in Russia. "What I am satisfied with is that we are making progress," he said. "There has to be recognised that this is a system that cataclysmically failed clean athletes." Earlier the Russia president Vladimir Putin used his state of the nation address to say he thought effective measures would be in place early in the new year. "I am sure the so-called doping scandal will allow us to create the most advanced system of righting this evil in Russia," he said. "I assume the national programme of counteracting doping will be ready as early as the beginning of next year."

Howard Schultz will step down as Starbucks chief executive – again. In April, the company said on Thursday, Schultz will become "executive chairman", and the Kevin Johnson, chief operating officer, will step up to replace him. Shares of the coffee retailer's stock took a sharp dive on the news in after-hours trading, dropping 3.3% to $56.78. Schultz, who will remain chairman of the board, will devote time to furthering a "social impact agenda", he said in a call with investors. His duties will also include developing new technologies for Starbucks stores, like the company's recent foray into carbonated "nitro" cold brew. In 2000, Schultz left the CEO position after running the company since 1987; in early 2008 he returned to steer it through the financial crisis after the company lost half its value on the stock market over the course of a single year. The coffeehouse chain's current situation is different from its position eight years ago, Schultz said, because the 2016 management team was better-suited to the challenges of the market than 2008's senior staff had been. The move is not entirely a surprise. Schultz stepped down from a seat on the board he will now chair in 2013, and rumors about his political aspirations have circulated for some time. A spokeswoman for the company dismissed them. "Howard has long said that we need to stop looking to Washington DC for wisdom and inspiration, and instead look for it in our cities and towns, in businesses and community organizations, and in one another," she told the Guardian. Schultz "has no plans to run for political office, as he has said many times, and will remain with the company", she said. In his new position, Schultz will shift focus to "retail innovation", the company said in a press release. Schultz said that he was "delighted" Johnson would take over his duties and said he would focus on finding "the balance between profit and conscience" with the company's veteran-hiring programs and its anti-poverty programs. "I think we can all agree, Republican or Democrat, that there's a lot of people being left behind and that companies can do more for the communities they serve and for the people they employ," Schultz told investors. Schultz has been a very public CEO. The coffee executive had been vocally political during the 2016 election season, telling CNN's Poppy Harlow, "I think it's obvious that Hillary Clinton needs to be our next president" in September. The company overwhelmingly contributed money to the Clinton campaign – nearly $65,000 to Trump's $1,400 in contributions. Schultz wrote a downbeat memo to staff when Trump won the election: "[L]ike so many of our fellow Americans – both Democrats and Republicans – I am stunned," he wrote. "We cannot know what the precise impact will be on our country and the rest of the world," Schultz wrote, though he said he was "hopeful that we will overcome the vitriol and division" of the season. On the conference call, Schultz was more upbeat: "These are exciting times for us all," he said.

After France's Socialist president, François Hollande, announced he would not run for re-election, his party will seek to prove wrong the pollsters who say the French left is too weak to make it through to the final round of the presidential election next spring. The final is currently tipped to be between the right's François Fillon and the far-right's Marine Le Pen. The French Socialist party, alongside other associated micro-parties, will hold an open primary race to choose its presidential candidate on 22 and 29 January and candidates have until 15 December to declare. But other candidates from the across the left have already announced they will run independently. Candidates from the hard-left to the centre-left could now include: Manuel Valls Hollande's prime minister and once his most loyal ally, Manuel Valls, has not yet announced if he will run in the Socialist primary race. Tough on law and order and a pro-business reformist from the right of the Socialist party, the 54-year-old is a little more popular with the general public than Hollande, but he is at odds with some of the left. He took only 5% of the vote in the last Socialist primary race in 2011. Arnaud Montebourg Arnaud Montebourg has already declared he will run in the Socialist primary race. Hollande's former economy minister is firmly on the left of the party and lost his cabinet position in 2014 after denouncing Hollande's pro-business shift. The former lawyer, who after leaving government did a management course at business school, says he favours a strong state to protect France's industry from "foreign interests". Benoît Hamon The leftwing MP for Yveslines, outside Paris, has already declared to run in the Socialist primary race. Benoît Hanonserved twice as a minister under Hollande. But, as education minister, the 49-year-old quit the government in protest at pro-business reforms in 2014. Emmanuel Macron A rebellious former economy minister and former protege of Hollande, he has launched a maverick, outsider bid for the presidency, promising to lead a people's "democratic revolution" against a "vacuous" political system. The former investment banker, 38, who was unknown to the French public until two years ago, is not a member of a political party and has never run for elected office. He describes himself as coming from the left but wants to unite the left and right on a centrist ticket. Jean-Luc Mélenchon The charismatic firebrand is running on a radical left ticket and last week won the backing of the Communist party. A one-time Trotskyist and former teacher, he spent 30 years in the Socialist party, where he served as a minister and was once the youngest ever senator. He quit in 2008, arguing the party wasn't properly leftwing. A former Socialist minister, he has emerged as the tub-thumping philosopher-leader of the radical left. He won 11% of the vote in the first round of the 2012 presidential election. Christiane Taubira Christiane Taubira, Hollande's former justice minister and a well-established political figure from Cayenne in French Guiana, hasn't commented on whether or not she will run in the primary but a petition calling on her to do so currently has 70,000 signatures. The 64-year-old, who was an important voice on the left of Hollande's government, quit after differences over his security measures after Paris's terrorist attacks. As a minister, she often faced racist taunts from far-right sympathisers: at one rally, children waved bananas at her. A municipal election candidate for the far-right Front National was forced to withdraw in 2013 after likening her to a monkey on Facebook. She later told Libération that racist attacks "were an attack on the heart of the republic".

The Dardenne brothers' new film, The Unknown Girl (unveiled at Cannes earlier this year), makes its UK appearance in a new edit, with six minutes cut from the running time. The new version can make no real difference to its fundamental problems: a bafflingly inert, undirected performance from Adèle Haenel and a borderline ridiculous detective story narrative, in which minor characters are laboriously wrangled on and off screen to tell Haenel important things. The movie is at its most effective in the opening five minutes: stressed GP Dr Jenny Gavin (Haenel) is giving her intern, Julien (Olivier Bonnaud), a harsh telling-off at the end of a long day, after surgery hours, and so ignores a door buzzer going off. Later, she is told by the police that this was a young African woman in a desperate state who was later found dead; if Dr Gavin had answered her call, she might still be alive. Stricken with guilt, she then makes it her business to find out who this woman was – as a doctor, she has a kind of carte blanche to go around asking questions. This detective routine is sometimes ingenious: taking a pulse while casually making inquiries is a good lie-detector test. But Haenel's blank, slightly bug-eyed solemnity gives no sense of her inner life; the parade of minor figures is mostly implausible, and the climactic revelation is melodramatic and unsatisfying. A minor misfire from these major film-makers.

Long before undergoing any proper study of war, I remember believing I had the problem sorted. In primary school, I remember remarking to friends that we could spare the lives of so many soldiers and civilians if leaders could simply agree what was being contested and have a chess match to determine the victor. The loser, I proposed, would then concede and the conflict would be resolved with no need for bloodshed. Reading Machiavelli later, I realised the obvious flaw in my solution: to put all your fortune into anything less than your entire army is often risky, dumb and irresponsible. All the same, the idea of a kind of war with minimal casualties remains appealing – and has throughout history. From so-called champions fighting in single combat – for instance, Siamese King Naresuan and Burmese Prince Mingyi Swa in the 16th century – to international agreements like the Hague and Geneva conventions, which restrict warfare to particular forms, we've constantly tried to manage the potential harms of war. Today, the quest for "risk-free" warfare seems to have reached its zenith in the increasing presence of robots on the battlefield. From the armed drones we read so much about – which allow targeted strikes to be administered by remote-controlled aeroplanes – to bomb disposal bots, the advantages of these techno troopers are pretty obvious. Not being human, these bots are expendable, albeit pricy. This means they can be deployed in contexts where it would be imprudent or irresponsible to send human combatants. This is exactly the argument the US president, Barack Obama, deployed in defence of his drone policy, including CIA drone strikes in Pakistan, Yemen and Somalia, and estimates of civilian casualties varying from less than 100 to over 800. Obama said it was "not possible for America to simply deploy a team of special forces to capture every terrorist. Even when such an approach may be possible, there are places where it would pose profound risks to our troops and local civilians." As the capacities of military robots expand from semi-autonomous machines to potentially fully autonomous, Terminator-style combatants, we should expect to see these arguments used with even greater force. The future we anticipate for military robots is a fully capable war fighter able to be deployed in place of a human soldier. Not only will this spare a human being the risks of combat, it might help protect civilians as well. With adrenaline pumping in the heat of combat, it might be hard for a soldier to make a split-second judgement on whether movement on his flank is an enemy trying to get a clear shot or a civilian seeking cover. A robot faces fewer obstacles to clear decision-making and might more regularly be able to make the right call, sparing not only civilian lives, but the moral trauma of having taken a life. It's here – in the avoidance of the moral problems associated with killing – that the great moral challenge of military robots arises. In essence, delegating the task of fighting war to robots means alleviating humans like us from the responsibility of making life-and-death decisions – including the potential psychological costs that responsibility entails. Yet, as with any area of technological development, we need to consider whether war and killing are activities that are appropriate to outsource to machines. In his play, Les Justes, Albert Camus pre-empts this question in his depiction of a group of revolutionaries plotting the assassination of Russian Grand Duke Sergei Alexandrovich. The abiding point of the play is that moral justification for killing relies to some extent on one's own willingness to die. Refusing to assume the risk of your own death is to miss the moral seriousness of killing; it means forfeiting any ethical defence for what you've done, in essence turning killing into murder. Camus' claims might go a bit too far. Firstly, many who are willing to die have no right to kill – terrorists, most obviously. Secondly, it's hard to argue that someone trying to defend justice and do what's right needs to be willing to die in order to do so: we wouldn't think a police officer unwilling to give their life was unworthy of the role. However, in the ambiguity of modern warfare it can be unclear precisely where justice lies. Because of this, having humans who recognise the moral seriousness of killing involved might be critically important. The conscientious reflection of those whose hands will actually do the killing serves as another safeguard against the potentially reckless administration of force by political leaders. Earlier in the US presidential campaign, Donald Trump promised to bring back waterboarding and other forms of torture. In response, the former CIA director Michael Hayden suggested rightly that troops would likely refuse to obey his commands. If risk-free, automated war became a possibility, one of the crucial safeguards against war crimes – the conscience, honour and personal ethics of military personnel, and what philosopher and psychologist William James described as a "pure piece of perfection" – might be lost. Regardless of their complexity, mechanised combatants will never be able to feel the moral implications of killing and the ethical reflection it sparks. While it is often less than this, in its purest form, war is one of the most raw expressions of our commitment to treat some subjects with moral seriousness. It reveals a truth which is easy to overlook in the innocuousness of the day to day: there are things for which a people are – and should be – willing to die. Because war isn't anything so banal as a chess game. It cannot be conducted in a vacuum and though we should aim to protect innocent people from the direct consequences of conflict by seeking alternatives to war, when it does inevitably occur, we cannot – and should not – be fully inoculated from the ethical consequences. When we send our sons, daughters, fathers, sisters and friends off to war, each of us feels the moral significance of the act. We use it to hold leaders to account, question the necessity of the conflict and express gratitude for what our armed forces are defending. It's true, we might feel the costs of war less if it were fought by machines – in many ways that would be a good thing. But "not feeling" has a cost of its own: not to be emotionally and intellectually compelled to understand and avoid the horror of war also seems horrific in its own way.

The US military has admitted culpability for killing approximately two dozen civilians in a July airstrike outside the Syrian city of Manbij, then the scene of fierce fighting with Islamic State militants. By the Pentagon's account, the strike, which hit the Syrian village of Tokhar near Manbij, represents the single worst incidence of civilian casualties in the entire US war against Isis. But human rights monitors believe the US military is still undercounting the death toll, which is substantially lower than the ranges those monitors have compiled. The Syrian Network for Human Rights has listed, mostly by name, 98 men, women and children dead from the July airstrike. The human-rights monitor Airwars, based in the UK, assesses civilian deaths in the strike to range between 73 and 203. In a statement on Thursday, US central command (Centcom), said that an internal investigation had concluded that "up to 24" civilians died from the bombing. Key details of the incident remain unclear: the attack at Tokhar, near Manbij, occurred in the early morning hours of 19 July, local time. Centcom listed the date of the strike as 18 July, while saying that a different 19 July strike allegation, this one near Aleppo, did not in fact happen. But it had previously acknowledged that the airstrike in question occurred. Centcom said the civilian deaths resulted from Isis "interspers[ing]" civilians with its fighters at an area identified as a staging ground for a "counterattack" against US and proxy forces. At the time, the two sides had been locked in weeks of fierce fighting for control of Manbij, a waypoint for Isis to exfiltrate terrorists through Turkey, and – for the US coalition – the last obstacle southward to Isis' Syrian capital of Raqqa. The US said the airstrike targeted the area and "inadvertently" killed the non-combatants alongside nearly 100 Isis militants. "Unknown to Coalition planners, civilians were moving around within the military staging area, even as other civilians in the nearby village had departed over the previous days," Centcom said in its statement. After various investigations into allegations of US-caused casualties, Centcom now believes that the US has inadvertently killed 173 people to date in a war that has entered its third year. But monitoring groups say that the US has systematically undercounted the civilian death toll of the war. "Our own research indicates at least 330 civilians died in these same events. Even when [Centcom] confirmed cases, there appears to be under-reporting on these incidents," said Airwars' Chris Woods. Woods said he was "very pleased" that Centcom acknowledged its role in the Manbij-area strike, though he noted the confusion in dates as to when the strike occurred. But he considered the variance in casualty figures alarming. "How can we only have 24 killed by the coalition, when we have such substantial reporting of civilian casualties that day?" said Woods.

The United Nations has admitted for the first time that its peacekeepers were directly responsible for bringing cholera to Haiti, bringing to an end a six-year delay in which the world body consistently ducked responsibility for importing the disease that has potentially killed up to 30,000 people. In a 16-page report released on Thursday setting out what is being billed as a new approach to fighting cholera in Haiti, the UN secretary-general, Ban Ki-moon, cites expert opinion about the cause of the deadly outbreak. It found that "the preponderance of the evidence does lead to the conclusion that personnel associated with the [UN's peacekeeping] facility were the most likely source". The comment marks the first time that the UN chief has admitted that the devastating disease was brought to the country by the organization's own peacekeepers when they were transferred from Nepal to assist with emergency rescue work in the wake of the 2010 Haitian earthquake. Ban presented his report to a special meeting of the UN general assembly in New York on Thursday. He spoke directly to the Haitian people in three languages – Creole, French and English. In English, he said: "We apologize to the Haitian people. We simply did not do enough with regard to the cholera outbreak and spread in Haiti. We are profoundly sorry for our role." He added that the UN's handling of the epidemic "leaves a blemish on the reputation of UN peacekeeping and the organization worldwide. For the sake of the Haitian people, but also for the sake of the United Nations itself, we have a moral responsibility to act and a collective responsibility to deliver." Despite the presentation of the speech as a historic "apology", it remained carefully worded in order to meet the tight limitations imposed by the UN's legal position. Since cholera erupted in Haiti in September 2010, the UN has insisted that it is legally immune from any claims for compensation from those who were sickened or from the families of those who died. The official death toll now stands at 9,200 people, but studies have suggested that if under-reporting is taken into account the real figure may be more than three times that number. As Ban and his senior team prepare to bow out from their positions at the end of the year, they have stepped up efforts to clean up what has become a fetid sore on the reputation of the UN around the world. For the past six years it had doggedly refused to address the issue of how its own peacekeepers brought the deadly cholera bacterium with them when they were supposed to be coming to the help of the stricken people of Haiti. A first tacit admission of guilt came in August. But that in turn was denounced by the UN's own human rights special rapporteur as a "disgrace" because in his opinion it amounted to an "explicit and unqualified denial of anything other than a moral responsibility". The special rapporteur, Philip Alston, on Thursday welcomed Ban's final admittance of the UN's culpability. "The secretary-general has finally acted, albeit in his last month in office, after years of stonewalling," he said in a statement to the Guardian. But Alston went on to slam Ban's speech to the general assembly as a "half-apology". "The determination not to accept legal responsibility entrenches a scandalous legal maneuver designed to sidestep the UN's legal obligations," he said. "It renders a meaningful apology impossible, as is made clear by the half-apology of the secretary-general today: he apologizes that the UN has not done more to eradicate cholera, but not for causing the disease in the first place," Alston said. The key countries impacted by the cholera epidemic, which has spread around the Caribbean, showed a similar mix of emotions in response to Ban's "apology". Haiti's representative to the UN, Jean Cazeau, said: "The UN has shown it can admit making mistakes." He added pointedly that Ban's volte face marked "a radical change of attitude away from the morally unjustifiable approach from the UN until now". Courtenay Rattray, UN representative for Jamaica which suffered a knock-on cholera epidemic that spread from Haiti, said that Ban's address acknowledged "the gross injustice that has been visited on the people of Haiti and the moral responsibility harbored by the UN". As part of the UN's new commitment to trying to redress some of the damage that its posture of denial has caused in one of the world's poorest nations, the world body is trying to drum up $400m of resources over three years to invest in combatting the epidemic and its impact. The money, if raised, would be split within a dual track approach – introducing new sanitation and health treatment measures to reduce incidence of the disease, and a community-based fund to help victims. However, a lack of finance may inhibit the delivery of the package. The announcement conceded that efforts to tackle the outbreak have been undermined by insufficient funding. Brian Concannon, executive director of the Institute for Justice and Democracy in Haiti, a partnership of Haitian and US human rights advocates, said the initial wording of the announcement marked "a refreshing change from six years of ignoring victims' voices and the UN's clear legal obligations to them". But he noted that the use of the phrase "moral responsibility" was the same language that the UN secretary general used during his trip to Haiti in July 2014, and appeared to be calculated to address the concerns of UN lawyers more than those of the people of Haiti. "Haitians are looking for a less qualified apology – for both introducing cholera and for the six years of denial of responsibility, which was an insult to Haitian dignity," said Concannon.

Claudio Ranieri's greeting for Kasper Schmeichel on Thursday was also the most tender of fitness tests. Until then the goalkeeper had offered the manager only his left hand since fracturing his right one in the Champions League draw at FC Copenhagen on 2 November but now Ranieri decided it was time to step up the comeback. "I said: 'Give me the right' and I shook it – but gently," said Ranieri. Schmeichel survived. Now Ranieri is taking encouragement from the belief that his first-choice goalkeeper, who is still training separately from his team-mates, could be back in action before Christmas. But there is no definite return date. "It depends on him and the surgeon," said Ranieri. So Ron-Robert Zieler will remain in goal for another few weeks at least. And the German has been jittery since standing in for Schmeichel – one reason why the champions have slipped into such a Premier League rut that Ranieri bills Saturday's duel with Sunderland as a relegation battle. Zieler was one of six signings Leicester made in the summer as they spent over £60m in an effort to defend their title and make waves on their Champions League debut. Only one, the Algerian striker Islam Slimani, can be classed as a success and even he has not been a perfect fit. Nampalys Mendy, prised from Nice as the intended solution to one of football's toughest brain-teasers – how do you replace N'Golo Kanté? – has only just returned to full training after injuring his ankle in the defeat at Hull City on the opening day of the season. Ranieri is considering taking him to Sunderland as a substitute. The Nigeria winger Ahmed Musa has performed only fitfully. The defender Luis Hernández has not made a league appearance since the 3-0 walloping at Chelsea in mid-October. And Bartosz Kapustka, the 19-year-old Polish midfielder, has not played at all, with Ranieri saying he is not yet robust enough for the Premier League. The Italian defends this recruitment and explained that some players need a while to adapt to the Premier League, citing the example of Riyad Mahrez, who was gradually integrated into English football after arriving from Le Havre in 2014. "If he needed six or seven months, imagine [how it is] for the others," said Ranieri. Which is fair enough. The problem is that the performances of Leicester's established players this season suggest the club needed summer reinforcements who were ready for immediate deployment in the Premier League. Especially as the most promising youngsters already at the club have not yet been able to contribute as much as hoped. The 19-year-old full-back Ben Chilwell suffered an ankle injury from which he has only just recovered, while Ranieri has deemed another youngster, the winger Demarai Gray, to be ready for no more than one league start so far this season despite some impressive appearances from the bench. Ranieri said after the match at Watford three weeks ago – their fifth defeat from six Premier League away matches – that he would give more serious thought than ever to revamping his starting line-up. But he made only one alteration for the next league match, Saturday's home draw with Middlesbrough, and that was enforced by the suspension of Danny Drinkwater. The manager does seem unconvinced about his squad's depth – players cannot return from injury soon enough. Jamie Vardy is not scoring, partially because Leicester are not creating many chances for him. Mahrez has completed only two passes to the England international in the last eight league matches combined, an extraordinary statistic given how thrillingly they colluded last season. Ranieri admits his team are not clicking but is reassured, at least, that this is not due to a drop in motivation. "If we compare with last season, we are missing everything," he concedes. "But the spirit is the same." The loss of Schmeichel has been a particular blow because, until his injury, he was the only Leicester player whose performances this season had reached the same level as last. Not only was he still making terrific saves; he was distributing the ball as well as ever and reassuring his defenders while There has been little sign of Zieler seems to have compounded the uncertainty of defenders already adapting their approach to take account of referees' new vigilance for grappling in the box. So far Ranieri's attempts to make his side more solid have included only one quickly aborted change of formation. A switch to a back three – a pattern that succeeded for Nigel Pearson during Leicester's late surge clear of relegation trouble in the 2014-15 season – was abandoned early in the game against Copenhagen because the team seemed to be destabilised even more by it. Hernández, drafted back into the starting lineup, looked particularly lost. Ranieri hinted on Thursday that improved defensive options may be on his January shopping list. The forthcoming transfer window will be the first since the appointment of the former Liverpool scout Eduardo Macia as head of recruitment in place of Steve Walsh, who was lured to Everton. Leicester need at least some of next month's signings to pay off faster than their summer ones. It would be a boon if Wilfred Ndidi turned out to be a ready-made replacement for Kanté. But the Genk midfielder is only 19. Still, Leicester are close to agreeing a transfer of around £15m for him and will be thankful Nigeria have not qualified for next month's Africa Cup of Nations. But Leicester look set to be affected by that tournament more severely than any other Premier League club as they are likely to lose Ghana's Daniel Amartey as well as Algeria's Mahrez and Slimani.

Gareth Southgate has reminded his England players the onus is on them to give themselves the best chance of competing at an elite level, and suggested poor off‑field behaviour draws more pressure and is "not intelligent" following the furore which erupted around Wayne Rooney and other team-mates during the recent international window. Rooney felt compelled to apologise "unreservedly" after being photographed last month socialising at a wedding party in the team hotel in the early hours of Sunday morning following England's World Cup qualifying win against Scotland at Wembley on the Friday. Southgate, who has signed a four-year contract to oversee the senior side on a permanent basis, had granted his squad the night off before the friendly with Spain on the following Tuesday evening, with other players choosing to leave the premises for a night out of their own. That behaviour had been scrutinised in the wake of England's failure to make a positive impression at successive major tournaments, and in the context of the Football Association's desire for the side to compete at a higher level under Southgate's stewardship. "There is a level of expectation when you are with England," the manager said. "We talk about pressure, and we spend most of our time trying to relieve it, so if we put ourselves in positions where we are going to increase that pressure ... it is not intelligent. "As a playing squad and group of staff, it's important we recognise we want to be a top team, so everything we do has to be geared towards improving. There has to be some time to unwind, to have a glass of beer or wine, but that has to be done at the appropriate time and at the right level if we aren't going to inhibit the way we perform. Fundamental to it all is how we are going to perform at the high level because, in international and top European football in this day and age, physical preparation is key." Rooney ultimately withdrew from the squad after suffering discomfort in his knee. He is understood to have stayed up to around 5am on 13 November, with Southgate last speaking to him at around 10.30pm the previous night. "I was watching a video of Spain, which is a usual Saturday night for me, and he popped his head round the door to see what we were doing as a group of coaches," he said. He denied telling the 31-year-old to retire to his room. "The only person I've told to go to bed in the last few years is my son, and he's never too fussed about that discussion either." The new manager, whose contract runs through to the 2020 European Championship and does not include a break clause after the World Cup in two years' time, indicated Rooney remains his captain, even if he is not guaranteed to start every game for his country. He intends to speak with his players when they next convene in March, for a friendly in Germany and the home qualifier against Lithuania, to discuss how they the squad spend their free time on get-togethers, with the practice of allowing them to spend the night as they see fit likely to be curtailed. "I'm not convinced that Draconian measures are going to work with English players, and we've maybe had a go at that in the past," said Southgate, appearing to point towards Fabio Capello's disciplinarian approach. "But there have got to be lines of what is acceptable and what isn't. The key is always thinking about performance. The players are involved in [drawing them up] because you are giving them ownership and accountability. And, if they want to be top, top players – which I believe they do – they have to recognise what is going to help us achieve that, and what is going to detract from that. "A lot of them are working with top coaches at their clubs and will see what is going to help them be successful and what is going to inhibit them, but if we think we are good enough to take on the best in the world without doing everything right along the way ... well, good luck with that. The days are gone from when I was younger, when we'd have beers after a game, or fish and chips on the way home on the coach. We probably fell off the bus. The rest of the world aren't doing that. "We are competing in a different landscape and have to be as professional and well prepared as everybody else before we even start looking at how good we are technically or tactically. The culture we create, the environment that we want to have, has got to be one of excellence. And we've got to strive to be the best we can be. Because for me the end-game isn't getting the job here. They have to ask themselves: 'How good do we want to be? What do we want to be going forward?' Every athlete has that decision to make. And, remember, we've got good competition for places."

One of the quirkier elements of the Football Association's three‑hour interview to which Gareth Southgate was subjected last week was a series of psychological tests designed to determine how he coped under pressure. The evaluation was apparently compiled by Lane 4, the medical psychiatrists who have been working with the national set-up since the summer, with the only candidate under consideration presumably filling in the questionnaire against the clock. His responses were duly dissected by the assessors and, once returned, then discussed by the five-man panel with their permanent manager-in-waiting. "The first part of the process had been reviewing the last four games and there had been some pretty feisty opinions from the more technically minded people in the room," the FA chief executive, Martin Glenn, said. "That was about asking: 'OK, do Gareth's powers of analysis stand up to scrutiny?' But having Gareth independently assessed for his mental strengths, and how he takes decisions, that was a separate set. It was to see how he reacted under pressure, the type of manager and thinker he is, because this is a high-pressure role." It is safe to assume he impressed. Southgate has endured a crash course in what life is like when in charge of the England team since stepping into the breach after Sam Allardyce's 67-day tenure. During his two-month interim stewardship his side have enjoyed a timely high by walloping a bitter rival, and underwhelmed against a team they would have expected to overcome. They have seen their most accomplished, slickest football earn a 2-0 lead against the Spanish and that canny team of winners still recover the deficit in the final few minutes. He has taken the bold decision to drop his captain, Wayne Rooney, widely welcomed as a show of strength, and discovered every perceived lapse in behaviour, every momentary slip in standard, fixes the focus firmly back on his own leadership and whether he exerts enough influence behind the scenes. Those familiar questions about whether his players had let him down – this time they related to off-field incidents rather than on-pitch failings – were batted away at his inaugural press conference as permanent manager but were pursued by demands for his opinion on the child sexual abuse crisis with which the game is confronted. Welcome to the limelight. And yet each response mustered was sensible, careful and eloquently delivered. There was no tub-thumping, no bold pledges which could return to haunt him in the future. Each level-headed assessment of where the England team currently stands, and how they envisage progressing, was delivered with a sense of realism which, in truth, boded well. England, he reminded the world, boast only potential. "I have seen what our younger age groups are doing against top nations," he said. "To have an understanding of the players in the system, and to have seen other countries at those age groups and what we need to improve upon, that is an advantage for me. "My big concern going into the summer's finals was the lack of big‑match experience of a lot of those players [in Roy Hodgson's squad]. We don't have a squad like we had in 2004 or 2006, with a load of boys who had won the Champions League or played in its latter stages. That experience is going to have to come over time. I am going to have to accelerate that. But maybe, collectively, a bit of humility won't be a bad thing: to admit this is where we're at, but let's look and see what is achievable and go for it. "I'd love to sit here and dress it up a bit more. As a coach you always have to be positive in your thinking and the idea is to improve this team as much as possible as quickly as possible. But you can't fast-track everything. What is important is I see a desire to improve, and a high potential, within this squad. It is a few years since we've had as this many English players playing in the Champions League, so they will benefit from that experience of top-level football and taste that pressure." Southgate has already spoken about cultivating a discernible style in his team's play, all high press and energy combined with comfort in possession. He recognises, too, the need to coax leadership qualities from more than merely Wayne Rooney, Gary Cahill or Joe Hart, the only senior players within the set-up with more than 50 caps. His attitude towards the cult of the England captaincy was noteworthy. "When you do have a permanent captain, as soon as you leave him out of the team it becomes a massive story. My ideal is what we had at Euro 96: six or seven guys who are captains of their club, who are men, who stand up and take responsibility on the field. You've got to have those characters who step up at different moments. I know some countries have leaders in the group, and the most capped player is captain on the match-day. There's a lot for me to think about moving forwards on that." "With the under-21s over the last few years, there's a group of senior players who, if standards aren't met in various areas, are on to it. That shows you've got a good culture in the team. That's far more powerful than the headteacher coming in and being the one that cracks the whip. That's the standard you want, because they drive each other. If I'm a centre-back, and other centre-backs are in the gym at 10am, I want to be there at 9.30am because I want to be doing a bit more than him to get in the team. That's a high-performance culture." He would be just as demanding of former internationals – Steven Gerrard and Frank Lampard were mentioned – mooted as potential future staff within his set-up, "but, if we're talking about them as coaches, then I'd want to see a real commitment to coaching, and a recognition that that's your whole life". Southgate himself continues to strive for self-improvement and is enrolled on an information sharing course at UK Sport with coaches from various Olympic disciplines. "Mel Marshall, Adam Peaty's coach, is an example of someone on that course, as well as some of the guys from cycling. It's a brilliant opportunity for me to get ideas from outside football or any little detail that might help us to improve." His objectives are clear enough, the pride and commitment obvious. The interim represented the honeymoon period. The hard work starts now.

Alan Pardew is pressing on with plans to identify possible signings at Crystal Palace in next month's transfer window while his future as the club's manager may depend on his team checking a dismal run of defeats against Southampton this weekend. Palace go into the match at Selhurst Park on Saturday having lost their past six league games which has left them outside the relegation zone only on goal difference. The club's three major shareholders – the chairman, Steve Parish, and the American investors David Blitzer and Josh Harris – have held talks this week and, despite alarm at the recent collapse in form, opted against making an immediate change in the dug-out. That stance is likely to change should Palace suffer a seventh successive defeat this weekend at a venue where only two clubs, Stoke twice and Norwich, have been beaten in the league throughout this calendar year, particularly if the performance is as chaotic as that in the 5-4 loss at Swansea last Saturday. The hierarchy have made clear that a team who have shipped 17 goals in five matches must show a dramatic improvement if Pardew's tenure is to extend into the festive period. Perhaps significantly the Americans are understood to have been made aware of Sam Allardyce's credentials, with the hierarchy conscious of his availability and apparent eagerness to return to top‑flight management, a reality that is heaping yet more pressure on Pardew to instigate a swift revival. The manager was asked to demonstrate a willingness to make radical changes in the team's approach this week and it is understood he has looked at switching to a three-man defence as he seeks some defensive solidity with Palace having not kept a clean sheet in the Premier League since mid-April. The 3-4-3 system is in vogue, with Chelsea having won seven league games in succession adopting it at the top of the division, and it could mean Scott Dann, Damien Delaney and James Tomkins operating across the back-line against Claude Puel's team. Pardew – who has lost Connor Wickham for the rest of the season with knee ligament damage and will be without the suspended Yohan Cabaye – has been lacking a left-footed left-back since Pape Souaré was seriously injured in a road traffic accident. The absence of the Senegalese has made a replacement a priority in the January window, with Pardew still overseeing the club's approach to recruitment. There is interest in Newcastle United's Paul Dummett, a player with whom he worked at St James' Park, while extensive scouting reports have been compiled on Leeds' Charlie Taylor and the Celtic full‑back Kieran Tierney. Luke Shaw, out of favour at Manchester United, has apparently indicated he would not be willing to move to the south London club on loan. Palace have also scouted another Senegal international, the midfielder Badou Ndiaye, currently at Osmanlispor in Turkey.

Martin Scorsese serves as executive producer on this film, a feelgood boxing-comeback drama with superficial style borrowings from Raging Bull: sparring sessions going too far, family strife, fanatical dedication, woozy fight sequences, sans-serif intertitles. But this film – enjoyable though it is – doesn't explore the real emotional pain that deeply, or at all. Written and directed by Ben Younger (famed for the tough financial movie Boiler Room), it tells the true story of Vinny Pazienza, the boxing champ who in 1991 brought off what some believe to be the most extraordinary comeback in boxing history; after a car crash, he endured a broken neck, and the excruciating ordeal of a "halo" head brace, to train and then defend his junior middleweight title. (Later, Pazienza would fight Roberto Durán, whose own story is told in the forthcoming movie Hands of Stone, with Édgar Ramírez as Durán and Robert De Niro as coach Ray Arcel.) Miles Teller is a tough and competent Vinny, Ciarán Hinds is his sorrowing dad Angelo and Aaron Eckhart sometimes looks like he's channelling James Gandolfini, playing Vinny's glowering coach Kevin Rooney. It never questions or qualifies its upbeat message, but it's watchable, well-crafted stuff, strongly acted, with a very funny opening "weigh-in" sequence, as Vinny desperately tries to sweat off excess pounds with minutes to go.

A review commissioned by the government from its health advisers has concluded that ministers should introduce minimum unit pricing of alcohol to tackle the grim medical, economic and social toll of drink-related harm. The in-depth study(pdf) has found that drink is now the biggest killer of people aged between 15 and 49 in England. It accounts for 167,000 years of lost productivity each year and is a factor in more than 200 different illnesses. It leads to such huge harm that the lost economic activity it produces, through early death and disability among workers, is more than that for the 10 most common cancers combined, the review found. The study's publication by Public Health England (PHE) is an embarrassment for ministers because it says they should embrace a policy that they have rejected due to an alleged lack of evidence. The report says: "Policies that reduce the affordability of alcohol are the most effective, and cost-effective, approaches to prevention and health improvement ... Implementing an MUP [minimum unit price] is a highly targeted measure which ensures any resulting price increases are passed on to the consumer, improving the health of the heaviest drinkers who experience the greatest amount of harm. MUP would have a negligible impact on moderate drinkers and the price of alcohol sold in pubs, bars and restaurants." The coalition government pledged in March 2012 to bring in the policy, but it made a U-turn in July 2013, earning condemnation from medical organisations and arousing strong suspicions that it had caved in to intense lobbying by the alcohol industry. PHE, the government's advisory agency on public health issues including obesity and smoking, published its "comprehensive review of the evidence on alcohol harm and its impact in England" in the Lancet medical journal on Friday. Sources say senior PHE officials feel its remit prevents it from explicitly backing minimum pricing, though ministerial opposition may also be a factor. Nevertheless, the report leaves little doubt regarding its support for the policy, observing that "the financial burden which alcohol-related harm places on society is not reflected in its market price, with taxpayers picking up a larger amount of the overall cost compared to the individual drinkers". It says pricing policies should be updated in line with changes in income and inflation, "in order to retain their relative affordability and therefore be able to impact upon alcohol-related harm". The new analysis has examined all the available evidence globally on alcohol harm and the steps effective in reducing it. PHE makes clear that the pricing of drink and the way it is marketed – issues of concern to medical groups – need to be urgently re-examined. It says policies can "address market failures by protecting people from the harm caused by other people's drinking, deterring children from drinking, and improving consumer awareness of the risks of alcohol consumption." The review, undertaken by PHE and researchers from Sheffield University, found that the economic burden of health, social and economic alcohol-related harm was substantial, with estimates placing the annual cost at between 1.3% and 2.7% of annual GDP. "In 2015 there were an estimated 167,000 working years lost due to alcohol, 16% of all working years lost in England," it says. "More working years are lost to alcohol than the 10 most frequent cancer types combined." The authors' conclusions will pose difficulties for the Department of Health, which asked PHE to undertake the assessment of the latest research. It will now face questions about why the government is not pushing ahead with introducing the policy, given that the evidence suggests it would be effective. In 2013 the government justified abandoning its plans by saying public consultation had "not provided evidence that conclusively demonstrates that minimum unit pricing will actually do what it is meant to: reduce problem drinking without penalising all those who drink responsibly." It is unclear how Jeremy Hunt, the health secretary, will respond to the results of a review that his own department asked PHE to instigate. Medical groups want ministers to take tougher action on alcohol. Although total alcohol consumption has fallen since 2008, that has not been accompanied by a drop in alcohol-related harm. Nicola Sturgeon's Scottish National party government in Edinburgh plans to introduce minimum unit pricing in Scotland if it successfully sees off a legal challenge against the policy brought by the Scotch Whisky Association (SWA). The Holyrood administration won the last round of the battle in the courts in Edinburgh in October, but the SWA is appealing against that decision at the UK supreme court in London. The Scottish government hopes to set a minimum price of 50p a unit, the level backed by many doctors. The scrapped Westminster plan was to have set the level at 45p a unit. Medical and public health groups are likely to welcome the new findings but alcohol firms are expected to dismiss them. Manufacturers often argue that a minimum unit price would penalise responsible drinkers who stick to the amounts of alcohol recommended by the chief medical officers of the four home nations. That guidance was revised in January to set a weekly consumption limit of 14 units for men as well as women, down from the 21 units previously advised for males. However, previous evidence has concluded that the move would save thousands of lives because the heaviest drinkers are most likely to consume less as a result of the hike in price. This article was amended on 2 December 2016 to add a mention of the Scotch Whisky Association's legal challenge to plans for minimum unit pricing of alcohol in Scotland. An earlier version said the SNP government was "pressing ahead" with the introduction of the policy.

For eight holes the fairytale was alive. Tiger Woods, on his return to golf after a 15-month absence from competition, was four under par and in a share of the lead at the Hero World Challenge. He couldn't, could he? A stumble followed, the kind that rather sums up Woods's career since 2013. In relative terms an opening round of 73, one over par, in the Bahamas would probably always have been acceptable, given how long the 14-times major champion had been sidelined, but the hope as offered to millions of onlookers during that early stretch meant the score was laced with disappointment. Woods himself could not contain his anger on the 18th tee at Albany, having watched a tee shot fly from the toe of his driver and into the water hazard. The fact that the 40-year-old used the club in question for that was a subtle indicator of his late-round desperation. Other players in the field, with considerably less distance available than Woods, had used fairway woods at the same juncture. "I hit it in three bushes and had a water ball," Woods said later. "So it could have been something really good. It was a solid start, I just made a few mistakes and things started going the wrong way. I let a good round slip away at the end. "I had some awkward shots out there. If you are driving it well, you can tear this course apart. If not, you are in among bushes and rocks but, all in all, I feel pretty good. I am looking forward to another three days out here. "I was pleased with how quickly I fell into the competitive flow of things, how I got used to the feel of the round. By the time I hit my tee shot on the 2nd, I was already in the flow of the round. To not play for 15 months and get that on the second hole was nice." Woods added that he had to "dumb down" a rush of adrenaline early in proceedings. First, the good stuff. Woods's iron play on this, his first time with a competition card in his hand for 466 days, was controlled. He showed no signs of physical discomfort at all, which will always be a significant factor after multiple back surgeries. Although Woods watched a series of birdie and par putts slide by, his stroke on the greens appeared perfectly sound. There was also no indication of the chipping yips that have been rumoured around Woods for so long. At the 14th there was a classic Woods moment. Having found wasteland from the tee and then a green‑side bunkerwith his second shot, the most famous golfer of a generation was faced with a putt from the fringe to save par. He duly rolled it in before pumping the air; such moments were once standard for Woods. By this stage, though, Woods was scrambling to keep his round together. He had taken bogey sixes at the 9th and 11th. Having made a straightforward birdie at the 15th, a par-five where he found the putting surface with a drive and a 7-iron, Woods could fare no better than a double bogey on the 16th from a second-shot position on the middle of the fairway. That aberration on the closing hole ensured an unwelcome finish of two double bogeys from the 16th tee onwards. Woods's outward nine of 33 contrasted markedly with an inward half of 40. Complete statistics showed six from 13 fairways found, 11 out of 18 greens in regulation and a total of 29 putts. The Hero World Challenge's propensity to produce low scores continued. JB Holmes leads the way after day one, having recorded a 64. The Open champion, Henrik Stenson, signed for a 67, with Jordan Spieth's 68 notable for two chip-ins. With Woods 17th in an 18-man field, Justin Rose at least offered him some cause to smile. The Englishman surprisingly slipped to a 74.

The title of John Pilger's new film reminded me of a now-forgotten conservative tract from 1991, The Coming War With Japan by George Friedman and Meredith Lebard, a hawkish work which argued that the Soviet collapse meant America should be on its guard against the resurgent old enemy from the second world war. Paradoxically, Pilger's documentary is about paranoia and pre-emptive military belligerence in the Pacific: a 21st century alt-yellow-peril. It's a subject which tends to be ignored, especially now that we are (justifiably) concerned by Putin's Russia. Pilger politely reminds us that Nobel peace laureate Barack Obama presided over a massive increase in nuclear spending and a new strategic objective, the super-modern "pivot to Asia", which for the arms business is like the exploitation of a lucrative new market. It means a colossal but unacknowledged buildup of military bases under China's nose, specifically intended to smack down any thoughts China might be having about translating its commercial prosperity into power in the region and answer with an overwhelming show of strength China's own disputed claim to the Spratly Islands in the South China Sea. Their semi-secret bases are tracked by academic David Vine in his observation project Base Nation. Pilger fills in the historical context: from turning the Marshall Islands and their peoples into vivisectional nuclear-test guinea pigs after the war, the US government has turned many places into missile bases whose weapons are trained on China. (Pilger could – but doesn't – point out how close America came to a nuclear strike on China during the Korean war.) It's a bizarre, dysfunctional situation, a buildup which shows no sign of abating, certainly now that Donald Trump has encouraged America to believe China is its new enemy. This is a gripping film, which though it comes close to excusing China ("Yes, there are issues with human rights ...") does point out China's insecurities and political cruelties. A strong corrective to our bland and complacent indifference to the new war-game scenario in the Pacific.

Donald Trump asked the state of Michigan on Thursday to reject Jill Stein's request for a recount of the presidential election. Attorneys for the US president-elect argued in a filing to Michigan election officials that Stein was not entitled to the recount and that it could not be completed in time before the state must cast its electoral college votes. "Michigan should not grant this lawless, insulting request, and its voters should not risk having the Electoral College door knocked off its hinges, all because a one-percent candidate is dissatisfied with the election's outcome," Trump's filing said. Trump accused Stein of creating an "electoral farce" and claimed that she "aims to sow doubts regarding the legitimacy of the presidential election". Stein, who has also filed for recounts in Pennsylvania and Wisconsin, described Trump's move as an "attempt to undermine democracy" and assured supporters that the recount would go ahead. "The Trump campaign's cynical efforts to delay the recount and create unnecessary costs for taxpayers are shameful and outrageous," Stein said in a statement. Ruth Johnson, Michigan's secretary of state, said in a statement that recounting, which was scheduled to begin on Friday and continue over the weekend, had been "put on hold" until the board of state canvassers had made a decision on Trump's objection. Stein's recount requests were made to states where Trump narrowly defeated Hillary Clinton, who had led in opinion polls prior to election day. Stein acted on behalf of a coalition of election security experts, who are concerned that the electoral process could have been sabotaged by hackers. The election took place following warnings from US intelligence agencies that Russian hackers were behind the thefts of emails from Democratic officials and had been intruding into the voter registration systems of several American states. The Obama administration has said it is confident that no cyber-hacking interfered with election day and that the result was "the will of the American people". A group of Democratic senators has, however, asked the president to declassify more information about Russia's involvement in the US election process.

The US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has given the green light to phase three trials of MDMA to treat post-traumatic stress disorder, the final phase of validation required to turn the party drug into a legal medicine. The treatment involves giving patients the drug just three times – once a month – during long talking therapy sessions, interspersed with weekly sessions without the drug. Early trials of the drug, currently listed as a schedule 1 substance by the Drug Enforcement Administration along with heroin and LSD, have shown encouraging results for patients with treatment-resistant PTSD. "Moving from phase two to phase three shows we have strong scientific reason to believe that MDMA is an effective treatment for PTSD in therapy. The fact the FDA is ready to move forward with phase three signals that they agree," said Brad Burge, from the Multidisciplinary Association for Psychedelic Studies (Maps), a not-for-profit based in Santa Cruz, California, that has spearheaded efforts to turn MDMA into a medicine. If the trials go well, MDMA could be legalized as soon as 2021, providing a novel way to treat those battling with PTSD, a debilitating mental condition that can be caused by witnessing or experiencing a life-threatening event. PTSD is common among military veterans, victims of sexual abuse and refugees with symptoms including anxiety attacks, body shakes, nightmares and insomnia. While many patients respond to established treatments such as cognitive behavioral therapy or eye movement desensitisation and reprocessing (EMDR), a subsection battle with the disorder for decades. "Currently approved treatments do work for some people, but they aren't working for at least a third of patients," Burge said. James "CJ" Hardin suffered with the disorder for years following his three tours in Iraq and Afghanistan. He had nightmares and insomnia and loud sounds or flashes of light could send him into a state of anxiety. He was given psychotherapy and prescribed antidepressants and anti-anxiety tablets, but nothing worked. That is, until he he enrolled in one of Maps' trials of MDMA-assisted psychotherapy. Hardin experienced a dramatic turnaround in his mental health within three months, and no longer has PTSD. "It has allowed me to be a productive member of society and given me new hope," he said. One South Carolina study involved 20 patients, mostly victims of sexual abuse, who had suffered from PTSD for more than 19 years. It was a placebo-controlled study, so all patients were given the same therapy, but only some were given the MDMA; 83% of those given the MDMA no longer met the criteria for PTSD following treatment, compared with 25% of those who were not given the drug. The results have held for several years. Maps has funded a total of six phase two studies of the drug, in which 136 patients have undergone MDMA-assisted therapy. Phase three trials require bigger groups of patients, at least 230 people, across different countries. Maps submitted data from its phase two trials along with plans for phase three to the FDA a month ago. On 29 November, the FDA gave the final phase of trials the go-ahead, subject to further clarification on a few technical details, including how to ensure double blinding with a drug whose effects are so dramatic. The recruitment of patients is scheduled to start in June 2017. Hardin is "elated" that the phase three trials have been approved. "I love it. This is where we needed to be. I am one of the lucky few that got this amazing treatment. I don't want to be the guy that got lucky – I want everybody to have this opportunity to recover." Once phase three trials are completed, and provided the results still look positive, the data can be submitted to the FDA for approval. In theory this means MDMA would be legalized for therapeutic use by 2021. (Although around 50% of drugs fail at phase three.) The drug would not be available on prescription for patients' use at home in the same way that marijuana is in many US states. The design of the trials means that the drug could only be administered by a trained psychotherapist in licensed centers. "People come into a clinic and receive one MDMA pill from the doctor and take it right away for their therapy session. They don't take it home," said Burge. He is swift to distinguish between the trial MDMA and the club drug ecstasy or molly. "Less than half of the ecstasy or molly available on the street contains any MDMA at all, and it usually contains far more harmful adulterants," he said. That's not to say that MDMA is risk-free. The drug, particularly when taken in a clubbing environment, can lead to overheating and organ failure. The MDMA pills given to patients during the trials are pharmaceutical grade with a known dose, created at a high security facility near the small village of Dudley in the north of England, at a cost of $400,000 per kilo. Maps is fundraising to buy enough of it to complete phase three trials. "It's a way for people to legally buy MDMA," he joked.

Eddie Jones said he does not care how he is perceived in his native Australia and is equally unconcerned about criticism of England's scrum before the Test at Twickenham on Saturday. Jones, instead, has labelled Australia's set piece "so-so" and suggested his coaching rival Michael Cheika should not have aired details of a private meeting with the match referee during this summer's series win against the Wallabies. Jones, who has made two anticipated changes by adding Nathan Hughes and Marland Yarde to his starting XV, kicked off a lively week by suggesting Australia scrummaged illegally and has given short shrift to the Wallabies' similar complaints about his own tighthead Dan Cole. "The only person who hasn't spoken about Dan Cole this week is [the former Wallaby coach] Bob Dwyer," Jones said. "I don't know if Bob is in the country but we've still got one day to go and I'm sure he can do it from Bowral. It's just constant, isn't it? Every time Australia plays England it's about Dan Cole but we wouldn't have any other tighthead in our team." While Jones is still planning to meet the South African referee Jaco Peyper on Friday he insists it is Australia who are making a mountain out of a front-row molehill. "I've coached over 100 Tests and had meetings with the ref before each of them. It's just normal procedure. There are always issues. We just wanted to make sure we were up front and told the Australians we were having a meeting. Last time they whinged and carried on about the fact they didn't know. "Some people think it's being mischievous [but] most people think it's actually productive, because you allow the referee to say what he wants to get in the game. That's why I've had meetings with referees for a long time." The former Wallaby coach said his successor, Cheika, was in "cuckoo land" if he wanted such gatherings banned. "It's not going to happen. It's part of the game and always has been." Jones also remains unimpressed by elements of the local media coverage during his team's tour in June, specifically a provocative Fox Sports promotional trailer and a press conference exchange with the former Wallaby Stephen Hoiles. "I'll reinforce again, I found the Australian media very disrespectful. I gave Stephen his first cap for Australia, he's a guy I like but he behaved absolutely terribly. We've since chatted after that and that's where it ends." He also questioned Cheika's remarks about Jones storming out of a referee meeting in the summer. "I've got different codes of behaviour," he said. "I was always brought up that if you have a private meeting it stays private. If people choose to have other views then go and talk to them about it. Speak to Cheika. He's been very forthcoming this week. I'm sure he'll share those things with you." As for his own legacy in Australia, which Cheika also suggested would be tarnished by this week's off-field spats, Jones was supremely unfazed. "It's not for me to decide what my legacy is. It's for other people to decide. So why would I worry about it?" He is far more concerned with warding off complacency, as England seek a 14th successive victory to equal their record for consecutive wins: "When you win how many games we've won in a row that's when you're at your most vulnerable." His instincts also tell him England's unprecedented 3-0 series win in June will make the Wallabies even more determined. "I think it makes us more vulnerable and them more hungry. Whenever you get beaten your attention is [sharper] and you want it more. When you have had some wins your appetite is pretty full. It's a test of mindset. That is why I am excited. There's nothing better than an Australia‑England rivalry, is there?"

There are days when Eddie Jones resembles a fiendish Bond villain and days when he could be a standup comedian. He has been coaching so long that switching between roles is effortless to the point where he knows when to press the right buttons in a Test week almost to the minute. Somewhere in the midst of everything there is a big game to prepare for but the Fast Eddie media show runs to its own unique timetable. Thus it was that, rather than continuing to lambast his fellow Australians for showing a lack of respect, Jones could be heard riffing on subjects as entertainingly diverse as Brexit, his relationship with his wife, alternative hairstyles, Muhammad Ali, his press officer's love life and Gareth Southgate. Try wedging all that into a lazy "Jones slags Aussies" headline which, naturally, is his genius. No one in world sport knows when to hold 'em and when to fold 'em so instinctively. Above all, though, he has decades' worth of experience at the sharp end of top-level coaching and a ruthlessly clear grasp of his priorities. Those are the qualities that have transformed this England squad, not whom he insults or teases at press conferences. "Do you think I'm the sort of person who worries about people's opinion of me?" he asked at one point. Perhaps, in the small hours, he has the odd regret but every other waking moment is focused on his team winning as consistently as possible. Which is why even beating his irritated old mate Michael Cheika again on Saturday would not be quite as much fun as winning the 2019 Rugby World Cup. This Wallaby fixture is significant, he acknowledges, but not quite in the way most imagine: "To me it's a World Cup dress rehearsal. You've got to win four games at a World Cup to get through to the next stage. We want to get into the habit of winning four games in a row. Ultimately, regardless of the result on Saturday, our aim is to win the World Cup in 2019." For that to happen he needs players such as Nathan Hughes and Marland Yarde, starting for the injured Billy Vunipola and the suspended Elliot Daly respectively, to develop into something more than useful stand-ins. Vunipola, in particular, will take some replacing and Jones is demanding the whole team share the burden, whether it be ball-carrying, turnovers or defensive hits: "There's only pressure when you don't know what you're doing. The great thing about our team is that we're probably missing seven very influential players and we just get on with it." Only Jones, though, judges a player's mood by his hair. Yarde likes to keep changing the colour of his braids, which in his coach's book makes him particularly interesting. "Any bloke who has hair like that and changes the colour all the time is up and down. He is not the guy who sits down quietly and works nine to five. I like Marland and to me that is the fun part of coaching – trying to get guys like that to have consistency." As well as raising the unexpected topic of his media minder's new girlfriend and offering his thoughts on Southgate's accession to the England football job – "I've heard a lot of good reports about him so hopefully he can be in the job longer than Sam" – he was also instructive on what it will require collectively, for England to progress from challengers to world champions in the next three years. "For me the rugby is always important but to be the best in the world you have to be like Ali. Go for those road runs every morning at 5am when no one notices. You have to have the relentless desire and pursuit of excellence. This team has always had talent. My job was to make them play as a team. At international level you are not teaching them to play rugby." It could just be England are about to experience the Jones era's most serious examination; the Wallabies have picked a strong-looking side and their hosts, by Jones's maths, are lacking seven crucial players, including Vunipola, Maro Itoje, Joe Launchbury and James Haskell. "When you've everyone available and you're flying, it's not a great test. Now is a great test for us ... these are the ones that really count." Weariness will not be an acceptable excuse: "All the signs are that we are physically at a peak. I get in in the morning and there are graphs everywhere. I thought I was back teaching maths." Coaching, by the sound of it, has often been easier than living for almost a year in England's team hotel. "We're just waiting to move into a place. I can understand why England voted for Brexit. The services here – goodness me. It's hard to get things done, isn't it?" Happily his wife Hiroko is good at keeping her husband on the straight and narrow. "Every time I go home she says: 'You'd better win this week,' so it's simple." Is she especially fearsome?" She is, mate. But it's nice to have a wife with her feet on the ground. I remember when I got sacked as the Wallabies coach. I came home absolutely distraught because it was my dream job. She said: 'Right, where are we going next?'" The whole of English rugby should be grateful for Mrs Jones's encouragement.

I'm off into the comments now once I have massaged my aching hands. But thank you for coming, once again, and keeping me company in what feels like a simultaneously pointless and completely vital service. If we didn't afford a stupid reality show this much attention, we might have to think about actual reality and that would be bloody awful. Keep it virtual, friends. Until next week, same day, same time. And I'd advise you to have a giin handy. Next week: well there was a white board with GIIN written on it. This is what Karrren would call her own brand of gin. I can't wait to see how they ruin gin. Jess confidently predicts that Dillon will be back at the house. Even when he doesn't come back, she doesn't seem to accept it. Grainne impresses on the rest of the house, how real this shit just got. No! She goes back to the house instead. THEN she probably visits the conveniences. So a double firing tonight - Dillon and Sofiane are off in separate taxis like a couple in First Dates who'd rather not go for that drink after the meal. It's getting close to the end now, says Alan. It really doesn't feel like it. WAIT. Sofiane is also fired. Grainne quietly shits herself. Alan can't deal with folk who have no regard for others, he tells Sofiane. Grainne says she's won three tasks which isn't none. Dillon tries to re-design the stupid game after the fact as Alan's brow darkens and he gets.....the finger. Dillon is gone. No, not Dillon. I'd only just really noticed his eyebrows. Dillon gives an impassioned speech a bit like the one Madonna does about turning up in New York with $37 to her name and a desire to make it in the big city. He is so like Madonna. For a moment there, he is in the spotlight but it is quickly snuffed out by Sofiane. The other two want Sofiane to go. Sofiane wants "definitely not me" to go. Hmmmm. I really don't want Grainne to go. Which probably means she's gone. Alana goes back to the house, little believing that she doesn't have to have a full on verbal slap-fight with the others for her place on the show. I'm surprised too. Alan and his familiars have a quick conflab and they three marked ones are back in the room. Dillon's face is all defiance and steel. The other two less so. Sofiane is bringing back Dillon and Grainne. Graiine????!!! Whut? Sofiane gets a tongue-lashing for going off-script during the pitch. Dillon says he stepped back because he didn't want to talk over the others and look unprofessional, which Al and co would 100% have told him off for. Alana is getting heat for not shouting louder over her teammates when their shit ideas took precedence. A Gloucester Old Spot has literally just flown past my window. Sofiane blames Alana for not coating him off about the rubbish idea sooner. Because he'd have loved that and totally taken it on board. "If it was up to you, Super Mario would be known as Fat Plumber," says Alan leaving everyone unsure whether or not they'd just witnessed his zinger. Was that it? Did I miss an earlier one? The arch of Dillon's eyebrow goes full Ming as his fury develops itself into a blame missile, heading at the rest of his team. Titans go into the boardroom to flap about and point at each other. Who on earth is going this week? My guess is Sofiane. I'm just not ready to lose Dillon yet. Trishna's made up to win as PM and said she "worked" with her "gut" leaving an unpleasant image as the rest of her team say they won despite her not because of her. Over at the sad cafe the pianist is already banging out the losers' lament. I think the pianist should actually be there, playing live their face streaked with mascara and contorted into a howl. Nebula got 222 votes out of 300 from the public and win an immersive dining experience in the sea, that most immersive of environments. OK, not actually in the sea. Titans win an immersive whinging experience in a poky cafe. Alana's gone full Candace from Bake-Off in the lip department.Goth is back, people. Oh, they are now cussing Courtney for passing the pitch onto Jessica. "You looked terrified," says a steely Karrren. He replies with a death stare. In turn, she tells Jess that the experts loved her and found her engaging. Maybe The Mask did kick in later in the pitch and it was left on the cutting room floor. And now for the Coral Kids at the other end of the table. Sofiane tries to justify what he did apart from lead the team like a big dumb figurehead. Alan observes that no one on his team really considered the target market. The bit wear one team member plays the game in the boardroom for Alan's pleasure is so cringe I can't watch. So fill in your own scenario here. Courtney's excuse for the lack of Gordon in the game is actually brilliant. If you're BEING Gordon in the game, as a first person player, you won't actually see him. Zing. Give that guy a job/suitcase of money. Time for the boardroom. Disappointed it's the real one and yet still imagining they are dangling in space. The fired candidate will simply be jettisoned into the black endlessness, thus removing them for further interacting with the fate of the human race. It's for the best. The Comic Con audience vote on their favourite game. So the geeks will effectively decide their fate this week. I think they should do it every week. All wearing masks and standing in a tight group like a.... wait for it...... Geek Chorus. Thank you, thank you. Imagine going to Comic Con 2025 and seeing someone dressed up as the Coral Kid. How niche would that be? Are they designing VR games or just some lame app for the iPhone 3? A little joke for modern youngsters who will clearly all be swanking about town with their iPhone 5s now. Now it's the turn of Magic Shells. Sofiane says the ocean is the "most immersive" place in the universe. I will spend the next 20 years of my life trying and failing to unpack that sentence. Grainne swaps with Alana and plays the Coral Kid game while Alana talks the audience through it. It's a ruddy shambles. If that was the edited version, I'm glad we were spared the full three hours. To the pitches! Jess goes first with Gordon's Lost His Badger (and the branding's lost its Gordon). Once again, Jess wobbles on the pitch. She's all talk off-stage but when she gets all eyes on her, she's an absolute liability. She should call to the spirit of Jim Carey in The Mask like she did in that first boardroom and just let him take over. What a pitch that would be. Jess dons a foil cape and VR head set while Trish talks through the gameplay. It looks so incredibly lame. The audience ask some basic "where is Gordon" questions and Trish's gang look non-plussed. Jess says their "a bit random" idea makes them less forgettable. Yuh. Sofiane wants Alana to mutely play the game while Grainne talks the audience through what she is doing. On no account must Alana speak. She looks a little bit peeved and I can see why. Dillon and Sofiane run around the exhibition hall dressed in green and yellow outfits to spy on the other team. They satisfy themselves that the other team stand no chances whatsoever. I can't call it at this stage. Both games are rubbish and I am shocked. It's like they've just got a bunch of non-experts to knock these thin ideas up in 24 hours. OH WAIT. The Magic Shells sales team are surprised when the grown-ups at Comic Con don't think the baby shell game is for them. And these are Comic Con visitors who basically arrested at 14 and never ever want to grow up. This is a blow. Magic Shells will not be the next Angry Birds. Jess really wants to do the pitch for Trishna's team but Trish picks Courtney. He says Jess should do it. It's like a game of pass the parcel if the parcel contained a big poo. The designer proudly unveils the logo for Galactic Gordon. It does not contain an image of Gordon himself. "The badger's got a quiff," yells Frances. She's fuming. The designer shrugs and says that's all he got from the other lot. Oh dear. It's the next day and the teams are off to Comic Con. Each team has a stand with the branding designed for them overnight. I really do hope some hapless art department sucker had to sit up all night to make this stuff for them. And then I hope that art department sucker resigned the next day and went away for a bit to think about their options. Galactic Gordon is the name of the character who stars in Trishna's game. He has, apparently, lost his badger. A common problem. Over in the sea, Sofiane is working on his Coral Kid and Claud is moaning that Grainne hasn't stood up to Sof at any point or questioned his ideas. Her card is marked. Are Claud and Karrren the two most theatrically joyless people on British TV? Yes. Dillon's eyebrows are hypnotising me. They are so, so neat and not the same colour as his hair. He's like a young Cara Delavigngngngnge. Trishna tells her designer what the space game should look like. I hope they call it Magic Planets. Grainne thinks their game should be called Magic Shells. "Wow, are you serious?" says Dillon. Alana casts doubt on the magical properties of their particular shells. Grainne and Sofiane assure her it'll be fine and it's fine. "Tragic," is how Alana describes it. Her words, not mine. Jess and Court try on space costumes which is amusing. Tick. We switch between the two teams, one oceanic, one cosmic, as they perform the business equivalent of taking it in turns to fly into a window while not having a basic misunderstanding of the difference between glass and air. Grainne and Sofiane go to try on costumes for their pitch. Sof's tights are clearly for a 10-year-old girl and Grainne's dress is crusted with sea bits and must properly smell of old bladderwrack. Courtney mutters some nonsense about an Astro Badger into his horizontal not-at-all-smart phone. Everyone looks at everyone, unsure of how to proceed. Trishna worries about Court and Jess's lack of focus. I think this is justified - all astro badgers considered. Alana is in the back of a people carrier with Dillon and she is, in broad daylight, inexplicably dressed for a glamorous cocktail reception. Meanwhile, Courtney and Jess giggle and sing at each other on the way to their appointment. Back to Alana and Dillon who bicker about the kind of game they should design. He's the creative here, OK. And he doesn't want collaboration, he's in more of an arty dictatorship vibe. Kay? I realise he didn't actually design the Crystal Maze himself, but in the conceit of the show, he lived there with his "mumsie" and I bought into it because it made me feel nice. Nothing has changed in the intervening 20 years. OK? Tishna's team are erring on the side of a space theme. "What do Martians look like?" asks Trishna without irony. She wants to know. Everyone looks at everyone, unsure of how to proceed. Dillon suggests a mediaeval theme for Sofiane's team's game. They are basically all just describing Crystal Maze games and Richard O'Brien's dialling finger is twitching. Trishna puts herself forward to be PM and is immediately accepted by her team. Dillon (Jedward ran at each other too quickly and created a new person) has a go but is immediately talked down by Sofiane who won't stop talking. As if leaving no gaps in his mouth noise will win the day. Oh, it does. Dillon is bitter. I love how they made his image fizzle and break-up as though he were Princess Leah on that R2D2 video. Cut to the housemates back in their jim-jams, pratting about the VR headsets and snortling among themselves. They hold a meeting with some of them still in nightwear. Good lord. Trousers round his ankles as the boardroom walls float away and it is revealed they are all floating above the earth while he crimps off and prepares to wipe. I'm sorry. I've gone too far. Yes friends, we are in the future now. Alan no longer needs to sit in a real boardroom designed to LOOK like the future. He could be sitting on the toilet for all we know, giving his preamble while superimposed into a virtual business arena. Let's imagine he IS on the toilet. Alan's on the loo. OK this is it. Prepare for the VIRTUAL BOARDROOM. Paul didn't even remark upon his own firing according to this recap. I admire someone who manages to prevent "Thank you for the opportunity," from spewing out of their sorry mouths at the moment of doom. The girls all go a bit silly as they get ready for the early morning call. And it's a bad one. Karrren and Claud turn up and they're all in dressing gowns. Not Karrren and Claud, they're fully dressed and looking fed up as per. That Russell Brand waxwork is genuinely nightmare-ish. I watched the new Sherlock today and I don't think it gives anything away to say a bit of it is filmed in the Aquarium in London. No Apprentice candidates dressed as shit mermaids in evidence though, which I feel was a mistake. This narrator says "corter" instead of quarter. Now I've noticed, I predict it's going to grate. If we all accept that I'll niggle about it at the start of every show, it'll save a lot of time. I had to really scratch my head to remember who left last week. Of course it was Paul. Of course it was. I think she is sad about the tale of her grandfather and his incredible seafaring career but it's hard to tell. Be gone, misty genealogy, it's time for cold hard cash and berks in costumes. Until you've seen Alan in his virtual boardroom, you've not properly lived. I may also keep this segment for times of great sadness. You'll see what I mean in a few minutes. It's spectacular. Amanda Holden's Who Do You Think You Are? - it's no Danny Dyer's Who Do You Think You Are? But then, nothing is. I keep it to watch in times of sadness. Or just that internet 90-second cut-up for when I'm pressed for time. Like medicine, it is. Can it really be week nine already? Yes, yes it can. I have grown a long-grey beard in the time it's taken us to get to this point in series 12 and I hope to have a small family of robins nesting in it in time for the final. Tonight, Team Nebulizer and Team Tit-uns must turn their hands to virtual reality game designing: an absolutely essential skill when you're running a digital recruitment agency or whatever dullsville business plan Lord Alan ends up investing in. It's basically another excuse for the numpties to dress in amusing cosplay outfits and try to sell with literally no power base at all. It's really hard to be taken seriously when you're dressed as a big pudding. Join me here at just before 9pm as the candidates invade Comic Con and still manage to look more ridiculous than everyone else there. And hello.

Austrian film-maker Ruth Beckermann has created a cerebral chamber piece from the love letters of postwar poet Paul Celan, whose parents perished in a Nazi concentration camp, and Ingeborg Bachmann, the author whose father had been a Nazi party member. Performers Laurence Rupp and Anja Plaschg play versions of themselves, reading out selections of the letters into studio microphones, apparently for a radio programme. We see them taking a thoughtful cigarette break together, or getting lunch. Maybe their own relationship is being influenced by Celan and Bachmann's? Most of the film consists of their faces in closeup, reading the text. It is an intriguing exchange, like a controlled but dreamily unhappy dialogue which can't represent the length and rhythm of the silences that existed between each letter: Celan was hurt by these silences. The historical issues between them are never alluded to, except at the end, when Celan is infuriated by an antisemitic remark in a German review of his great poem Death Fugue, and then by Bachmann's calmly dismissive attitude to his outrage. It could also be that he was not entirely pleased at Bachmann's growing literary prestige. This reminded me a little of Margarethe Von Trotta's film Hannah Arendt, which was itself a bit like a radio play. It also reminded me of Julia Leigh's erotic nightmare Sleeping Beauty, in which one sex scene is bizarrely preceded by a discussion of Ingeborg Bachmann's work. This is more forensic than erotic.

In a series of tweets last month, EDM superstar Joel Zimmerman all but disowned his eighth album, calling it "rushed" and "slapped together". "I don't even like it," he claimed, adding that he is only releasing it to pay the bills. There were two tracks he reserved praise for, however: Whelk Then, a strange experimental offering that wavers between bursts of clangy syncopation and the ASMR-y sound of dripping water; and Snowcone, which mixes plunderphonic aesthetics with a chunky trip-hop beat. Both are diverting on their own, but slightly confusing as part of an album that skirts all over the shop, genre-wise, covering trance-house fusion, bleeping 80s electro and seemingly everything in between. It's possible that it was this lack of focus that led Zimmerman to feel dissatisfied with his work – but he shouldn't really. This might be far from a perfect album, but it's certainly nothing to be ashamed of.

Is Moana the next Frozen? Or is that Frozen 2? Either way, Disney has contrived an amiable new animated musical that speaks to the tween-princess-sleepover demographic while tapping into Polynesian myths and making a modest, decently intentioned gesture at diversity. But it does this by feeding these components into its well-honed narrative machine, and producing a story with obvious but well-managed borrowings from The Lion King – with a bit of The Hobbit and even the Book of Exodus: it's a pretty traditional exile-quest narrative with a sense of monarchical destiny. Newcomer Auli'i Cravalho voices Moana, the smart, rebellious daughter of a Polynesian king; she is entrusted by the ocean-spirit with a precious stone: a sweet initial scene with the uncomprehending one-year-old Moana waddling into the magically parting surf. Her people are terrified by the sudden disappearance of fish and Moana's mission will be to solve this eco-crisis and heal the cosmic wound by reuniting the stone with the ancient goddess. To do this, she needs to team up with swaggering bad-boy demigod Maui (voiced by Dwayne Johnson): a mountain of muscle and tattoo. Maui and Moana squabble their way through a sibling meet-cute before becoming a devoted animated duo, facing up to a scary, funny giant crab, Tamatoa (Jemaine Clement). As for the songs, they didn't seem to me as catchy as the great refrigerated masterpiece, but time will tell.

When Andrew Strauss swapped the commentary box for the role of England's director of cricket in May 2015, among his first moves – along with shoring up the position of a then-wobbling Alastair Cook – was to relieve Ian Bell of the Test vice-captaincy and hand it to Joe Root, thus a putting a long-term succession plan in place. Fast forward 18 months, with England 2-0 down to India, looking worryingly ill-equipped to square the series and a year away from their defence of the Ashes in Australia, the question of when this button will be pushed is starting to cross minds, not least since Cook, who will turn 32 on Christmas Day, began openly talking of a desire to return to the playing ranks before his eventual retirement. Is the current team, one that beat Australia in 2015 and then won in South Africa but now sit two defeats away from equalling a record eight losses in a calendar year (matching 1984, 1986 and 1993), still progressing under Cook? It is something Cook and Strauss continue to discuss on a series-by-series basis. With a home Test summer against a resurgent South Africa and a perhaps less-threatening West Indies side, any change to the arrangement would logically need to occur after either the current tour or the 2017-18 Ashes, given Root would need a run-up to tackling such a winter. Australia is a tour that Cook himself may well eye as a swansong in the role given the 5-0 defeat suffered last time. He would likely have a side better equipped, you would think, to compete there than on the subcontinent, too. His captaincy, after an England-record 57 Tests, continues to attract criticism for "conservatism" – the third day in Mohali the most recent example – but with holes in the batting and only one spinner, Adil Rashid, fulfilling their role, not all of it should fall at his door. Root, speaking before he and the majority of the squad flew to Dubai for a mid-tour rest before the fourth Test in Mumbai on 8 December, has unsurprisingly stated his preference for Cook to carry on for some time. "I think he is pretty set on captaining for a few years and I hope he does because I think he is a brilliant leader and I've really enjoyed playing under him," said the 25-year-old, who has only known life under Cook since making his debut in 2012. "I'm quite happy with the role I'm playing at the moment and you want to do what is right for England and the side. "And genuinely, honestly, I think he is the right man. Hopefully, we get these results we want in the last two games and we can put right what has been quite a frustrating last couple of weeks." Cook stated after the defeat in Mohali that the team's mini-break is certainly needed amid their epic seven-Test pre-Christmas schedule and while a six-month hiatus will follow in the new year, this is understandable on a personal level with the five days in Dubai seeing him reunited with his family and the daughter with whom he has spent only the 18 hours after her birth before flying out to join the team in Bangladesh. Root has been unaware of this having had any effect on his leadership, however, with blame for the current dormie scoreline in his eyes resting squarely on the jumbled batting lineup that, after racking up 537 first-up in the draw in Rajkot, failed to pass 300 in their first innings during the defeats in Visakhapatnam and Mohali. "I think he is coping all right," said Root. "He's very professional and you don't really get much from him in that respect. I imagine it must be quite tough being away from a new child and family and everything. You could put a lot of blame on Cooky but actually it is the responsibility of the batters to make those big scores. You can blame whoever you want, but we have to take responsibility for our own games." Root was certainly one of the guilty men during both, having run out his partner Haseeb Hameed and been caught in the deep during the second-day collapse in Vizag, and the swipe across the line against Jayant Yadav – the first ball after drinks on the opening morning – saw him trapped lbw for 15 and England falter again in Mohali. Greater disgust with himself would come in the second innings, however, when on 78 he was caught at slip off the left-armer Ravi Jadeja to end a stand of 45 with the injured Hameed at No8 that he felt may have given England a puncher's chance of bowling out India had it continued. Hameed, who has returned home this week for surgery on his broken little finger and will be replaced by Durham's uncapped left-hander Keaton Jennings (who celebrated his England call-up with an unbeaten century as Lions captain in their eight-wicket win over United Arab Emirates in Dubai), has made an impression on Root, who in his role as a senior player has spoken to the 19-year-old on how best to approach his cricket for Lancashire before the South Africa series in July. "The only advice I gave was make sure you don't go back to county cricket at the start of the summer and rest on your laurels and think: 'I'm a Test cricketer now,'" Root said. "It's an opportunity to prove to everyone in county cricket that you are there for a reason. You have opportunities to make some really big scores, keep learning and improving, put the good work he has done here into his game and continue to develop the way he has done. "He will have different expectations in the future and that might be a different challenge but he has got a very good head on his shoulders and he should be proud of what he has done so far. Now it is about managing those expectations and being realistic – it's going to take time to keep developing and it might not always go how he wants. But I'm sure that if he does have some hard times, he'll get through it." Sound advice from the second best batsman in the world Test rankings. India's Virat Kolhi jumped into a career high third after Mohali, having begun the series in 15th, and with Australia's Steve Smith top and New Zealand's Kane Williamson fourth it means Root is the only one among this recognised elitewho is not captain of his national side. When this changes remains to be seen.

The 15% backpacker tax has passed the Senate but in the fallout Pauline Hanson has criticised her One Nation senator Rod Culleton for defying the government to push for a lower rate. The Greens leader, Richard Di Natale, has criticised the Coalition for not initiating the compromise with his party, after the Greens delivered the government the final votes in return for an extra $100m for Landcare. The treasurer, Scott Morrison, has indicated offsetting savings will be found elsewhere to pay for the deal. On Thursday the passage of the backpacker tax was imperilled by a breakout group of crossbenchers, including senators Jacqui Lambie, Derryn Hinch and Culleton, who pushed for a 13% rate. The Greens originally favoured a rate of zero but did a deal with the government to pass the tax at 15%, warning no deal would have resulted in the unacceptable rate of 32.5%. The tax passed about 8:30pm as the unlikely alliance of the Coalition, One Nation and the Greens gagged debate. Hanson thanked the Greens for compromising. But on Sky News, the One Nation leader took aim at Culleton and Derryn Hinch, who she said refused to accept a 13% rate when she pushed it as a compromise. "I was so annoyed that Rod Culleton actually crossed the floor and he wouldn't come to the 13%," Hanson said. The comments appear to confuse Culleton's position as he in fact pushed for a 13% rate and refused to accept his party's compromise for a 15% rate. "Rod said he's a farmer. No. He is a farmer of a different sector, he does not have backpackers. Derryn Hinch, what's his connection with it? Have they ever really gone out to speak to the farmers? "I was so angry that they would not agree to the government's [proposed compromised of 15%]." Despite striking a deal with the government, on Friday Di Natale revealed that "through this whole period, we didn't receive a phone call from any minister from within the government – not one". "In the end we showed some leadership in the afternoon," he said, by approaching the government to end the "awful standoff". Morrison told ABC's AM the backpacker tax deal achieved "70% of what was originally in the 2015-16 budget". "And that's the 45th parliament, and on occasions these deals will go right down to the wire. "It would've been preferable for that not to have played out that way and for this matter to be resolved some time ago, but there was a lot of politics being played and in the end the Labor party played themselves into the ground." Morrison said the backpacker tax would raise $560m, even after compromises with Nick Xenophon to allow Australians to pick $5,000 of fruit without losing welfare. He said the mid-year economic statement on 19 December would show that the $100m for Landcare "will not come at any additional cost to the budget", indicating that offsetting savings will be found elsewhere. Morrison acknowledged the Greens had approached the government to reach the compromise. The backpacker tax split is just one of a number of cases of division in One Nation. On Thursday, Culleton put up a motion for the Senate to recognise that when it referred his eligibility to the high court it was unaware that the judge in his larceny case was not able to sentence him to imprisonment because the conviction was in absentia. The motion directed the attorney general, George Brandis, to explain why he had not told the Senate that fact. It passed, without One Nation support. It was the second time the party has split over the issue, after Hanson agreed to her own senator's eligibility being referred to the court. Culleton has previously claimed that Hanson will support him when she has the "full facts". But the failure to support the motion suggests One Nation has no appetite to assist Culleton in his push to have the Senate's referral torn up to save him fighting the case in court.

The past 12 months have been so sad and seismic that it feels as if there's no more room in the world for additional musical melancholy. Brisbane alt-rock group the Trouble With Templeton are named after an episode of The Twilight Zone, which signals their songs' late-night, spectral qualities, and bring the sentiment and soundscapes of the moody, spacious guitar bands who still lurk on festival bills but hardly capture the zeitgeist: the Antlers, Sigur Rós, Patrick Watson, etc. Influenced by early Radiohead and the sulky post-rock that used to be celebrated on Pitchfork, frontman Thomas Calder is dedicated to his doom; sometimes sulky ("Don't make me explain again"), other times slacker. The slow-motion misery of I Want Love is a little too drenched in its own fragile despair, but the lazy, wilted quality of Bad Mistake is better; a tired, grunge-lite lollop, more Stephen Malkmus than all-out macabre.

Erotic, neurotic, euphoric and at all times unutterably twisted and bizarre, David Lynch's Blue Velvet is back in cinemas, 30 years after its original release: an intensely 80s movie with an intensely 40s noir template: a baffling and unique palimpsest of styles and associations. From the dreamy, disquietingly intense vision of picket-fence America, a macabre drama emerges. Clean-cut Jeffrey (Kyle MacLachlan) is walking home when he discovers a severed ear on the ground: does that ear stand for the director's own hyper-sensitive perception of underground stirrings, the secret life of underground America? I continue to wonder, incidentally, about how Jeffrey comes to be walking anywhere, given that we later see him at the wheel of a gorgeous red convertible. Jeffrey conceives a fascination with nightclub singer Dorothy Vallens (Isabella Rossellini) who sings Blue Velvet, while her abusive, misogynist sugar-daddy Frank (Dennis Hopper) watches, caressing a sample of this same material. Jeffrey breaks into Dorothy's apartment to spy on her – a classically Lynchian Alice-down-the-rabbit-hole or Alice-through-the-looking-glass moment – and indulge a dysfunctional romantic rapture, in which he witnesses how she is abused. The film releases a toxic narcosis of fear. The standing-up dead man in the yellow suit – kept upright by some kind of rigor mortis or final act of will – is an invention of pure horror.

The NSW government has abandoned its plan to make cyclists carry photo ID. The change in direction was announced by the roads minister, Duncan Gay, on Friday, following consultation with cycling groups. The government would instead "encourage" cyclists to carry ID or "emergency contact cards", to be made available through Cycling NSW and Bicycle NSW, Gay said. This "alternative solution struck the right balance between safety and convenience," Gay said in a statement. The requirement for cyclists to carry photo ID or be fined $106 was announced in December last year, along with a number of changes to cycling laws and huge increases in fines for offences. The ID plan was to take effect in March. A 2016 members' survey conducted by Bicycle NSW showed that about 93% of riders already carried ID. The group had expressed concern that making it mandatory would serve as a disincentive to ride and was a case of cyclists "being singled out". Its chief executive, Craig Meagher, welcomed the government's about-turn and the "strong, working relationship" the two bodies had developed in consulting on the issue. Gay said preliminary statistics for 2016 showed bicycle rider injuries and fatalities were stable or reducing in NSW, which "would suggest our changes ... are making a positive difference to road safety". But recent figures suggest the number of people cycling in central Sydney is lower than it was two years ago, with some blaming the decrease on the Baird government's changes to cycling laws, as well as construction work in the CBD. Roads and Maritime Services figures show the average daily number of cyclists counted during peak hours on the Anzac bridge, at Anzac Parade and on the Harbour bridge dropped from 5,249 in 2013 to 4,453 in 2015 before recovering to 4,859 in 2016. In September the state government scrapped its target of of doubling the number of trips made in Sydney by bicycle. Among the law changes were substantial increases to fines – some went up by as much as 500% – bringing some into line with the penalties imposed on motorists for the same offences. The penalty for not wearing a helmet went from $71 to $319, while riding dangerously or running a red light went from $71 to $425. The government collected $1.3m from 3,171 fines issued to cyclists in the seven months to September this year – more than double the amount collected in the 2013-14 financial year. Most were for not wearing a helmet. Over the same seven-month period, only 15 fines were issued to motorists for violating one-metre passing rules introduced at the same time, raising $4,857. Labor MP Penny Sharpe told the Sydney Morning Herald the stricter laws were a revenue-raising exercise. "What is the point of it? It is clearly not about safety. This is a government that has not been friendly to cyclists." In 2014, Gay had explored the possibility of a licensing system for cyclists, which was abandoned without fanfare after the department deemed it "not [to] be a cost-effective way of improving NSW cyclists' behaviour or safety". Craig Richards, the chief executive of Bicycle Network, said requiring riders to carry ID "would have been a terrible thing for bike riding": "Common sense has prevailed in this instance". It would have been born of a bid to register bikes or riders as cars and drivers are, he said – "then they work out that it's not practical". "It is frustrating. I can set my calendar and say every six weeks, someone is going to raise bike registration. "To have it taken this far is quite extraordinary. NSW was going to be the only place in the world where this was a law."

Given that he's the creator/star of a TV comedy – the brilliant Atlanta – that's embedded in the world of hip-hop, you'd be forgiven for expecting Donald Glover to cover similar territory with his musical alter ego Childish Gambino. Indeed, his previous album under that name, Because the Internet, did just that. For his follow-up, though, Glover decided to run a mile from the genre: instead, Awaken, My Love is a prog-tinged funk opus situated somewhere between Sly and the Family Stone and Unknown Mortal Orchestra. In his rap incarnation, Glover was sometimes mocked for being inauthentic – a Hollywood type trying a rap career on for size. Yet any sense that his latest evolution is merely an affectation is disabused by opener Me and Your Mama, an opus that builds from hushed gospel to howling freakout. Glover has a keen ear for genre idiosyncrasies and Awaken, My Love is full of tiny rewarding details: the pinched surf guitar of California; the squalling organ blasts of the Parliament-Funkadelic-ish Riot. Only the limitations of his voice occasionally let him down – he doesn't quite have the range to nail Awaken's more ostentatious vocal lines. Still, it's a minor gripe when there's so much here to enjoy.

This Brit indie returns us kicking and screaming to that millennial moment when any passing Guy Ritchie wannabe might have pitched something along the lines of Danny Boyle's The Beach. Here, it's director Charles Henri Belleville, reducing Simon Lewis's 1999 novel Go to a threadbare endeavour concerning the non-funny, non-sexy, non-thrilling misadventures of three charmless chancers – headed by a perma-chewing Robert Sheehan – fleeing violent sex traffickers on sandy South Indian shores. Belleville cranks up the colour saturation and ironic Yuletide soundtrack, but all his slo-mo hedonism can't disguise an otherwise addled story treatment: we chop haphazardly between hemispheres, leaving characters and subplots treading crystal blue water. Doubtless a nice holiday; shame about the movie.

English meteorology may seem rather tame, but it can be hazardous, as shown by a balloon expedition by the Meteorological Council in December 1881. The expedition, in a balloon called Saladin, was to examine the conditions that had produced "a very peculiar fog", thick enough to delay the trains in London. Three men were involved: Captain Templer from the Royal Middlesex Rifles, a Mr Agg-Gardener, and the Conservative MP and aeronaut Walter Powell, who piloted the balloon. The plan was to take temperature readings at different altitudes. They may have been looking for evidence of a temperature inversion, in which cold air is trapped below warmer air, now known to be associated with smog formation. The balloon lifted off from Bath and was blown along at over 30mph. Visibility was poor and, realising that they were approaching the sea, Templer ordered a descent. The balloon crash-landed near Bridport. Templer and Agg-Gardener were thrown out, the latter breaking his leg. The balloon, lightened by the reduced load, rose again. Templer held on to a line and shouted to Powell to jump. The line was torn out of Templer's grip, lacerating his hands. The balloon continued to rise as it blew away. Templer speculated that Powell was ditching ballast, hoping to make it clear across the Channel. The balloon was soon lost to sight. Two weeks later, fragments of the balloon were found in Asturias in Spain. There was no sign of Powell, apparently lost in the cause of meteorology.

Georgia Byng's children's novel Molly Moon's Incredible Book of Hypnotism is well admired by many for its vivid heroine and its fresh twist on the old plucky-orphan narrative gambit. This film adaptation assembles a cracking cast, starting with the terrifyingly impressive Raffey Cassidy (the pretty android from Tomorrowland) in the title role, with assists from some illustrious thespians, including Lesley Manville as the mean orphanage director; Emily Watson as a kindly staff member; Celia Imrie as the cook; right down to Joan Collins, resplendent in a red wig and a ton of slap, as an evil criminal mastermind. And yet, in the hands of director Christopher N Rowley and an assortment of screenwriters (including Byng), the result is a rebarbative mess – mirthless and shoddy like a disposable Christmas stocking novelty. Even my daughter, who likes anything with bright colours and pugs, thinks the above star rating is generous.

So soaked with sentimentality, bogus emotion and cliche, to watch it is to feel as if one is being pelted by a spongiform romance novel soaked in alcopop, this St Petersburg-Paris set drama is the very embodiment of the Russian notion of "poshlost", a kind of corny vulgarity that Nabokov dissected at length in his book on Gogol. It's a depressing sign of the times, along with the election of Donald Trump and the vote for Brexit, that this rubbish was one of the highest-earning films in Russia recently. Former Eurovision contestant Dima Bilan plays with equal woodenness two different characters in two different time periods, who both fall in love with Svetlana Ivanova's simpering blonde princess and her descendent. During the 1917 Russian revolution, they are separated by wars and pesky, evil Bolsheviks. In 2016, they are separated by their inability to navigate the Parisian Métro system, which is at least understandable. By Russian standards, this allegedly had a huge blockbuster production budget, and yet it looks surprisingly gimcrack and shoddy. At least there are giggles in store watching it tick off the romantic movie tropes, including not one but two scenes where our lovers run towards each other in slow motion.

Douglas Adams paperbacks and Time Bandits posters – writer-director Martin Gooch likes to put well-thumbed influences to use as onscreen props. But while his 2013 sci-fi comedy, getting a belated release, bubbles with nerdy zeal, it can't quite bottle the pathos of Terry Gilliam's irrepressible dreamers. David Jones, played by Gooch, is a fortysomething kidult using a £60,000 lottery win to fund his obsessive search for the brother he believes, to the exasperation of everyone around him, was abducted by aliens as a child. Fondly teasing UFO conspiracy theorists and tabletop-gaming hobbyists, The Search for Simon's whimsy barrage is admirably detailed – from a fake BBFC certificate to comedy acronyms (British AeroSpace Technology Advanced Research Development Division). But the film waits too long before permitting us any of the painful reality underlying David's predicament. Without it, there's little of the dramatic tension driving the grittier end of Gilliam's oeuvre, such as The Fisher King and Tideland. The gag rate might be high, but accumulatively, like its hero, it becomes infuriating.

You wouldn't have a clue that Laura Lee and Andreya Casablanca were in a group based in Berlin in 2016 by listening to their first album. Even the presence of one song in German, Walnuss, wouldn't convince you that In My Head was anything other than something unearthed from some US liberal arts college after sitting in a record shop rack since the early 90s. Gurr's sound is bright and shiny: not the polished metallic sheen of state-of-the-art studios but the tinny reflectiveness of the foil wrapper around a tube of Rolos. In My Head sprints through its 11 songs in half an hour, dispensing fizzing, punky guitar pop at every turn, with some amusingly baffling lyrics leaping out along the way: "Kissing you feels like 1984!" offers Breathless. It's very much Indie As It Used to Be, all the way through, but In My Head serves as a reminder that the combination of good tunes and bags of enthusiasm can gloss over a lot of shortcomings: the Mo Tucker drumming, downstrummed guitars and just-about-there harmonies of #1985 sound like bottled joy.

Johnny Murtagh, a three-times Derby winner and one of the most successful jockeys of recent decades, has spoken at length about his struggle with alcohol addiction during the first 10 years of his riding career in a video released in an attempt to raise awareness of addiction issues in the weighing room. The 15-minute video, which was shown to an audience of 30 apprentices at the British Racing School on Thursday and can also be watched on YouTube, encourages any jockeys who are struggling with addiction to seek help. It also includes an interview with Tony McCoy, the 20-times National Hunt champion jockey and a lifelong teetotaller, and quotes from the autobiography of the former Flat champion jockey Richard Hughes about his own struggle with alcohol. Murtagh, who retired after the 2013 Flat season to concentrate on his new career as a trainer, rode as the principal jockey for Aidan O'Brien's Ballydoyle Stable and the Aga Khan's powerful bloodstock operation during his long and successful career. However, Murtagh says in the film that for the first 10 years of his career in the saddle as a leading jockey, and even after a six-week stay at a clinic specialising in addiction problems at the age of 21, he struggled to control his drinking. "For 10 years I never got one year sober," he says. "I might get nine months, I might get 11 months, I might get six months but I was never sober. I'd say, I deserve a night out, I'd go out and have a few drinks and wake up the next morning, and I think that's what got me in the end." Murtagh says in the early years of his career "I rode Derby winners, Royal Ascot winners but I was never satisfied, there was always something missing in my life". He finally decided to face up to his addiction on the balcony of an apartment in Dubai. "Thankfully, looking over the balcony, something happened to me and I just got down on my knees and said: 'Please God, help me, something's wrong with me,' and that was the turning point in my career," Murtagh says. "You will not meet your true potential [if you are] drinking and drugging. You can't. You can get so far and there might be times of brilliance but, I think if you look back at the last 15 years of my career, I was consistent, consistently good, whether it was Roscommon on a Monday, Royal Ascot on Saturday, The Curragh on Sunday, that's what I wanted to bring into my life. Before that I might be brilliant for one day but I wasn't consistent as a person and in my job." Murtagh also adds that strict alcohol and drug-testing regimes mean jockeys are now much more likely to be caught if they are regularly drinking or using drugs. "I get some young jockeys calling me and they know they're drinking too much and I say: 'Would you like to go to an Alcoholics Anonymous meeting?'" he says. "That word puts them off straightaway, they're too young. They know they have a problem but they don't want to admit it but the quicker you throw in the towel, the better it will be for you in the long run." Paul Struthers, the chief executive of the Professional Jockeys' Association, said on Wednesday that the PJA was grateful for Murtagh's contribution to the film, which is part of a series called Jockey Matters produced by the Jockeys Employment &amp; Training Scheme. "We entirely echo Johnny's comments and are very grateful to him for his powerful and important contribution," Struthers said. "Through our helpline and one‑to‑one support, which we provide through our mental wellbeing partner, Cognacity, we can help jockeys struggling with addiction issues and would very much encourage them to get in touch to access that support."

Law enforcement agencies are dramatically increasing their use of Opal card public transport data to track the movements of people in New South Wales, with approvals for data more than doubling this year. Internal documents also reveal that police can be handed the information of "collateral cardholders", or people who are not suspects, when their person of interest's identity is unknown. The details of collateral cardholders may be handed over when police request details of all travellers who have used their card at a particular time and place. That may occur, for example, when police have seen a suspect on CCTV, but do not know who they are. Opal card data has been accessible without a warrant by police and other government authorities since mid-2014, Similar powers are used to access data from Go cards in Queensland, MyWay cards in the Australian Capital Territory and myki cards in Victoria. New Transport for NSW figures provided to Guardian Australia show law enforcement agencies tried to gain access to Opal data 327 times in 2015, and were successful 96 times. The number dramatically increased this year. Law enforcement requests had already doubled on 2015 levels by September, with a total of 608 requests, more than a third of which were granted. Transport for NSW would not say which agencies had requested the data, or how many of those requests came without a warrant. But documents obtained under freedom of information laws show that NSW police were responsible for the majority, while the Australian federal police made occasional requests. More than half the access requests sought personal information rather than just the travel history of cardholders. An internal document setting out the department's rules for releasing Opal data to police, seen by Guardian Australia, reveals that information on "collateral cardholders", people other than the police's person of interest, can be released in certain circumstances. The document states that such requests would be inappropriate if they involved the disclosure of "personal information of a significant number of collateral cardholders without good reason (eg, more than seven)". Details of collateral cardholders can be released only after the ticketing and concession branch escalates the request to privacy specialists in another area of the department. The document also states that vague or broad requests should be denied, and that Opal data is not to be handed to police for "general intelligence" purposes. A Transport for NSW spokeswoman said there was a "rigorous framework" to deal with attempts to gain Opal card data, and it released information only where necessary to find missing people, comply with a subpoena or search warrant, or where it was "reasonably necessary to protect the public". "The protection of personal information is properly balanced with the need to ensure community safety and to assist NSW police in the search for missing persons," she said. "In any three-month period Transport for NSW rejects around 70% of requests from law enforcement agencies for Opal data, demonstrating the rigorous framework Transport has developed for processing requests." But critics have raised concerns about leaving the decision in the hands of the department, rather than a court. The vice-president of the NSW Council for Civil Liberties, Pauline Wright, said the number of refusals showed that "inappropriate requests are surely being made". "Our view still is that requests for this kind of information should only be able to be made by warrant, rather than leaving it up to the discretion of Transport NSW," she said. "Clearly there's been a huge increase in two years in the number of requests, so one can only surmise that the circumstances in which those requests are being made are broadening. "So as police realise how easy it is to get this, there's a real potential that it's being requested in completely inappropriate circumstances." Registered Opal cards contain first and last names, addresses, details of the preferred contact method, date of birth, and use and travel history. Concession card holders also have information about the identification they used to prove their entitlement. The data is managed by a third-party contractor, Cubic Transportation Systems, and Transport for NSW has a formal agreement with NSW police about accessing the data. The process is subject to annual audits, the requirements of NSW privacy laws and the scrutiny of the privacy commissioner. The internal rules warn department employees that: "Vague, non-specific intelligence gathering requests from law enforcement agencies are not considered to be legitimate law enforcement purposes for the disclosure of Opal information." It also cautions against providing volumes of data for a large window of time, except in special circumstances.

At some point on Saturday Sebastian Coe will address all 214 member federations of athletics' governing body, the IAAF, and urge them to support a revolution. "This is a pretty important week in the history of our sport," the IAAF president admitted on Thursday night. "Because I do not want us ever to return to the grotesque stories that even over the last few days we have been waking up to." Coe did not refer to those stories directly. There was no need. It has been impossible to escape the festering stench of corruption left by several former senior IAAF officials, who this year were banned for life for conspiring to demand money from Russian athletes in order to cover up anomalies in their biological passports. This week the French newspaper Le Monde and the German broadcaster ARD reported that the practice was more widespread than initially thought, based on documents from a continued investigation by French prosecutors into the former IAAF president Lamine Diack, his son Papa Massata Diack and others over alleged corruption and money laundering. Meanwhile the steady drip of positive retests from Beijing 2008 and London 2012 – while ultimately good for the sport – has deepened the impression that more needs to be done to stop doping. However, Coe hopes to perform the equivalent of a hard reset on a calamitous few years for athletics by introducing a series of governance reforms – including some that are surprisingly radical in places. They include stripping himself of some powers as IAAF president, creating an integrity code and anti-doping body, ensuring a greater voice to athletes and creating a roadmap to ensure a 50/50 male/female split among the IAAF council by 2027. Under Coe's plans the president and IAAF council will not be allowed to serve more than 12 years and there will also be greater checks and balances to stop the president taking major decisions alone. "This is a moment to be bold, not to be timid," he said on Thursday night. "The reforms create the strongest set of foundations upon which we need to build new fans, create new formats, to find new partners and frankly to create new and exciting events. We must engage with young people, we must find new fans – and that sits at the heart of our strategy." Coe stressed that his key reform was a plan for a beefy and independent integrity unit that would manage all anti-doping matters and be responsible for greater intelligence gathering. He also pointed out that an online portal to allow people, privately and securely, to forward on information about doping had received 43 leads in its first 48 hours. "These reforms are fundamentally about standing tall for the clean athletes," he said. "The clean athletes have to know we are in their corner." Coe needs the backing of two-thirds of the federations to get the proposals through and, while he knows there will be some resistance, he has urged doubters to think of the consequences of maintaining the status quo. "We have sponsors and stakeholders watching very carefully how we address the issues facing our sport and facing all sport, as we strive for greater transparency and accountability," he wrote recently in the IAAF's booklet Time for Change. "Our partnerships and revenue streams are directly under threat if we do not act promptly and decisively." Privately his supporters hope the reforms will turn the IAAF into one of the most open and transparent bodies in global sport – perhaps even the most transparent, an exemplar for others. They also point to the vocal backing of the IAAF Athletes' Commission, which says the "future of the sport" depends on the proposals being voted through. Coe knows not everyone is so positive about him or the sport's future. However, as he might reflect, Friday is a year to the day since he faced a hostile three-hour grilling from MPs on the culture and media select committee over his relationship with Lamine Diack and why he did not know more about corruption at the IAAF. As Coe confessed to the MPs, the IAAF's problems were like a "horror show". Now, perhaps, it is more like a 12 certificate than an 18 – but much work remains, as Coe concedes. "We must accept that the reputation of the IAAF and athletics has been tarnished by events that came to light a year ago," he says. "We still have a lot of work to do to restore our reputation, credibility and trust within our own sport and the wider world of sport." Saturday, though, could prove a significant step in the right direction.

Hamburg Demonstrations marks a departure for Pete Doherty: it's perhaps the first record he's put out that few people outside of his fanbase will be paying much attention to. With the endless soap opera surrounding the Libertines dimming down and the sound of rickety indie no longer in vogue, it feels very much like a record that can be judged on its own merits. Those merits – the just-about-held-together arrangements, muttered vocals and literary references – are not new ground for Doherty. But the Kinks-esque melodies are surprisingly tuneful and, during its hushed moments, Doherty proves himself a deft master of late-night intimacy: few things he's written are as beautiful as the Amy Winehouse tribute Flags of the Old Regime. The truth is, he seems to suit life as an alternative songwriter on the fringes far more than he did a mainstream one in the limelight.

Britain could end up paying the European Union to retain access to the single market, David Davis and Philip Hammond have said, in a concerted attempt to signal that the government is willing to take a flexible approach to the looming Brexit negotiations. Theresa May has never made ongoing financial contributions a red line – unlike controlling immigration – but Davis still surprised MPs when he conceded on Thursday morning that the government may be willing to pay to retain single market access, a point Hammond then reinforced in a speech in Scotland. Concern has been growing in Brussels about the lack of clarity in the UK's Brexit strategy, increasing fears that it has an unrealistic "have cake and eat it" approach, as stated in a memo snapped by a photographer in Downing Street this week and a series of flamboyant interventions by the foreign secretary, Boris Johnson. Claims that ending contributions to the EU's budget could free up "£350m a week" to be spent back home was a central thrust of Vote Leave in the referendum campaign; it was emblazoned on the side of its red buses. But the Brexit secretary and the chancellor, who have forged a close working relationship in recent weeks, appear to have consciously decided to strike a more emollient tone, stressing the government's willingness to make concessions where necessary – a stance backed up by No 10. During questions in the House of Commons on Thursday morning, the Labour MP Wayne David asked Davis if he would "consider making any contribution in any shape or form for access to the single market". Davis said the government would look at the options during the article 50 process over the next two years. "The major criterion here is that we get the best possible access for goods and services to the European market," he said. "And if that is included in what he is talking about, then of course we would consider it." Sterling jumped by more than 1% on the foreign exchanges after Davis's comments, with traders keen to clutch at any hint Britain could retain its lucrative access to the EU single market. Hammond later reinforced the Brexit secretary's point in Edinburgh. "You can't go into any negotiation expecting to get every single objective that you set out and concede nothing on the way," the chancellor said. "It will have to be a deal that works for both sides. I think David Davis is absolutely right not to rule out the possibility that we might want to contribute in some way to some form of mechanism." The UK government had not taken any decisions on whether it wanted to join the customs union, he added, but hinted this was at the centre of any deal with Brussels. The customs union is at the heart of the European free trade area, the European body that includes Norway, Switzerland and Liechtenstein and incorporates the EU. "We're sitting down at the table as the sixth largest economy in the world to negotiate with the world's largest trading bloc, the European Union, a deal that works for both sides. It has to work for both sides; if it doesn't work for both sides then it won't get done," Hammond said. "And we should be flexible and open minded about how we put that deal together." Vincenzo Scarpetta, senior economic analyst at the Open Europe thinktank, suggested one option might be to pay to retain access to the single market during a transitional period on the way to Brexit. "It may be that it's a card that the UK might want to play to smooth things over a bit," he said. Labour MP Angela Eagle, who memorably urged Johnson to "get that lie off your bus" during one of the televised referendum debates, said the admission underlined how flimsy many of the promises made by the leave campaign had been. "We now know the campaign was full of cynical untruths," she said. "That £350m a week for the NHS is just not going to happen – and the more these lies are exposed, the more illegitimate the referendum decision in the first place". In a speech on Thursday evening to a CBI dinner in Cardiff, Davis made clear that the government would not pursue controls on immigration at the expense of the "national interest", another indication of flexibility. "As we take back control of immigration by ending free movement as it has operated before, let me also say this: we won't do so in a way that it is contrary to the national and economic interest. Because as the chancellor has said, Britain must win the global battle for talent. No one wants to see labour shortages in key sectors. That wouldn't be in anybody's interest," he said. Pro-Brexit Conservative MPs appeared relaxed about Davis's admission, with Anne-Marie Trevelyan saying it was important the government retain "maximum flexibility" with negotiations unable to begin until article 50 of the Lisbon treaty is formally invoked next year. But Ukip donor Arron Banks reacted with derision to the idea the government could end up continuing to pay into the EU. He described Davis's remarks as "an incredibly foolish concession by a politician who clearly knows nothing about business or negotiation" and suggested he buy a copy of "Negotiating for Dummies". A German Christian Democrat MEP Reimer Böge, the former chair of the European parliament's budgets committee, has said the UK could pay up to €5bn (£4.2bn) a year for the highest levels of access to the single market, equivalent to the status of Norway. "If you want something, you are obliged to pay for it. This is part of the deal," Böge said. "If you take the Norway calculation for the UK, it will be €4bn to €5bn." The UK's net contribution was £8.5bn a in 2015, so a Norway-style deal would amount to around half the current annual EU bill based on current exchange rates. Britain's limbo status will be underlined at an EU summit in Brussels on 15 December. It emerged on Thursday night that May has been invited to formal talks but not to the traditional dinner afterwards, which will instead involve just leaders from the other 27 member states.

If Adam Deacon's Anuvahood was the Carry On of Brit urban comedy, then perhaps The Weekend is the On the Buses: likable, freewheeling, a bit ropey. Jovian Wade, Dee Kartier and Percelle Ascott have already shown tag-team charisma on their Mandem on the Wall YouTube channel and E4's Youngers, and they easily carry it over to their feature debut as a trio of London friends who accidentally lay their hands on £100,000 of gangster readies and foolishly decide to spend it. As well as scampishly running rings around the grim fatalism of Noel Clarke's 'hood trilogy, The Weekend atypically makes Wade's lead a nice middle-class boy. Directed by fellow debutant Sheridan De Myers, the caper takes too long to get going and is thinly sustained when it does – however much Dizzee and Stormzy is slathered on to the soundtrack. But the film fizzes in episodic bursts with a feel for London's multicultural pageant; everyone loves a dodgy Nigerian pastor.

In a feature (Rear of the year, 1 December, page 19, G2), we misnamed one of the artists shortlisted for this year's Turner prize, the winner of which will be announced next week. The creator of the work Project for Door (After Gaetano Pesce) is Anthea Hamilton, not Andrea Hamilton as we had it. A piece about the Swedish crime drama Modus, being shown on BBC4, said that it was based on a book written by a former minister of justice. Anne Holt is a former Norwegian justice minister. Although the television adaptation is Swedish, her novel is set in Norway (New ingredient proves a winner in latest Scandi noir, 26 November, page 5).

Why aren't we allowed to talk about Christmas any more? For that's the question we're all asking ourselves, surely, in between ordering the turkey and hanging the Advent calendar. Why is there not more Christmas in my life, I ask myself plaintively, while cobbling together an emergency nativity play costume at midnight? Why are the forces of political correctness so cruelly suppressing all references to it, leaving us barely two months of the year to enjoy reindeer jumpers and piped-carol muzak in all the shops and giant Christmas trees outside parliament? Why, you'd barely know it was Christmas time at all. Thank goodness, then, that the equality and human rights commission and the prime minister are on the case. The commission's new chair David Isaac boldly declared this week that employers should realise it's "OK to hold a party and to send Christmas cards" without fear of offending other faiths, just in case anyone was wondering whether the religious nature of the average office Christmas party could prove divisive. And questioned on the issue in the Commons this week, Theresa May said solemnly that people at work certainly should "feel able to speak quite freely about Christmas". Who knew, eh, that so many Britons had been so cruelly oppressed just for trying to organise an office secret Santa? Unfortunately what you've just read is precisely the sort of smart-alec liberal elitist response that's proved so resoundingly popular and electorally successful this year. Like a doctor responding to a wholly imaginary complaint – the perennial rightwing fantasy that someone somewhere is trying to kill Christmas – May was prescribing a placebo, a soothing assurance that the thing that isn't happening anyway, definitely shouldn't happen. It offends every liberal instinct going, because it's pandering to an imaginary problem rather than confronting it head-on. But the uncomfortable question it poses is – what's your better plan, exactly? I have every sympathy with Christians who feel commercialisation is squeezing the religious meaning out of Christmas, and still more so with those worried by the murderous persecution of Christians overseas. But that's not what drives the complaints about school PTAs renaming their Christmas fundraisers "winter fayres". The latter is the political equivalent of moaning about having to cater for a vegetarian at Christmas lunch; it's an irritable reaction to being asked to adapt to the presence and beliefs of others, which has precious little to do with the Christian ideal of loving one's neighbour. It's infuriating, but arguing with this kind of vague cultural anxiety is like boxing shadows or punching smoke. You can't rationalise something that is impervious to reason, and liberals ought to know that, because we've been trying unsuccessfully to do it for years. When people first started grumbling that they weren't allowed to talk about immigration any more, sometimes even while being interviewed at length on national media about immigration, liberals responded by pouncing gleefully on errors of fact or with mockery. We thought that if you didn't punch the smoke you were ceding ground to extremists, and we may well have been right. But nonetheless, we all know how that movie ended; with a room full of smoke. As a journalist, I am not willing to let go of the belief that facts are sacred, and that misunderstandings or untruths exist to be countered. But nor am I blind to the fact that politicians operate in a different world from journalists. If the facts were wobbly and anecdotes exaggerated, the pretence that debate was being silenced was basically code for something harder to dismiss: feelings about change, loss of control, and the world moving on without their permission. There was undoubtedly racism mixed into it, but also a lot of vague generalised anxiety and innate conservatism. And the same is true now of the imaginary threat to Christmas. What May said was in itself fairly meaningless, because there's nothing meaningful to say about a nonexistent problem. (For any Christians genuinely discriminated against on grounds of their beliefs, there is already recourse in law.) And fighting culture wars in this way does leave politicians looking a little like adults at a toddler tea party, gravely pretending to drink nonexistent tea from an empty cup. But even that game has, deep down, a purpose. The toddler knows the cup is empty really, but it's gratifying to be taken seriously by a grownup, and that strengthens the bond between them. If the intention is to build trust and thus get a hearing for the more thoughtful things May has said in the past about religious plurality and respect for all faiths – well, maybe it's not the liberal way, but liberals are not in power any more. The risk, however, in playing tea parties on a national scale is that you're playing with millions of toddlers at once, and not all of them understand the tea isn't real. Whenever politicians position themselves as standing up for Christmas, some will almost certainly interpret that as asserting the supremacy of Christianity over minority faiths and by extension of minorities themselves, even though May pointedly mentioned the "very strong tradition in this country of religious tolerance". But many others will simply hear a vaguely reassuring message that Christmas isn't about to change; a promise to defend overcooked sprouts and snowball fights, O Come All Ye Faithful and grandchildren being forced to write proper thankyou cards rather than beastly emails. The fact that none of these things are particularly endangered doesn't matter; what her target voters hear is that she values the same things they do, and crucially that she isn't laughing at them. It's the political equivalent of what relationship counsellors call mirroring, or defusing a row by calmly repeating what your furious partner says back at them, rather than getting defensive (or offensive) in return. But even mirroring is only meant to be a way of calming things down, so that you can rationally discuss who does the chores in future. Currently rightwing politicians have been tremendously good at mirroring voters' fear of change right back at them, and the left has been much better at rationally dissecting the way forward, but nobody is particularly excelling at doing both. So bah, humbug to the idea that anyone is killing Christmas. But perhaps liberals need to find a way of saying so that doesn't sound quite so contemptuously Scrooge-like.

Hospitals are cancelling record numbers of outpatient appointments, which doctors say illustrates the unprecedented strain on the NHS. Hospitals in England cancelled 7.68m outpatient appointments last year, almost three times more than the 2.76m they called off a decade earlier. Cancellations have also increased over that time as a proportion of all outpatient appointments, from 4.6% in 2005-06, to 6.8% in 2015-16 – which is a 48% jump. The latest annual figures for hospital outpatient activity published by NHS Digital confirms that demand for healthcare has been rising sharply. While there were 60.6m appointments in 2005-06, that had almost doubled to 113.3m last year. "The rising rate of outpatient appointments is another sign of an NHS under stress," said Andrew Goddard, the Royal College of Physicians (RCP) registrar. "While most appointments are postponed rather than just cancelled, the extra waiting time can cause anxiety for patients and delay in getting the right treatment." Evidence collected by the RCP indicated that the NHS was struggling to cope with the increasing pressures of rising demand and inadequate funding and therefore it needed a new budget, Goddard said. The proportion of patients classed as "did not attend," because they did not turn up for an appointment, has fallen, from 8.3% (5 million ) to 6.6% (7.5 million). But more patients have been cancelling appointments – 6.4% (7.2 million) than did so last year, and this was up from 4% (2.4million) in 2005-06. Overall, patients attended 89.44m of the 113.3m appointments last year, an attendance rate of almost four in five (78.9%), slightly down from the 82.6% seen a decade ago. But the proportion cancelled by the patient or hospital rose, from 8.6% to 13.2%. Women are much more likely than men to attend outpatient appointments. Last year 51.7 million women attended compared to 37.6 million men. There were 186 outpatient visits among women per 100 population but just 139 for men. Five areas of specialist medical care accounted for 30% of all last year's outpatient appointments: trauma and orthopaedics (7.65m), opthamology (7.3m), physiotherapy (5m), obstetrics (3.65m) and dermatology (3.46m). The shadow health minister, Justin Madders, said: "These shocking figures are yet another example of patients being let down by a health service unable to cope with demand due to six years of Tory underfunding. Despite the best efforts of hard-working NHS staff, the system is now stretched to breaking point. Last week Theresa May missed the opportunity to deliver the rescue package that the NHS so badly needs. Ministers need to stop burying their heads in the sand and face up to the level of the crisis that they have created." Responding to the figures, a Department of Health spokesperson said: "The number of cancelled outpatient appointments remains very low given that the NHS is seeing millions more people every year. In fact, in 2015/16 the NHS treated 9.6 million more people as outpatients compared to 2009/10." This article was amended on 2 December 2016 to add a comment from the Department of Health that was received after publication.

Those of us with only a smattering of knowledge about the ancient world know one thing about Cato the Elder. During Rome's long wars against Hannibal, Cato ended every speech in the senate with the same words: "Carthage must be destroyed." "Brexit must be stopped" is unlikely to last as long as Cato's catchphrase has managed to. But it focuses the mind. Those who think Brexit must be stopped are not the majority. But they have a case and a cause, and they are right. So how might stoppage be achieved? Probably not by a political movement headed by Tony Blair. The former prime minister is not heading back into frontline politics. But he is one of the biggest names to insist that Brexit is not yet irrevocable. He told the New Statesman last week that Brexit "can be stopped if the British people decide that, having seen what it means, the pain-gain cost-benefit analysis doesn't stack up". And on that he is absolutely right. Blair carries so much baggage that it is inconceivable he either could or should play the leading role in any campaign. The Iraq war was wrong and it is no part of my argument that the past can be brushed aside. But Blair has serious things to say about Brexit that serious people ought to listen to. It's time his critics were big enough to give him a break. The 439-70 House of Commons vote this week against the SNP's effort to sanction Blair for the events of 2003 may suggest there is some space for the former Labour leader to at least be heard. But don't hold your breath. If Brexit is to be stopped it will require time, a change of public mood, and an alliance. The SNP, Greens, Liberal Democrats, significant parts of the Labour party and a minority of Tories would all have roles to play. People from outside politics are crucial too. This week's joint press conference by Nick Clegg, Chuka Umunna and Anna Soubry was a start. But as Clegg says, to turn the referendum around needs the people's consent, not a procedural trick. This will only happen if the public mood changes. Anti-Brexit campaigners should try to change it, and here's how. The first point is to be clear who they need to be talking to, rather than squabbling about which of them is entitled to do the talking. The name of this game is changing minds. So there is absolutely no point crafting a campaign that is aimed at fundamentalist Eurosceptics who never wanted Britain to be part of the EU in the first place. Nor is there any point in focusing on racists and xenophobes. People who don't like foreigners or people with coloured skin are not going to change their minds. But that leaves a lot of people who voted for Brexit, in hundreds of thousands of cases, on the basis of their own experience. They were sold a false prospectus by the leave campaign; but they need a better one, which offers them hope, support, material improvements in their lives, and confidence. Theresa May gets this, though she is doomed to promote Brexit and not to stop it. Those who want to stop Brexit need to learn this lesson: the aim of any campaign must be to persuade these voters that there is a better way of getting the things they want than leaving the EU. Don't berate, persuade. And get out of the bubble. The second key principle is to accept that this is a long game. Brexit won in June 2016. It won't be turned around quickly. Stopping Brexit is on the margins of political possibility right now. It could be that Brexit will be slowed by the supreme court's ruling, due in January. But that's just the start. Opponents of Brexit should settle in. Time is on their side. The negotiations with the EU will take a minimum of two years – longer if there is a transitional phase. The pressure to bring things to a head will be enormous and will grow, both in Britain and in the other 27 EU countries. British opponents of Brexit must be EU reformers too. The third point is to remember Cato. Chip away, every day. Every time something new and troubling happens, make it clear that things would be different if Brexit were stopped. This week's immigration figures showed a pre-referendum surge. Without Brexit this wouldn't have happened. Hate crimes have proliferated. Brexit shares the blame for that. When inflation rises and growth slows next year, make sure Brexit's role is spelled out. If ministers abandon the single market in favour of migration curbs, make Brexit's responsibility clear. Unless anti-Brexit campaigners have established in the public mind that there is a clear and viable no-Brexit alternative, they won't be in a position to make the most of their opportunities. The fourth point is the other side of the same coin. The leave campaign lied through its teeth about the benefits of Brexit. It said there would be £350m extra every week for the NHS. Last week the chancellor said precisely nothing about any extra NHS spending in the next four years. And look what is actually happening to the NHS. The leave campaign landed the May government with a huge promise that it cannot deliver. The opposition parties need to link the two at every opportunity. Stopping Brexit will not be easy. Recovering from a big defeat is hard. The campaign is more likely to fail than to succeed. The Brexiteers will fight very dirty. But the prize is immense – and Hannibal was not defeated in a day.

Cruise lines are among the travel industry's worst polluters, notorious for dumping insufficiently treated sewage into oceans or producing as much soot as 1m cars per day. Now, cruise companies are seeking to offset that tainted image by offering "voluntourism" experiences. Passengers onboard Carnival Cruises' Fathom line, for example, can expect to tan by the pool in the morning, build water filters in the Dominican Republic in the afternoon, then dance on the ship's deck at night. Other cruise lines have been offering these kinds of excursions on luxury voyages since 2011, but Fathom, which launched in May 2016, is the first to center its weeklong journeys entirely around volunteer work. The company offers "impact travel" exclusively to the Dominican Republic for now. In coordination with local nonprofits, Fathom passengers sort cocoa beans in a chocolate factory or tutor schoolchildren in English in the Puerto Plata region of the DR. There are educational, environmental and economic development excursions, all of which have received strong reviews. Yet, so far, it's proven somewhat of a tough sell. "I wish I could say they were selling out, but they're not," said Heidi Allison, an executive at trip booking site Cruise Compete. "It's been a rough struggle. People aren't used to mixing their vacations with volunteering. We've had more sales recently, but the prices are so inexpensive... that means they can't get people on them." With its 700-passenger vessel sailing at well below capacity, Fathom has been forced to discount their trips from an initial starting price of $1,540 down to low as $199. And, while the company would prefer to focus on its positive statistics – like the 16,000 seeds its passengers have planted in a Dominican reforestation nursery, or the 730 water filters to benefit local families who don't have access to clean drinking water – the question remains whether these projects are sustainable. Impact travel has received increased scrutiny in recent years as some voluntourism groups have been exposed lying about the profits they make on goodwill trips. Many organizations have been criticized for favoring exotic or uplifting experiences over actual work. International development experts also bemoan the amount of money spent transporting unskilled Westerners to poor countries, when that financing could make a stronger impact as a donation. These types of concerns made Julian Hatfield and Christine Williams initially hesitant to try Fathom. They both have a background in development work and co-author a travel blog, Don't Forget To Move, that highlights responsible tourism options that respect local communities and the environment. "Tourist companies can really screw this up," Hatfield said. "It just depends on how they go about it: what local partners they have on the ground and how they prioritize the needs of the community over the comfort level and experience of the volunteers." Ultimately, the couple came away impressed by Fathom's organizational partners, which convinced them the local community isn't dependent on continued assistance, and therefore won't regress if Fathom stops coming. There was a social impact that heartened the couple as well. "It was really moving to see how people reacted to witnessing the way these people lived, or to interacting with these children," Hatfield said. "I think that has a huge impact on somebody who lives in the Western world." As to the misallocated resources, Williams said: "People would have a greater impact if they came to the community and volunteered for a year, or if they donated $10,000 so [the local nonprofits] could hire somebody. But the fact is people want their cruise ship. They want to have that vacation. They want to be in the community and experience it firsthand." Carnival Cruises, Fathom's parent company, has marketed the trip to church groups, millennials and progressive-minded baby boomers interested in doing something other than donating to a good cause. Upon its launch, Fathom predicted that 40% of its passengers would be first-time cruisers. But many in their target demographic would rather seek adventure on their own, not aboard a luxury cruiseliner with a heavy carbon footprint. Although Fathom scored an A in sewage treatment in the 2016 Cruise Ship Report Card by the environmentalist group Friends of the Earth, Carnival's philanthropy line earned F grades in transparency and air pollution reduction. "It's a good thing to volunteer on your vacation – that's a wonderful thing to promote," said Marcie Keever, the report's author. "But cruise companies really need to do more to protect the places they travel to and improve their footprint around the world." This comes in the wake of several Carnival incidents in the past few years, including a 2013 engine room fire that left more than 4,000 passengers and crewmembers stranded in the Gulf of Mexico, some without power or bathroom facilities. That and other mishaps followed the catastrophic 2012 Costa Concordia shipwreck that resulted in 32 deaths near the Italian coastline. "Maybe people are still getting over some of the bad publicity," said Sevil Sönmez, a hospitality and tourism professor at the University of Central Florida. "The tourism industry is very interesting. Negative things happen – natural disasters, terrorism – and the activity dips, but in time it recovers." Fathom is committed to sail through to 2017, but has started cutting back on its impact journeys to the Dominican Republic in favor of its more popular cultural exchange trip to Cuba. According to Fathom president Tara Russell, starting in November, the cruise line's sister brands also began offering volunteer excursions when docked in the DR. Much like its competitors – Royal Caribbean and Crystal Cruises – Carnival's other brands now promote voluntourism experiences along with their centerpiece luxury voyage events. "It takes time to build a market for an entirely new category of travel," Russell said. "[This] appeals to people who love to travel, but also like the idea of making a difference. It's not for the hardcore adventurer that goes to climb Mount Everest. It's for someone who is looking for a way to bring authentic, impactful experiences into their daily life in a very accessible way."

The New England Patriots are likely to be without Rob Gronkowski for the rest of the season. ESPN reported that Gronkowski will have surgery for a herniated disc in his back on Friday and is expected to miss two months. The injury is a severe blow to the Patriots, who have long relied on the 6ft 6in, 265lb tight end to bull over defenders. He has been especially important in the playoffs, catching nine touchdown passes in 10 postseason games and averaging 75 yards receiving a game. But despite his dominance in recent seasons, Gronkowski has been slowed for much of this season, missing three games with injury and catching just 25 passes while not scoring a touchdown until the season's sixth week. New England has always had an ability to adapt to even the worst player injuries, and the Patriots are still 9-2 and in first place of the AFC East even with his diminished performance. Still, the back injury must raise the question of how much longer Gronkowski can continue to run over opponents. In football terms he is an old 27, having played in 98 regular-season and postseason games over nearly seven years. He missed most of 2013 with a torn ACL and came back the next season to help the Patriots to a Super Bowl title. But this season has been his most trying physically. He did not play the first two games with a hamstring injury, and then missed the Patriots' game two weeks ago after being hit in the chest during a loss to Seattle. He came back to play against the Jets last Sunday, but left with what was described as a back injury. It is unclear when the injury occurred in the Jets game. He left after taking just seven snaps, went to the locker room and did not return. Martellus Bennett will likely be New England's top tight end. He has caught 42 passes for 540 yards so far this season with four touchdowns. Super Bowl LI will be played in Houston on 5 February.

Congressman Xavier Becerra was appointed as California's attorney general on Thursday, setting him up to lead the state's looming court battles with Donald Trump over climate change, immigration and more. A 24-year veteran of Congress, Becerra will replace outgoing attorney general Kamala Harris, who won a Senate seat last month. Becerra, 58, earned a law degree from Stanford University and worked in the civil division of the attorney general's office before winning election to the House of Representatives. Once there, he rose to become the highest ranking Latino member and was a strenuous advocate for Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton. His appointment makes him the state's first Latino attorney general. California's state leaders, including Governor Jerry Brown, have promised to resist attempts by a Trump administration to alter state policies on climate change, organized labor and immigration. Eddie Kurtz, executive director of the Courage Campaign, a progressive organizing group, hailed Becerra's appointment, saying, "California can – and should – be the tip of the spear for state-based resistance to Trump and the Republican party's inhumane vision for our country." Brown and Becerra said they would protect California's values. "Xavier has been an outstanding public servant – in the state legislature, the US Congress and as a deputy attorney general," Brown said in a statement. "I'm confident he will be a champion for all Californians and help our state aggressively combat climate change." "Governor Brown has presented me with an opportunity I cannot refuse," Becerra said on Thursday. "As a former deputy attorney general, I relished the chance to be our state's chief law enforcement officer to protect consumers, advance criminal justice reform, and, of course, keep our families safe." "California right now is ahead of the country when it comes to clean energy, commonsense treatment of immigrants, real health security and so much more," he added. Trump has not yet named anyone to lead the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), but has placed a coal lobbyist in charge of his EPA transition team and has called global warming a hoax "created by and for the Chinese". More recently, Trump told the New York Times he believes there is "some connectivity" between human activity and climate change, and said he has not yet made up his mind whether the US should withdraw from the Paris climate agreement. The president-elect has also promised to deport millions of migrants and cut federal funding to "sanctuary cities", where local authorities limit their assistance to federal deportation. His other proposals that may violate the constitution include penalties for free speech, a religious test for migration, retaining his businesses and interfering with the justice system. Mayors of two major California cities, Los Angeles and San Francisco, are among those that have promised to try to protect migrants from Trump's encroachment into local policies. With Becerra as attorney general, liberal California could play a similar role under a Trump administration as the one performed by conservative Texas during the last eight years of Obama's administration. Texas aggressively lead 46 lawsuits against the administration, questioning the president's power on immigration, climate change, healthcare and voter rights, among other issues. The state has won seven cases so far, most prominently a 4-4 supreme court decision that ultimately blocked Obama's efforts to protect millions of migrants from deportation. The state has lost 12 cases, including a 2012 decision that upheld Obama's signature healthcare act as constitutional. In all, the suits lifted Texas' attorney general's office to the head of the opposition against Obama – raising Ted Cruz to a Senate seat and presidential campaign – and cost Texas taxpayers almost $6m. Anthony Rendon, California's state assembly speaker, hinted at the future court battles awaiting the Democratic party. "Becerra clearly has the experience to step into this vital role," Renden said in a statement. "Just as important, he has great tenacity and he respects the rights of all Californians – much-needed qualities for an attorney general given the troubling times ahead."

Whether it's another person's words, folklore or a wider philosophy being called into question, disbelief is everywhere. We're looking for your songs on this very theme – which, we believe, is open to interpretation as you see fit. You have until 11pm on Monday 5 December to post your nomination and make your justification. RR contributor Stephen Males (who posts as severin in the comments) will select from your recommendations and produce the playlist, to be published on 8 December. Here is a list of all songs previously picked and therefore ineligible for the series. If you want to volunteer to compile a playlist from readers' suggestions – and potentially blog about the process/selection for the Guardian – please email matthew.holmes@theguardian.com with the subject line "RR guru", or make yourself known in the comments. Here's a reminder of the guidelines for RR: Tell us why it's a worthy contender. Quote lyrics if helpful, but for copyright reasons no more than a third of a song's words. If sharing links, make sure there is appropriate copyright permission. Listen to others people's suggestions and add yours to a collaborative Spotify playlist. If you have a good theme, or if you'd like to volunteer to compile a playlist from readers' suggestions, please email matthew.holmes@theguardian.com There's a wealth of data on RR, including the songs that are "zedded", at the Marconium. It also tells you the meaning of "zedded" (picked for a previous playlist so ineligible), "donds" and other strange words used by RR regulars. Many RR regulars also congregate at the 'Spill blog.

An 89-year-old has found a job after placing an advert in his local paper asking for part-time work to stop him "dying of boredom". Joe Bartley, from Paignton, south Devon, is due to start work at a cafe in the town after the owners of the family-run business spotted his request. "No matter what your age or your background, you deserve a chance," said Cantina Bar and Kitchen's co-owner Sarah Martin. "Most people have got something to offer and Joe is someone who is keen, who is putting himself out there. What is not to like about that? "A lot of people who come here don't just come for coffee, they come for a chat, so Joe is perfect." Bartley, who was a member of the 6th Airborne division and served in Palestine after the second world war, put an advert in the Herald Express twice last month. It read: "Senior citizen, 89, seeks employment in Paignton area. 20hrs+ per week. Still able to clean, light gardening, DIY and anything. I have references. Old soldier, airborne forces. Save me from dying of boredom!" He said he had been overwhelmed by the response to the advert, which he described as "not unusual, just an old guy looking for work", adding: "The owner phoned me and said she was interested, and asked me to come in. So I arrived at the cafe and we've had a bit of a chat with the owner, and shook hands." Bartley said he was amused at the fact that the advert had made him something of a local celebrity, and said he was looking forward to earning his own money to enable him to pay rent. "I can't believe it really, I feel great about it," he said. He said he had lived alone since his wife, Cassandra, died two years ago, and had been lonely. "When you live on your own there is no one to speak to. Since she died I've moved into a flat and it's a big block. Once you walk into that flat it's like solitary confinement," he said. His new hospitality role was not the only job offer he got after taking the initiative. Glenn Rodgers, an independent baker in Barnstable, north Devon, offered the pensioner a job after reading his story in the Guardian. "I'm a baker and even though it's not complicated, it's therapeutic, it's quite a soulful thing to do – and I thought I'd offer him a job." But the bakery, The Ginger Breadman, being in Barnstaple, was too far for Bartley to travel. Rodgers said he wanted the pensioner to know he had been offered a job in the hope that it would put a "smile on his face". More employers should think about taking on older staff, he added. "It's unjust otherwise. Why not give him a chance? Also it works both ways, employers are getting experienced reliable staff who really want to work." Bartley will get a lift to work with his new employer on Sunday, but will take a bus the rest of the week. "He is delighted, and we are looking forward to it," said Martin. "We think about these things all the time. We are never going to be rich, but we like to give something back, so when we saw the advert there was no question – the minute we saw it we knew we'd give him a job."

Channel 4, the state-owned broadcaster whose future is under review, has accused the government of "a worrying and unprecedented level of interference" after the appointment of four white men to its board. The government confirmed the appointment of four board members this week but rejected a fifth candidate put forward by the media regulator Ofcom, who happened to be the only woman and black or minority ethnic candidate on the list. In a sharply worded note to all staff, the Channel 4 chief executive, David Abraham, was highly critical not just of this decision but of the government failing to announce its verdict on the broadcaster's ownership status and future. "Set against the backdrop of over a year of government-induced uncertainty at Channel 4, to say that this latest sequence of events is dispiriting would be an understatement," he wrote. "When combined with the many detailed issues they have raised with us over more than a year, this amounts to a worrying and unprecedented level of government interference. The editorial and institutional independence of Channel 4 remains paramount and I do not want it to be compromised." In September 2015, a leaked memo revealed that the then culture secretary, John Whittingdale, was considering the possible privatisation of Channel 4. After the departure of Whittingdale along with David Cameron, the incoming culture secretary, Karen Bradley, indicated that her department would still consider the future of the commercially funded broadcaster. This review is ongoing. Abraham said he had written to staff after "concerns have been raised internally" about the appointments process "and what this means more broadly in terms of the relationship between Channel 4 and the government". He argued that Ofcom had experienced "extraordinarily lengthy delays in securing government approval". "While it would not be appropriate for the confidentiality of the process to be breached, in the circumstances neither do we believe it makes any sense for Channel 4 to publicly defend a decision which we find hard to understand. "Not only do we share Ofcom's view that the fifth candidate is highly qualified, but she would also have added to the diversity of our board. Furthermore, improving board diversity is something that the government says it wishes to support." The decision to reject the only minority candidate has been criticised by the Labour MP David Lammy, who asked about the issue in this week's prime minister's questions. Theresa May said she intended to look into the matter.

It has been described as a "thank you tour", a victory lap and even the launch of his re-election campaign for 2020. Donald Trump was set on Thursday to return to the American midwest, the region that did most to hand him a stunning upset over Hillary Clinton in last month's election. The president-elect was travelling to Indiana, where he anticipated a hero's welcome for brokering an agreement to save 1,000 jobs that had been bound for Mexico, then holding a rally in Ohio, a critical battleground state he won on 8 November. Such a tour is highly unorthodox for a president-elect but in keeping with Trump's showman style. His "make America great again" rallies were notoriously raucous affairs, with crowds chanting "Lock her up!" in reference to Clinton, and were seen as feeding his personal need for adulation. The brash billionaire made salvaging jobs for blue-collar workers in the midwest a central plank of his campaign. He turned his wrath particularly on Carrier, a heating and air conditioning company which in February said that it would shut its plant and send 2,100 jobs to Mexico. A video of angry workers being informed about the decision quickly went viral. Trump appeared to have scored an early PR coup, even before taking office, when Carrier announced on Wednesday that some, though not all, of the jobs had been saved. More than 1,000 would remain, it said, and the company would continue to make gas furnaces in Indianapolis, as well as retain engineering and headquarters staff in the city. The announcement was "possible because the incoming Trump-Pence administration has emphasised to us its commitment to support the business community and create an improved, more competitive US business climate", it said. "The incentives offered by the state were an important consideration." The decision was seized on and trumpeted by the president-elect's supporters. Sean Hannity, a Fox News presenter, tweeted: "1000 jobs saved today! Awesome start! ... 1000 Families will have a better Christmas &amp; future because @realDonaldTrump cared enough to fight for them." Trump was due to visit the Carrier plant in Indianapolis and meet union leaders there on Thursday, accompanied by his vice-president-elect Mike Pence, currently the governor of Indiana, who also helped to broker the deal. Details of the agreement remain vague and there has been speculation over Carrier's motives, ranging from federal tax incentives to the company being threatened with the loss of defence contracts to pressure at state level by Pence. The Wall Street Journal reported Indiana officials gave Carrier's parent company $7m worth of tax breaks to keep the jobs. The White House gave the decision a welcome laced with scepticism. "Ultimately we'd have to rely on the executives at Carrier to explain why they made the decisions that they did," press secretary Josh Earnest told reporters on Thursday. "If you're a worker or if you live in one of the 1,000 families where that pay cheque is being collected then obviously that's welcome news. I'm not criticising it at all. "I think what I'm trying to highlight is as you evaluate the strategy that's being put forward by the president-elect, it's worth drawing a comparison to what was done in the last eight years under President Obama." Obama's strategy saved more than a million jobs in the manufacturing sector and created another 804,000, Earnest added. "Mr Trump would have to make 804 more announcements just like that to equal the standard of jobs in the manufacturing sector that were created in this country under President Obama's watch. This is good news but the incoming president has a high bar to meet when it comes to putting in place the kinds of economic policies that will benefit American workers." Asked if he was being unduly critical, Earnest replied: "I think if anything I'm suggesting that the success of the incoming administration in protecting those manufacturing jobs is something they're going to have to aggressively ramp up if they want to meet the standard set by the Obama administration. "Just a little rough math would indicate that if President Trump is fortunate enough to serve two terms in office for eight years, he's probably going to have to average two of these announcements a week, every week of his eight-year presidency in order to meet the same standard. So the bar's high." During the campaign Trump threatened to impose sharp tariffs on any company that shifted its factories to Mexico. His advisers have since promoted lower corporate tax rates as a means of keeping jobs in the US. But conservative critics expressed concern about interference in the free market, while those on the left worried that other companies might now threaten to send jobs overseas in the hope of getting a tax cut. Vermont senator Bernie Sanders, who lost the Democratic primary election to Clinton but won in Indiana, wrote in the Washington Post: "Trump has endangered the jobs of workers who were previously safe in the United States. Why? Because he has signaled to every corporation in America that they can threaten to offshore jobs in exchange for business-friendly tax benefits and incentives. "Even corporations that weren't thinking of offshoring jobs will most probably be reevaluating their stance this morning. And who would pay for the high cost for tax cuts that go to the richest businessmen in America? The working class of America." Anthony Scaramucci, an entrepreneur and member of the Trump transition team's executive committee, told reporters on Wednesday: "I'm hoping that every CEO in America is getting that beacon signal from the new Trump administration that we're open for business here in the United States, and we've got to get American people back working in American jobs." From Indiana, Trump and Pence were to travel to a rally in Cincinnati, Ohio. Trump was the first Republican nominee for president to win the state since 2004. The evening event at a downtown sports arena which can host a crowd of more than 17,000 was expected to be similar to those that drew energised crowds of thousands during the campaign. Trump is also expected to hold rallies in battleground states including Pennsylvania, Florida, North Carolina and Michigan in the coming weeks, though details have yet to be announced. The transition team has dubbed it a "thank you tour" while US media have generally referred to it as a "victory lap". A headline in the Washington Post even called it "the unofficial kickoff of his 2020 reelection campaign", suggesting that in the age of permanent campaigning, Trump will spend the next four years trying to shore up the support in the midwest that was so crucial to his success.

An unmanned Russian cargo spaceship has broken up in the atmosphere and crashed over Siberia en route to the International Space Station, according to Russia's space agency. Roscosmos said on Thursday that the Progress MS-04 cargo craft broke up at an altitude of 118 miles (190km) above the remote Russian Tuva region in Siberia, which borders Mongolia. Most of the debris burned up as it entered the atmosphere before crashing over what the space agency said was an uninhabited area. It earlier said it had lost contact with the Progress MS-04 383 seconds after it launched from the Baikonur cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, and that its specialists were looking into the problem. The space agency said the loss of the cargo ship would "not affect the normal operations of the ISS systems and the subsistence of the station's crew". Nasa meanwhile said on its website that supplies at the space laboratory were "at good levels". The cargo ship, which had been scheduled to arrive at the ISS on Saturday, was carrying 2.4 tonnes of fuel, food and equipment when it took off from Baikonur, according to Roscosmos. The agency said a state commission would investigate the incident but did not say whether it would affect future launches. It was the second failure of a Progress cargo craft in less than two years. In April 2015 a Progress vehicle disintegrated as it fell to Earth, a failure Russia blamed on a problem with a Soyuz rocket. The incident led to Russia putting all space travel on hold for nearly three months and forced a group of astronauts to spend an extra month on the ISS. Russia said at the time that because the same type of rocket was used for manned ships, all issues with Progress resupply missions needed to be thoroughly investigated before any manned vessels could be launched. Russia sends three or four such spacecraft a year to supply the ISS. After making their delivery, they plummet back to Earth, burning up in the atmosphere above the Pacific Ocean. Last month the Frenchman Thomas Pesquet, the Russian cosmonaut Oleg Novitsky and the American astronaut Peggy Whitson were sent to the ISS for a six-month mission. The mission followed that of the Russians Andrei Borisenko and Sergei Ryzhikov and the American Shane Kimbrough in October, which was pushed back by nearly a month due to technical issues. Technical mishaps have complicated plans to extend the periods during which the ISS is fully staffed with six astronauts. Russia's Soyuz capsules offer the only way for manned missions to reach the space station since the US space shuttle programme was retired in 2011. The space laboratory, where a range of research is carried out, has been orbiting the Earth at about 17,000 mph (28,000 km/h) since 1998.

François Hollande, the least popular French president since the second world war, has announced he will not run for a second term in office. With a satisfaction rating so low it recently dropped to just 4%, the Socialist president appeared shaken and emotional as he said in a live televised address from the Élysée palace that he would not attempt to run for a second term, conscious of the "risks" to the French left if he did so. "Today I am aware of the risks that going down a route that would not gather sufficient support would entail, so I have decided not to be a candidate in the presidential election," a sombre-looking Hollande said. He said his only concern was "the superior interest of this country" and that he could not stand for "the break-up of the left". He said his time in power had taught him "humility". He is the first French president since the war not to attempt to run for re-election. François Fillon, the right's presidential candidate and the favourite to win next spring, said Hollande had "admitted with lucidity that his obvious failure stopped him going any further". Fillon, who last week called Hollande's presidency "pathetic", said Hollande's presidency was ending in a "political shambles". Hollande's decision leaves the way open for a bitter Socialist primary race in January to decide who will run in his place. Manuel Valls, the ambitious prime minister who is a tough law-and-order voice and pro-business reformist on the right of the party, could now decide to run to become the Socialist candidate. If he does run, Valls will face opposition from several former government ministers who are part of a leftwing rebel movement, including the ambitious former economy minister Arnaud Montebourg, who is fiercely critical of Hollande's pro-business line. Hollande's popularity slumped right from the start of his presidency in 2012. He beat the rightwing Nicolas Sarkozy after a classic leftwing campaign in which he targeted big business and pledged to raise taxes for high earners. He began his presidency with a leftist programme that included a wealth super-tax of 75% on top earners but he shifted course midway through his term. Grassroots supporters were further alienated by a pro-business switch in 2014, a wavering over security reforms, and labour laws that brought thousands out onto the streets in protests early this year. Hollande was accused of a lack of preparation, zigzagging on policy and being unable to keep a lid on his government's internal feuding on how to address the economy. His initial attempt to style himself as a "normal president" – paying no heed to the superficial trappings of office – backfired and endeared him even less to the electorate. Accused of lacking authority and coherence, dithering over policy decisions from tax increases to pro-business reform, failing to kickstart the sluggish economy and failing to protect France from a series of devastating terrorist attacks, he was eventually abandoned by his own core of Socialist party voters who felt betrayed by his muddled, stop-start pro-business reforms. One recent poll by Odoxa put him at only 7.5% in the first round of the presidential race, behind the right's Fillon, the far-right Marine Le Pen, his former economy minister and maverick independent candidate Emmanuel Macron, and the hard-left Jean-Luc Mélenchon. In his televised address, Hollande said he felt he had achieved many changes for France in his time in office, including introducing same-sex marriage and beginning to lower France's stubbornly high jobless figures after decades of mass unemployment. But he admitted that the drop in the number of unemployed had come too late and "unemployment is still too high". Hollande said he was pleased he had led France to intervene against Islamists in Mali, in west Africa. He said his biggest regret came after the Paris terrorist attacks of November 2015 when he planned to strip French citizenship from dual-nationality citizens convicted of terrorism. The plan caused havoc and division on the left and right, and Hollande was forced to abandon it. Hollande's complicated personal life in office only served to reinforce his image as indecisive and distracted. In January 2014 he was photographed by paparazzi going by scooter to a flat near the Élysée where he was conducting an affair with actor Julie Gayet. His partner, the political journalist Valérie Trierweiler, then wrote a tell-all book about their tumultuous relationship, in which she described their relationship breakdown in excruciating detail and, most seriously, accused Hollande of mocking poor people as "toothless". The fallout was disastrous for his image. A recent 600-page book, A President Shouldn't Say That, in which Hollande shocked even those in his close circle by regularly confiding in two journalists with the private details of his presidency and personal life – including openly discussing state secrets such as details of plans for an airstrike on Syria in 2013, or paying ransom for abducted French journalists – served to damage him further. More than any other French president, Hollande attempted to play the transparency card, confiding in journalists and inviting documentary crews into the Elysée, yet there was a communication gap in which he was never able to build a relationship with the French people in which they understood his goals and felt he understood them. Hollande's family, including his ex-partner and mother of his children, Ségolène Royal, a government minister, is said to have advised him not to stand again and risk being humiliated. The French presidential election takes place next April and May.

The operator of Southern rail has launched legal action in an attempt to stop industrial action by the drivers of its trains. Aslef, the drivers union, this week announced three days of strikes later this month as well a week-long walkout in the new year. Action by the drivers could cripple services on Britain's biggest commuter rail franchise, which has been disrupted throughout the year by strikes by conductors. The short-staffed rail franchise would be put under severe pressure even outside the strike dates, with an overtime ban due to start next Tuesday. The train company has admitted that it does not employ a sufficient number of drivers to cover its rosters. Southern's operator, Govia Thameslink Railway, issued proceedings at the high court on Thursday to seek an injunction to stop Aslef's industrial action which was was backed overwhelmingly by drivers. GTR previously blocked a proposed strike in 2015 by Aslef, arguing successfully that there were irregularities in the ballot. Aslef suspended the latest ballot on one occasion in an attempt to avoid any further challenge. The train operator has lodged the court application citing its belief that the union's planned action would breach customers' rights under EU law. Charles Horton, GTR's chief executive, said: "We launch legal action reluctantly but now without any other choice. Obviously we would prefer to resolve this directly with Aslef. We asked the union to withdraw the industrial action and to re-enter discussions but they refused to do so, which means that we now have no choice but to go to court. "We have a responsibility to our customers to do all we can to protect their interests and maintain services for them. Passengers now face the prospect of 40 days of continuous industrial action by Aslef and, on top of months of travel misery they've already suffered, it is totally unacceptable. "The proposed industrial action called by Aslef is unjustified, unnecessary and we believe unlawful. It will severely disrupt all our customers, including the tens of thousands of customers a day who use our services for travelling to and from Gatwick airport." The dispute, with the RMT's conductors as well as Aslef, centres on the issue of driver-only operation of trains, which GTR insists is perfectly safe and accepted elsewhere in the rail industry by drivers. However, Mick Whelan, the general secretary of Aslef, said that the union believed the practice was unsafe with growing passenger numbers and longer trains. He said: "Driver-only operation was designed for three-car 317s on the Bedford to St Pancras line in the early 1980s when it was all about managed decline at the fag end of British Rail. "An increase in the number of passengers we are carrying every day means there are now 1,100 passengers on a 12-car train and a driver will have just two seconds to check 24 sets of doors and that's simply not adequate to deal safely and properly with the travelling public." A hearing and decision at the high court is expected in the coming days. Earlier, the RMT announced it would move the date of some of its planned strikes from the days immediately prior to Christmas, instead taking action on 19 and 20 December, in response to passenger feedback. Southern said the move was cynical and designed to cause maximum disruption after Aslef strikes scheduled for 13, 14 and 16 December. The RMT's conductors on Southern will also be striking from 6-8 December and from 31 December for 72 hours.

Immigration to Britain reached 650,000 – its highest ever annual level – in the runup to the EU referendum, fuelled by record numbers of European migrants coming to work in "the jobs factory of Europe", official figures reveal. The record level of immigration at the time of the Brexit vote was driven by a historically high inflow of 284,000 EU citizens, almost matching the number of those from outside Europe (289,000). The influx meant net migration remained at a near-record high of 335,000 in the 12 months to the end of June. It is more than three times the government's target to reduce annual net migration to below 100,000 a year. However, the figures show that Theresa May's drive to reduce overseas student numbers is continuing to bite, with 30,000 fewer international students compared with the previous year. Some early data from after the Brexit vote suggest that some migration to the UK may be decreasing. New national insurance data suggests that the numbers of Polish people and other eastern European migrants registering to work in Britain dropped by 17% or 35,000 in the 12 months to September. But there was an 11% rise, or 22,000 increase, in Romanians and Bulgarians registering for national insurance. Work has proved the main attraction for the record levels of immigration, particularly from within the EU, accounting for 189,000 of the 311,000 who came to Britain for a job in the last year. More than 182,000 came to work in a definite job, but those looking for work jumped 23,000 to 130,000 in the latest figures. The proportion of EU citizens coming to work in Britain without a specific job offer has now risen to a record high of 43% (82,000), while 57% had a definite job. May has strongly indicated that a new post-Brexit immigration system could be based on restricting access for European jobseekers to the UK labour market. The ONS said that in 2015 Romania had for the first time become the most common country of last residence, displacing India and making up 10% of all immigrants. The figures show a sixth successive annual increase in the number of asylum seekers claiming refugee status in Britain, to 41,280. But despite the intensification of the European refugee crisis, the number of Syrians claiming asylum in the UK fell by 317 to 2,298. The largest numbers were Iranians and Iraqis. A further 4,162 Syrians were directly resettled under the government's commitment to take 20,000 over the next four years. The latest Home Office figures show that the backlog of EU citizens who have applied to secure their right to residence in the UK jumped by more than 23,000 to 113,000 in the three months immediately after the Brexit vote. The figures for applications for permanent residence cards alone jumped 83% during the six months bracketing the referendum campaign. Net migration from the EU is at historically high levels and now matches net migration from outside the bloc. The record 650,000 level of immigration in the year to June 2016 was made up of 284,000 EU citizens coming to live and work in Britain, 289,000 coming from outside Europe, and 77,000 Britons returning to live in the UK. The most common reason they came to Britain was to work. Nicola White, the ONS's head of international migration statistics, said that net migration remained at record levels, but was stable compared with recent years. "Immigration levels are now among the highest estimates recorded; the inflow of EU citizens is also at historically high levels and similar to the inflow of non-EU citizens. "These long-term immigration figures run up to the end of June, so it is too early to say what effect, if any, the EU referendum has had on long-term international migration." The immigration minister, Robert Goodwill, responded to the figures by saying the British people had sent a very clear message that they wanted more control of immigration. He renewed the government's commitment to getting net migration down to sustainable levels in the tens of thousands. "There is no consent for uncontrolled immigration, which puts pressure on schools, hospitals and public services. That is why reducing the number of migrants coming to the UK will be a key priority of our negotiations to leave the EU," he said. "Further to this, we continue to reform non-EU immigration routes to ensure we attract the best and brightest, who benefit and contribute to this country. But there is more to do as we build an immigration system that delivers the control we need." But immigration lawyers Laura Devine Solicitors highlighted a refusal of 49% of entrepreneur visa requests in the last quarter, many from India, and argued that this questioned Britain's "open for business" reputation. The shadow home secretary, Diane Abbott, said the May and the Tories seemed determined to repeat their mistakes over the net migration target. She said: "We now know that at the same time she was cutting the border force, she tried to force schools into objectionable schemes that would hurt children in a failed effort to meet that target. We should welcome overseas students and the contribution they make to our universities and wider society, and yet the Tories seem determined to discourage them." She said it was a scandal that the number of asylum applications had gone down from Syria despite the deepening crisis and said it was time to provide certainty to EU citizens about their future in Britain. Phoebe Griffiths of the Institute of Public Policy research said the surge in grants for permanent residence – up by 40% following the referendum – showed that Brexit was clearly causing concern among EU nationals living in Britain. "When individuals already in the UK take steps to safeguard their status, barriers should not be put in their way. Brexit has created great uncertainty. If the government does not wish to guarantee the rights of all EU nationals at this point in the negotiations, it should at the very least prioritise streamlining the process for residence applications," she said. Marc Stears, of the New Economics Foundation, said: "This isn't bad news for the economy: to take one example, according to the Office for Budget Responsibility's forecast, a possible reduced immigration as a consequence of ending free movement – Brexit – would translate into lower GDP and lower tax receipts, resulting in an increase of public sector debt by £16bn to 2020-21. The fact immigration hasn't gone down means more money to spend on things like the NHS, pensions and welfare." This article was amended on 2 December 2016 to correct details about refused visa requests highlighted by Laura Devine Solicitors.

Exeter 12.20 Samson 12.55 Present Man 1.30 Cyclop 2.05 Charlemar 2.40 Wistari Rocks 3.15 Frodon (nb) 3.50 Paris Bound Sandown Park 12.40 More Buck's 1.15 Dino Velvet 1.50 Antartica De Thaix 2.25 Messire Des Obeaux (nap) 3.00 Greywell Boy 3.35 Major Mac Sedgefield 12.00 Louloumills 12.30 Thumb Stone Blues 1.05 On The Road 1.40 The Character 2.15 Distant Rain 2.50 Derintoher Yank 3.25 Dear Sire Wolverhampton 4.10 For Shia And Lula 4.40 Espresso Freddo 5.10 Attain 5.45 The Tichborne 6.15 Gentlemen 6.45 Limonata 7.15 Rubis 7.45 Trishuli Rock

Ryanair has moved into direct competition with tour operators by selling bonded package holidays alongside its flights. The Irish airline claimed it would "transform the market" as it launched Ryanair Holidays online, claiming to undercut competitors by offering rooms at 330,000 hotels across Europe with the cheapest flight seats. However, the move comes more than five years after rivals EasyJet launched a similar service. Kenny Jacobs, Ryanair's chief marketing officer, said that "consumers have been paying too much for package holidays for years", adding that the company would forgo standard commission rates to drive sales. He told a press conference in London: "If you're looking at a package holiday on Ryanair Holidays you will see that typically our customers will save at least €40 on every single seat that they're booking. "If you take those flight savings that you make versus any other airline and apply those to a package holiday, a mum, dad and two kids will save at least 10% on a package holiday." Ryanair Holidays has been launched in the UK, Ireland and Germany, with other countries to follow next year. Jacobs said: "We are also willing to invest our part of the commission to drive conversion of this and it's a market which has a huge amount of commission, so we're confident this will be the best value for European consumers in the market." Ryanair had already been selling hotel rooms and car hire online but not as packages, potentially leaving customers at risk. The holidays will now be fully Atol-bonded, protecting consumers if an operator goes bust. Rival airline EasyJet launched its own EasyJet Holidays site back in 2011, and expanded it across Europe in 2014. The new Ryanair venture will work in a partnership with Spanish tour operator Logitravel and accommodation provider World2Meet, offering 3- to 5-star hotels throughout the Mediterranean and European cities. Ryanair has been seeking to remould itself from an airline to a broader digital business. As well as package holidays, Ryanair is also considering offering events tickets, restaurant bookings and other travel-related services in the future. As it cuts fares further this year, an increasing proportion of Ryanair's revenues are expected to come from ancillary streams, using data on its customers registered on MyRyanair. Last week, chief executive Michael O'Leary said he had a vision of "free air fares" in future, with profits made from growing other purchases from captive customers.

The eurozone crisis never went away; it was just overlooked in the Brexit upheaval. But you can rely on Italy to trigger thoughts of catastrophe and, sure enough, the arrival of this weekend's referendum on constitutional reform has spooked markets. The yield on 10-year Italian debt has doubled from 1% to 2% since August, outpacing the rise in yields on most other eurozone sovereign debt. The euro has even weakened against the supposedly down-and-out pound. A euro cost 90p a month ago but now fetches 84p. In the grand scheme, these are not enormous moves. Back in 2011-12, when the Greek debt crisis was in full swing, Italian 10-year yields hit 7%; and the euro is still 10% stronger against sterling since the UK referendum. But Italian risks – for the short, medium and long-term – are real. The immediate danger will arrive if PM Matteo Renzi loses the referendum and then honours his pledge to resign. His departure would make it harder to resolve a crisis in the Italian banking system that should have been addressed half a decade ago and is now intense. It even got a special mention in the Bank of England's UK financial stability report this week. The detail is extraordinary: bad, or non-performing, loans in Italy exceed the total provision for losses and the banks' core capital. The only solid cure is a combination of fresh capital and the infliction of financial pain on some classes of bondholders. The latter is politically explosive – because so many bank bonds are held by pensioners – but demanded by new eurozone restrictions on state-sponsored bailouts. As for injections of capital, the private sector will not volunteer if the country is without a prime minister for the next two months. The medium-term risk is that the vacuum is filled by the anti-euro Five Star Movement led by comedian Beppe Grillo, currently riding high in the polls in the run-up to a general election that must be held by February 2018. Note, too, that planned electoral changes in Italy will give the largest party extra parliamentary clout in future. The overhaul is intended to prevent so many wobbly coalitions. But if Five Star is the first beneficiary, the eurozone will have a proper political crisis on its hands. The long-term risk remains the same: Italy is stuck in an economic rut. Growth has improved slightly with Renzi's market-friendly reforms – 0.8% is predicted for this year – but the Italian economy is still basically sluggish. Meanwhile, public debt is 130% of GDP and unemployment stands at 11.6%, above the eurozone average of 9.8%. The employment rate is just 57.2%; the UK's is 74.4%. It is too simple to say defeat for Renzi in the referendum will unleash a fresh eurozone crisis because one should never underestimate the power of the European Central Bank to buy time by suppressing bond yields. But the ECB's powers are not unlimited and the quantitative easing programme cannot continue indefinitely. The Bank of England's stability report summed up the overall picture: "Risks associated with the euro area remain elevated." You bet. And the Italian risks look acute. Glencore's dance with debt has hurt its chief Ivan Glasenberg has hauled Glencore out of its debt hole, a task that looked daunting 18 months ago. Borrowings have been reduced from $30bn to $17.5bn by selling $6bn of assets, cutting expenditure and raising $2.5bn of fresh capital at 125p a share. Glasenberg, the chief executive, dipped into his back pocket to contribute $211m to the fundraising and has made a handsome turn. The share price is now 283p. It has been an impressive act of escapology, with dividends set to resume next year. But Glasenberg's status as the all-seeing sage of the mining world is surely ruined. Glencore's dance with debt was absurdly aggressive in an industry where the next big downturn is never far away. The company has recovered through its own efforts but also through good fortune, in the form of a rapid rebound in the prices of copper, coal and zinc. Those commodities will have to keep humming along if Glencore is ever to return to its 2011 flotation price of 530p, which is a truer benchmark for success. Only an 87% improvement in share price to go, then. Asos's spirit of openness has its limits "We have nothing to hide and much to be proud of," declared Nick Beighton, chief executive of online clothing retailer Asos, in October when working conditions in the firm's warehouse in Barnsley came under the spotlight. The spirit of openness has its limits, however. Beighton initially welcomed our reporter to Asos's annual shareholder meeting on Thursday but then changed his mind and turfed him out before proceedings started. Note to Beighton: if you want promote the idea that your working conditions are splendid, don't adopt a bunker mentality.

Apply an X-ray to its position description, and you'll find that the core job of a sports administrator is to give a career-long enactment of The Miller and the Donkey. Whatever choice they make, part of the audience will say they've put on the wrong game at the wrong time with the wrong team in the wrong place on the wrong broadcast medium with a wrongheaded approach. Sometimes, some of those people are right. Sometimes, you have to remember you can't please all of them all of the time. Some of them are not happy about three One-Day Internationals against New Zealand in between two Test series. They think these short games are irrelevant, and an unacceptable injury risk, and will disrupt Test preparation for Pakistan. Well, buck up, it's not the worst thing that's happened this year. Once these appalling wasteful distracting unnecessary games are played, I have a sneaking feeling most of these people will flick on their TVs and radios. Admittedly, it is a weird season. It started with the white ball in the Matador Cup and South African ODIs, then went pink in a day-night Shield round, to red for two Tests and Shield brackets, back to pink for the day-night Test in Adelaide, to red in the Shield. Now it goes white in this ODI series, to pink for the Shield and the Brisbane Test, back to red for Boxing Day, which comes after everyone outside the Test squad has gone full-time white ball for the Big Bash T20s, until February when the Shield resumes with the red, while the internationals keep playing short-form with the white ball, the last of which will be bowled in Adelaide the night before the first red ball is lobbed down in a Test in India. That's no paragraph for the purists, whether of cricket or of syntax. But given the depth and extent of the mish-mash, this series doesn't feel like a straw that's going to burden any dromedary with particular inconvenience. In many ways, there is a lot to like about this scheduling. It gives a break between the Test series, a reset button that allows you to refocus, so they retain their individuality rather than being blurred into one long conga line of white trousers and hidden confectionery. And if history is a guide, it'll be good cricket. Australia and New Zealand have a brilliant ODI rivalry, not built on some underarm nostalgia in need of a deodorising spray, but on 15 years of close-fought matches. Think about the trip over in early 2000, when Adam Gilchrist and Steve Waugh launched a couple of 300-plus totals, before the Kiwis wrecked Australia for 191 while Damien Martyn carried his bat. Or the home tri-series in 2002, when New Zealand finished Waugh's one-day career by persistently winning, except in Melbourne where Michael Bevan's measured masterpiece with the tail scaled 246 from the depths of 82-6. A lot of strangers were hugged in the MCG that night. The Chappell-Hadlee trophy appeared in December 2004, with Australia's 246 chased down with two balls to spare. A fresh-faced wicketkeeper named Brendon McCullum sealed it down the order. The next game had curly-locked Kiwi bowler Kyle Mills bombing the long-on boundaries with sixes, eventually stranded 44 not out, 17 runs short, three overs unused. What might have been. As if to salute the standard of the contest, the decider was rained out, honours even. These contests have since become part of the evolution of target-chasing. A decade ago, 300 was all but impossible. December 2005, New Zealand lifted their game, bowled out two runs short of Australia's 322. Next game they recalibrated to mow down 331. McCullum did the final damage again. January 2007, fuelled by Jacob Oram's violent hundred in Perth, the Kiwis fell eight runs short of the 343 built by Ricky Ponting and Matthew Hayden. A few weeks later, with poor old Mike Hussey captaining a trip to New Zealand, they blew past Australia's 336 and 346 in consecutive games. Somehow the schedulers let this rivalry fall away. By the 2015 World Cup, the two sides hadn't played in so long that their pool match decided the bilateral trophy. This series is part of getting relations back on track. Anyone who might be injured in these games might equally be injured in a Test. On average players are better for any available run. Regardless of format, a couple are a chance to play themselves into the Test side. Patrick Cummins makes yet another comeback from the blighted moonscape of injury, and the super-fast bowler was close to an Ashes Test last year. Selectors might not be able to help themselves if he goes well. Glenn Maxwell was back as soon as Rod Marsh quit the selection chair, and a big show here could pressure Nic Maddinson at No6: indeed, on the selectors' own rationale for picking Maddinson, Maxwell was eminently more suited. Of the rest, Steve Smith and David Warner lead the pack, George Bailey and Aaron Finch are the batting veterans with Travis Head their padawan, and Matthew Wade will keep to Adam Zampa's leg-spin. No one could resist having Mitchell Starc and Josh Hazlewood lead the bowling, but it's bizarre to omit John Hastings. Not trendy, but a magnificent practitioner, he has the equal-most ODI wickets in the world this year, and from 27 fewer overs than England's Adil Rashid. Even with the run-fests in South Africa and last summer against India, those wickets came at an average of 24 and a strike rate of 27. In a squad with Mitchell Marsh, James Faulkner, and a classic Greg Chappell academy pick in Hilton Cartwright, Hastings could easily challenge for one of those all-rounder spots: he averages 37.8 as a batsman since returning to the team in 2015, including important innings at Leeds, Wellington and Centurion. A ridiculous absence; but then, being a selector is a bit like being an administrator. There's an old story about a bloke and a donkey.

The way a government talks about issues and policy tells us a lot about the way that they think. Certain phrases or announcements, like an immigration minister singling out Australian Muslims of Lebanese background by suggesting that they are more likely to be terrorists, speak volumes. However, if we step back and listen to the whole story all that we really hear from the current government is that it is this or it's that; it's black or it's white; or at its worst it's "us" or it's "them". This is amplified wedge politics, except it's not trying to split the vote in a caucus room, but trying to pit us – citizens – against each other. The statements made by Peter Dutton show us that his immigration policy has a similar binary. There is a right type of migrant, and a wrong type of migrant. We have genuine refugees and queue jumpers – even if this might be an unfair characterisation, given that most of those queue jumping asylum seekers have been found to be genuine refugees. So your status under international law isn't necessarily going to get you into our country, even if you eventually become a citizen of another. Turning to international relations, we find the Coalition's foreign policy agenda is again rigidly divided. We can either stay with the USA, or we can pivot to China. There is little talk about how we can build strategic diplomatic and trade relations with our closest neighbours such as Indonesia, India or Thailand. We don't hear new ideas about creating greater access to Australian exports for the European consumer base, or emerging markets in the rest of the Brics (Brazil, Russia, India, China, South Africa) or Mint (Mexico, Indonesia, Nigeria, Turkey) countries. This narrative extends to economics. A couple of weeks ago, while most of us were cooking dinner or putting our children to bed, the prime minister was at a gala event hosted by the Business Council of Australia. Following the cheese platters and digestifs, he gave a speech on the need for fairness in the economy, but as he succinctly put it "[it] must be fair in a broad sense". This call for fairness was well met in the exclusive event for Australia's business elite, particularly as this fairness was broad enough to include a reduction in the corporate tax rate. Before saying his farewells and boarding a flight to the Apec summit in Peru, the prime minister reminded us all that fairness doesn't come cheap. In order to reform our economy to deliver long term gains, we need to accept that there will "winners and losers" if only for the short term. Perhaps being an Oxford man, the prime minister might not be inclined to remember the words of Cambridge economist, John Maynard Keynes who famously wrote that "in the long run we are all dead". Often quoted out of context, Keynes directly follows this statement by arguing that "economists set themselves too easy, too useless a task, if in tempestuous seasons they can only tell us, that when the storm is long past, the ocean is flat again". He reminds us that economics can do more than eventually restore equilibrium, it can do more than merely return us to surplus, and it can do much more than divide us into winners and losers. Unfortunately for Australia, the prime minister's statements are not only based on an unwavering belief that growth is driven by those at the top of our economic food chain, these comments are part of a much broader narrative of division. This dichotomy between one side and the other has been a common theme throughout the Coalition's policy platform and political narrative. We can all remember the ill-fated 2014 budget speech made by the former treasurer, Joe Hockey, which told us we would be a nation of "lifters, not leaners". It would make us not only a great nation, but a great people. For the doomed Abbott government, there was a clear divide between those who pitched in, and those who relied on others. A resurrected Turnbull administration failed to change this essential dichotomy, despite protestations that it had a new economic vision for the country. Yet if you are a young person, this new vision seems surprisingly short sighted. The government's Path program tells young people that they've got to be earning or learning. This poorly designed policy stop gap operates on the fundamental assumption that young people left to their own devices will end up as welfare dependant ne'er-do-wells. An obvious departure from the Abbott government's revitalised Work For The Dole scheme, which assumed that anyone looking to access Newstart payments would end up as welfare dependant ne'er-do-wells, if left to their own devices. This narrow-minded view of politics and policy is not the only one possible. If we want to stop Trump-style populism from spreading down under, the Australian people deserve a political narrative that addresses the complexity of our economy, one that is not predicated on inequality and division. I do agree with the prime minister though. If he continues to stick to this rhetoric, there will only be one loser – and he will absolutely be for the short term.

Australia's Department of Immigration routinely rejects doctors' advice to move critically ill asylum seekers to hospital, and refuses permission for offshore detainees to be transferred to Australia, an inquest has heard. The fourth day of the inquest into the 2014 death of the Iranian asylum seeker Hamid Kehazaei has again focused on the bureaucratic delays in transferring the critically ill asylum seeker from the Manus Island detention centre. The transfer of Kehazaei, who was suffering from a bacterial infection, was initially delayed by more than a day, and he was then taken, in defiance of doctors' advice, to the Papua New Guinea capital, Port Moresby, instead of Brisbane. After suffering three heart attacks in Port Moresby, he was flown by air ambulance – by then unconscious – to Brisbane, where he died a week later. Yliana Dennett, a co-ordinating doctor with International SOS, the company subcontracted to organise medical transfers from offshore detention, told the Queensland state coroner on Thursday that Australia's Department of Immigration and Border Protection routinely refused doctors' recommendations to move critically ill asylum seekers to Australian hospitals. "Experience has shown the department is very reluctant to bring patients to Australia ... If we recommended someone transferred to Australia, we knew it would not be approved," she told the inquest. On 25 August 2014 Dennett recommended the transfer of Kehazaei, who was suffering a severe and worsening infection that was not responding to any antibiotic treatments available on Manus, to Port Moresby's Pacific international hospital. She told the inquest that while the medical care in Port Moresby was a "step up" from that available on Manus, it was "not the best option", and that transfers to Port Moresby were not used for any patients except asylum seekers from the detention centre. "We usually do not recommend medical transfer to Port Moresby," she told the inquest. "The medical care in Port Moresby ... and the expertise of the local doctors is not up to Australian or international standards." The inquest has previously heard that the Pacific international hospital in Port Moresby was unhygienic, that it had an insufficient number of staff, and its doctors and nurses were inadequately trained. But Dennett said she had recommended the transfer to Port Moresby because "we knew that a transfer to Australia would not be approved by the department". "We have had several cases prior to that case where we have recommend Australia as a first or only option, and the majority of cases – these have not been approved, or have not been approved in an adequate timeframe, or have had considerable delay," she said. Under questioning from counsel for the commonwealth, Dennett said she had personally dealt with cases in which she had recommended urgent transfer for patients with serious heart conditions or psychiatric illnesses, but their transfer had been refused by the department. In other cases, she said, approval had been delayed for several days or a number of weeks. In the case of Kehazaei, the department – which retains ultimate control over asylum seekers detained offshore – received a request for his urgent transfer at 10.55am on 25 August. The department was urged to approve Kehazaei's travel immediately for a flight leaving the island that evening and was told the 24-year-old had a "risk of infection spreading, leading to sepsis – life-threatening widespread systemic infection". The department did not respond until 6.01pm – after the flight had left – when its director of detention health operations, Amanda Little, emailed the area medical director for offshore processing, Dr Anthony Renshaw, who had recommended Kehazaei be moved. The email, which was presented to the coroner, said: "I am wondering why this can't be managed at Lorengau hospital [on Manus]? Even using something 'unusual' should be able to be managed locally. Is there a [drug] supply issue that we are unaware of? Again, these should be brought in, rather than the person being transferred if this is the case. DIBP staff on island are being pushed for this urgent transfer in the next 18 hours, however I don't have adequate information to be able to escalate at this point if this is still warranted." Renshaw told the inquest he was surprised at the response. "I felt we had made the rationale very clear to the department that Lorengau was not a suitable location. As a doctor, I had provided sufficient rationale for this man to be moved offsite." Little, along with several other immigration department bureaucrats who handled Kehazaei's case, will be called before the coroner next week. Kehazaei was not moved from Manus until lunchtime on 26 August, more than a full day after his transfer was requested, and three days after he first presented to the detention centre clinic. By that time he was reportedly suffering septic shock and acute respiratory distress syndrome. Doctors say he was confused, distressed and moaning in pain. Leslie King, the emergency doctor who treated Kehazaei at the Manus Island detention centre, said if he had been moved on the first day his transfer was requested, "he would have had a very different outcome". "I wish he could have left that day, by whatever means," she told the inquest. "I really feel strongly that if he could have left that day, gotten to a place that had a laboratory, that had facilities we didn't have, he would have had a very different outcome ... he would have had much more of a fighting chance." King also said that on two consecutive nights in the detention centre clinic, her directions to give Kehazaei intravenous paracetamol were ignored by night staff. The department, successive immigration ministers and the offshore detention health provider International Health and Medical Services have consistently maintained asylum seekers and refugees held in offshore detention are afforded international-standard healthcare. IHMS's regional medical director, Mark Parrish, told the inquest in a statement that asylum seekers held in offshore detention were afforded health services "broadly comparable" with those available in Australia. But IHMS's own medical evacuation response plan – an internal document presented to the coronial inquiry – imposes a two-tier health system, where detention centre staff who fall ill are immediately transferred to Australia, but asylum seekers are kept in Papua New Guinea. The plan says detention centre staff working on Manus – known as "stakeholders" – who require medical treatment beyond the capability of the detention centre clinic should be transferred immediately to an Australian hospital. The document states, "for transferees [asylum seekers and refugees held in detention] consideration should be given to the possibility of treatment for PNG. Recommendations for transportation to Australia can be made only once local options have been exhausted."

Rogue Jones are a charmingly quirky band from Cardiff who deserve a cult following. The key figures are the singer-songwriters and multi-instrumentalists Ynyr Ifan, who plays guitar, percussion, bass and trumpet, and his wife, Bethan Mai, who plays piano, drums, accordion, autoharp, glockenspiel and trumpet. They are joined by Bethan's sister Mari Morgan on violin, bass, drums and synths, for agreeably oddball songs in Welsh and English. The opening track The King Is Dead starts with tinkling effects and develops into an anthem with a melody as sturdy as a Welsh hymn, while the more folky Hungry shows off Ifan and Mai's fine harmony vocals, and Afalau is a catchy, guitar-backed pop tune. As for the lyrics, I enjoyed "the human heart is a frightening thing, I'll hide behind the sofa."

December is upon us, one third of the Premier League season has been completed and a definite hierarchy has been established. You could throw a blanket over the top four of Chelsea, Liverpool, Manchester City and Arsenal, who are separated by only three points after 13 matches. With the gap from the fourth-placed Arsenal to the best of the rest a more emphatic four points, the smart money suggests that barring an unlikely surge from Tottenham Hotspur or Manchester United, this season's Premier League title will almost certainly go to one of those four. With a busy period of festive football looming, now seems as good a time as any to take stock and see which of the four look freshest and perhaps best equipped to pull away from their rivals. Each of them will have to play seven league games by the end of the first week of January, when Premier League teams will contest the third round of the FA Cup. Chelsea Unlike Tottenham with Moussa Sissoko, Chelsea certainly got what they paid for in N'Golo Kanté, who has clocked up 153km in the 1,170 minutes of Premier League football he has played this season – almost 20 more than his team-mate César Azpilicueta has run in the exact same time. An otherwise fairly straightforward schedule is bookended by tricky away trips to Manchester City and Tottenham and it is now Chelsea could further reap the benefits of not having to worry about Europe. It seems fairly obvious that keeping their tireless wing-backs, Victor Moses and Marcus Alonso, as fit and fresh as possible may prove key to their title chances. The energetic duo have not played even 700 minutes apiece this season but have become a pivotal part of Antonio Conte's plan since his switch to a back three, but they could conceivably run out of steam at such a busy time. Chelsea have used the fewest players of the four and do not appear to have the strength or quality of their rivals in reserve. Cesc Fàbregas is available for selection but despite his obvious class does not appear to have a fan in Conte, while Oscar, Willian and Michy Batshuayi have also found their opportunities limited. News from the treatment room suggests John Terry is due to return from a muscle injury this month, while Mikel John Obi should also be back shortly but seems totally surplus to requirements and may leave in January. Players on the bench in last league game Begovic, Fàbregas, Batshuayi, Chalobah, Ivanovic, Willian, Oscar. League matches in next four weeks Manchester City (a), West Bromwich Albion (h), Sunderland (a), Crystal Palace (a), Bournemouth (h), Stoke City (h), Tottenham Hotspur (a). Liverpool With their incessant pressing , Liverpool are the other top-four side for whom an absence from European competition can be considered a blessing. With the exception of games against Manchester City and Everton, their other opponents can all be found in the bottom half of the table, a state of affairs which should give Jürgen Klopp and his merry men an excellent chance of pulling clear. Jordan Henderson has been crucial to the Liverpool cause, running his legs into stumps more than 155km in 1,154 minutes, while Nathaniel Clyne (137.3km), Roberto Firmino (136.5km) and Sadio Mané (126.5km) can hardly be accused of idling. Liverpool's options from the bench look limited compared with those of Arsenal and Manchester City, although Daniel Sturridge has been a brooding but reassuring presence in reserve and should get plenty of game‑time during a period when Philippe Coutinho is sidelined with an ankle injury and not expected to return until mid-January. There are minor fitness concerns over Sturridge but Jürgen Klopp also has Divock Origi available. The manager has not been particularly lucky with injuries and has lost Danny Ings for the season. Firmino and Adam Lallana are also numbered among Liverpool's lame but both are expected to return to full fitness soon. Players on the bench in last league game Mignolet, Moreno, Klavan, Ejaria, Woodburn, Origi, Lucas. League matches in next four weeks Bournemouth (a), West Ham United (h), Middlesbrough (a), Everton (a), Stoke City (h), Manchester City (h), Sunderland (a). Manchester City Manchester City, along with Arsenal, are the sides facing the added distraction of the Champions League and City have an appointment with Celtic to contend with along with their seven league matches. It is a period that could make or break their season, as they will face each of their three main title rivals. Home matches against Chelsea and Arsenal and a visit to Liverpool give them a gilt-edged chance to put a significant distance between themselves and their rivals. Fernandinho has been City's unsung hero, galloping 143.1km in the 1,170 minutes he has clocked up, compared with Kevin De Bruyne (111.9km in 862), Sergio Agüero (100.1km in 919) and Raheem Sterling (117.6 in 1,001). With the exception of the luckless Vincent Kompany, Pep Guardiola has been fortunate with injuries and the manager will be able to call on the completely fresh midfielder Fabian Delph, sidelined since August, any day now. The presence of De Bruyne, David Silva, Kelechi Iheanacho and Jesús Navas on the bench last weekend suggests strength in depth is unlikely to be a concern. Guardiola has also got the wonderfully talented Gabriel Jesus joining in January (albeit after a tiring year in Brazil). Players on the bench in last league game Caballero, Iheanacho, Silva, Zabaleta, De Bruyne, Sané, Navas. League matches in next four weeks Chelsea (h), Leicester City (a), Watford (h), Arsenal (h), Hull City (a), Liverpool (a), Burnley (h). Arsenal Arsène Wenger has already voiced his concerns over the fact Alexis Sánchez is going about his business held together with sticky-backed plastic and paperclips and the manager has every right to be worried about the Chilean's workload. The 27-year-old has already made 23 appearances for club and country this season, playing 1,089 minutes of Premier League football along with the 10 matches he has more or less completed in the Champions League and with Chile. Sánchez has run 114.5km in the Premier League, two fewer than the equally indispensable Mesut Özil, who has almost 1,000 Premier League minutes behind him. Should injury befall either player it could serve as a hammer blow. The thought of losing them simultaneously is probably enough to prompt most Gooners to reach for the gin. Despite lying second in the Premier League injuries table, Arsenal do have plenty of strength in depth. Olivier Giroud's sterling contributions from the bench have been well documented, with the Frenchman having scored three goals in the miserly 123 Premier League minutes afforded to him. Francis Coquelin, Kieran Gibbs, Aaron Ramsey, and Gabriel Paulista were among the talents alongside him on the bench last weekend. Wenger's hand will be further strengthened by the return of Héctor Bellerín (18 December), while the club captain, Per Mertesacker, and Danny Welbeck are expected to return to full fitness in January. Santi Cazorla has had surgery on the achilles injury he sustainied in the 6-0 Champions League win against Ludogorets and is out for at least three months. While Arsenal's schedule over the next four weeks is not particularly punishing, they face a trip to Manchester City and have the added irritation of a Champions League match at Basel next week that is must‑win if they are to have any chance of overtaking Paris Saint-Germain and finish top of their group. Players on the bench in last league game Ospina, Iwobi, Coquelin, Gibbs, Gabriel, Ramsey, Giroud. League matches in next four weeks West Ham (a), Stoke City (h), Everton (a), Manchester City (a), West Bromwich Albion (h), Crystal Palace (h), Bournemouth (a).

More than two-thirds of Australians think the condition of the Great Barrier Reef should be declared a "national emergency" and support much stronger measures to protect it than are now being considered. On Thursday the government released its report on the reef to Unesco, which was a condition of the reef being excluded from the UN body's "world heritage in-danger" list. The government reported slow progress on the key issue of water quality and the failure of a major plank in the plan – slowing tree clearing in Queensland. An Essential Research poll of more than 1,000 people found 68% of people agreed that the reef should be declared a "national emergency". Commissioned by WWF and the Australian Marine Conservation Society, it also found three-quarters of people agreed that the government should ban all tree clearing in Great Barrier Reef catchment areas. A full 86% of respondents said the government should legislate to stop farm chemicals polluting the waters of the reef. Respondents were also very concerned about the impact of Adani's huge Carmichael coalmine on the natural wonder. More than three-quarters of respondents said the mine and its associated port expansion would have an impact on the reef, with 46% saying it would have a "major impact". Only 4% said they thought it would have no impact. More than two-thirds of respondents said the mine should not go ahead. Imogen Zethoven, the AMCS Great Barrier Reef campaign director, said despite the Australian government's assurances to the Unesco's world heritage centre, the community believed far more must be done. "The message from the Australian community is that leaders of all major political parties should commit to major improvements in reef protection, including not allowing the Carmichael coalmine to go ahead," Zethoven said. "Australians are way ahead of their governments in recognising the threat to the reef and tourism jobs, and demanding strong, urgent action. The health of the reef is in crisis, requiring a national response and leadership from the federal government. "It's time for our leaders to recognise that they can't have a massive new coalmine and a healthy reef. Australians don't want carbon pollution. They want a healthy reef and economic opportunities to rapidly transition to clean, renewable energy."

Sydney Morning Herald journalists had a bit of fun for a good cause on Wednesday, holding a sausage sizzle outside their office at Pyrmont to raise awareness that the gender pay gap in newspapers is surprisingly high, according to the Workplace Gender Equality Agency. Newspaper publishing pays its female employees on average 23.2% less, and that is across the board – not just journalists. Staff sold sausages on a roll for a gold coin and donated the proceeds to the Luke Batty Foundation. "If you want to find out more about what your colleagues are doing to help balance the ledger, come along to our inaugural Sausage Fest, guaranteed to add some sizzle to your week," read the cheeky poster, which showed Rosie the Riveter holding a sausage impaled on the end of a fork. But not everyone appreciated the humour. Weekly Beast understands that Sean Aylmer, the editorial director of Fairfax's metropolitan newspapers, was particularly grumpy, and wandered the newsroom floor making his displeasure known. One journo told Beast: "They're unhappy about Rosie holding a phallic snag on a stick but OK with 175 years of gender pay gap." ABC's narrow road It was a very strange week at ABC TV. One program which was widely publicised, Plumpton High Babies: 10 Years On, was pulled from the schedule at the 11th hour with little explanation while another program, Life After Death, was so studiously ignored by ABC publicity that when it did got to air it was watched by very few. Life After Death is a BBC documentary about the Australian writer Richard Flanagan, who journeyed with the presenter Alan Yentob through his native Tasmania and then to Thailand to visit the sites that inspired his novels. The Narrow Road to the Deep North, set on the Burma "death railway", won the Man Booker in 2014. The doco has also been successful, winning a British Bafta award last month. It was described by Radio Times as a "finely crafted and sensitive film about his life and work" when it aired on the BBC. It might surprise you then to hear that the documentary was broadcast on the ABC on Tuesday and you probably missed it. For reasons unknown even to people inside Aunty, the doco was completely sidelined: not given the courtesy of a press release, a publicity campaign or an-air promo. "It is more than strange when a documentary on an Australian writer can succeed on the BBC and be set up for resounding failure a year and a half later on the ABC," one insider said. So why did they bury something that would be popular, given the right handling? Politics? Resentment that the BBC made a successful blue-chip, Bafta-winning documentary about an Australian writer? We have no clue. Plumpton High Babies: 10 Years On was to screen on ABC TV last Monday and everyone knew about it because it was given quite the opposite treatment to Life After Death. But hours before it was to be broadcast a statement was sent out by the film-maker, Aviva Ziegler, saying it had been postponed "due to a late legal matter". Ziegler said: "Making this film, from the very start, has been a labour of love. Plumpton High Babies: 10 Years On represents a relationship spanning over 15 years, with a wonderful and compassionate headmaster and a group of young women I have come to know and care about, as I watched them and their children grow. "I am so sorry they won't be seeing their stories told and their voices heard tonight. But I do hope their lives, and Glenn Sargeant's commitment to giving them every opportunity through education with a school program that supported them and their community, will nevertheless still be seen very soon on the ABC." Weekly Beast understand that a collaborator on the original film claims certain rights and went to the broadcaster's ombudsman with a complaint at the last minute. Long player The cuts to Radio National's music programs are just the latest assault in several years of cutting shows from ABC Radio. On Wednesday hundreds of artists including Paul Kelly, Gurrumul, Missy Higgins, Archie Roach, Kate Ceberano, Tim Freedman, Sarah Blasko, Megan Washington and Katie Noonan wrote an open letter to the managing director, Michelle Guthrie, and the ABC board saying they are appalled by the decision to axe Daily Planet, Inside Sleeve, The Live Set, Rhythm Divine and Jazztrack. A staffer with a long memory told Beast the cuts under the director of radio, Michael Mason, are a drop in a bucket compared with all the music programs lost since 2012 on RN, Classic FM and Triple J. Taken from RN alone: Sound Quality (electronic music), Quiet Space (ambient and electronic music) and Weekend Planet (world music), plus the mixed bags that were Into the Music, Radiotonic, The Night Air and Poetica.. Chris Scaddan, ABC Radio's head of music, defended the cuts in a bracing interview on PM with Mark Colvin on Wednesday. Scaddan might have been hoping no one would dig up his commentary on the importance of music radio which he penned in 2013: Why Music Radio Still Matters. "If you follow the commentary, you'd be forgiven for thinking that the medium of radio was in some state of massive decline, relegated to the 'old media' basket while new services reign supreme," Scaddan said, before going on to quote US data which stated that 48% of people still discover music via radio, well above any other method. One National The artists behind the campaign to save RN music sent the open letter to the ABC Board and Guthrie to all members of the federal parliament as well. One of the politicians sent this (presumably automated) reply: "Dear Sir or Madam, Thank-you for your email regarding free speech and section 18C of the Racial Discrimination Act. Pauline Hanson's One Nation Party is passionate about the importance of free speech and Senator Roberts will certainly be voting in favour of removing the words "insult" and "offend" from the legislation." Switzer-land Not only has the conservative commentator Tom Switzer, former opinion editor of the Australian and an adjunct fellow of the Institute of Public Affairs, secured two programs on Radio National next year but the two shows are programmed to be broadcast back to back. According to the 2017 draft schedule we've seen, Sunday Extra with Tom Switzer will start at 7.30am and run through to 10am. At 10am Between the Line, also hosted by Switzer, will start and run though to 10.30am. Grisly for Bearup Donald Trump's election has caused some reorganisation of priorities in Australian media. Greg Bearup, south-east Asia correspondent for the Australian, has been prematurely recalled to Sydney after the Oz editors decided to close the India bureau. Bearup and his family had only been there for a year so it came as something of a shock. But Paul Whittaker, the Oz's editor-in-chief, has reopened the Washington bureau and the associate editor Cameron Stewart will be dispatched to keep an eye on Trump early next year. Whittaker told staff a review of overseas postings after the election had sparked the changes: "The US is undergoing significant economic and political change and it is essential that we have a bureau in the capital."

Russian officials and Syrian rebel groups are holding talks in Turkey on the fate of east Aleppo as food reserves in the enclave dwindle to zero, opposition and diplomatic sources said on Thursday. The negotiations have been under way in Ankara for a week. The deal on the table involves a ceasefire and an opening of corridors for delivering humanitarian aid in return for the departure from the city of extremists among the enclave's defenders. It is a similar bargain to the one proposed in October by the UN envoy on the Syrian conflict, Staffan de Mistura. However, although the plight of east Aleppo is even more desperate now, the arrest or disappearance of hundreds of men stopped at regime checkpoints as they fled the area in the past week has undermined trust in Moscow's guarantees of safe passage out of the city through government-controlled areas. The level of trust at the Ankara talks is also low because Russia has been leading a relentless aerial bombing campaign against east Aleppo that has caused mass civilian casualties. Russia is now perceived as having declining influence in Aleppo over regime forces and the Iranian-led militias spearheading the house-to-house fighting in the ruined city. "The Russians are playing a double game," said Bassam Barabandi, a former Syrian diplomat who is now political adviser to the opposition High Negotiations Committee. "They want to show themselves to be the superpower in the region, to broker a deal but, at the same time, they are bombing and killing everyone left in Aleppo. "The Russians would prefer to have a ceasefire, to help their relations with Turkey and show they are interested in peace, but the regime and the Iranians – they don't care. They want to take all of Aleppo. For the Russians, failing to achieve a ceasefire in Aleppo will show just how weak they are." East Aleppo has been under siege for 150 days and has suffered increasingly heavy bombardment for several months. About 200,000 people are thought to be trapped there, without any functioning hospitals and with medical and food supplies exhausted. After a ground offensive in the past week led by Lebanese Hezbollah units and Iranian-led Shia militias, the rebels lost 40% of their territory in the city. There are now thought to be up to 8,000 rebel fighters left, of whom an estimated 100 to 400 are part of the extremist Jabhat Fateh al-Sham, formerly known as the al-Qaida-aligned Nusra Front. Randa Slim, an analyst at the Middle East Institute who has been involved in back-channel dialogue in the region on Syria, said the Russian proposals in Ankara did not appear to offer anything new. "The issue has always been that these humanitarian corridors go through government territory, and the four corridors the Russians are talking about still go through government territory, and we have heard now of hundreds of people being taken at checkpoints," Slim said. The International Committee of the Red Cross said on Thursday it had asked Damascus for access to the sites where Aleppo residents were being screened and detained as they fled the city. "We are of course trying to get access to these screening facilities and screening centres. In Syria, we also have access to a number of places of detention," Dominik Stillhart, the ICRC director of operations told Reuters. "But the situation is, for the time being, extremely confusing. It is not easy for our teams to have access to these centres." Slim said that if the rebels decided to fight to the death, south-east Aleppo could perhaps hold out for some time as its defenders had constructed a network of tunnels and fortifications. But the regime side now believes the crushing of the enclave's resistance will be completed within weeks. Reuters quoted a senior official in the pro-regime alliance as saying that the current war aim was to drive all rebels out of Aleppo before Donald Trump took office as US president.

Residents of the city of Sheffield are at war with their council over the cutting down of trees. According to protesters, 4,000 have already succumbed since the council signed a contract with Amey, a private contractor commissioned to improve the city's roads. The battle of Rustlings Road, on 17 November, was an inglorious affair: on the one hand, men wielding chainsaws against the street's trees at 5am; on the other, three residents, including sociology professor emeritus Jenny Hockey and retired teacher Freda Brayshaw arrested and detained for staging a peaceful protest against the felling. Today two other opponents of the fellings in Sheffield pleaded not guilty to charges under the Trade Union and Labour Relations Act, which criminalises those who prevent a worker from carrying out a lawful task, in this case tree surgeons. Meanwhile, residents are rallying to protect the trees of Western Road, also threatened – and these venerable planes considerably raise the stakes in the dispute, since they were planted in 1919 to commemorate pupils from a nearby school who died in the first world war. The British like to romanticise trees: in our stories woods are places of mystery, escape and enchantment; sometimes of threat. Robin Hood's Sherwood is a locus of freedom from tyranny. Shakespeare's Forest of Arden, in As You Like It a (windy, rainy) asylum from the "painted pomp" of court, where the exiled Duke finds "tongues in trees, books in the running brooks/Sermons in stones, and good in everything". In JRR Tolkien's The Lord of the Rings, the ancient Ents of the Forest of Fangorn – "tree shepherds" who have grown to be much like trees themselves – rise up to defeat the wizard Saruman; as in Macbeth, when a forest is on the move, it's time to be alarmed. The children's first glimpse of Narnia, as they tumble through the fur-coat-hung wardrobe in CS Lewis's story, is a snow-muffled forest. Even the regimented, unromantic plantations of Scotland are capable of a certain mystery in British art: the final scenes of Jonathan Glazer's cinematic masterpiece, Under the Skin, take place under the waterlogged, treacherous shadows of windswept pines. But the Sheffield dispute is not just about an atavistic affection for the forests of our imaginations: it is about a community deracinated from local decision-making processes by austerity. Sheffield's agreement with a private contractor is a pragmatic measure in a city hit by appalling cuts to services. It is cheaper to fell trees, perhaps replacing them with younger specimens, than to maintain old ones; Amey has its bottom line to consider, and is not directly accountable to local voters. But the trees matter to people, and it is heartening to see Sheffield's protesters come together in defence of the handsome, beloved planes that line its streets. It is not the first time in recent years that urban communities have rallied in defence of the precious green growing things in their midst: in Glasgow, residents have waged a fierce and long battle against the council's plan to sell off the North Kelvin Meadow and Children's Wood for housing, defending this patch of land, with its wild orchids and elegant birches, from a needless housing project. Just as Scottish ministers should now step in decisively to stop the Kelvinside development plans, so Sheffield should reconsider the fate of its trees – and save them from the axe.

Recent political campaigns have shown beyond reasonable doubt that dry statistical claims that things are getting better don't work when the public suspects that they are not. So the claim that the percentage of schools ranked good or outstanding has increased in the past five years is unlikely to be reassuring to anyone who frets about the condition of education in England. Technically, though, that is true. For primary schools, the rise is from 68% to 89%; for secondary schools it is from 66% to 78%. One person keener than most to advertise those numbers is Sir Michael Wilshaw, since they reflect his four-year tenure as chief inspector of schools. He is standing down at the end of the year. It is easy to find fault with the inspection regime, to challenge the criteria on which judgments are made, to criticise the way data is collected, to lament the imprecision of verdicts expressed in crude categories and league tables. But it is also easy to forget that an imperfect system for upholding standards and giving parents a tool to monitor progress came into being because previously there was no system at all that allowed parents to judge how their child's school was doing. No one doubts Sir Michael's commitment to that process, even if his approach has ruffled feathers along the way. He earned suspicion from unions for supporting reforms that began under New Labour and were accelerated by Michael Gove, and for comments on underperformance that left teachers feeling berated and demoralised. His reputation as a transformative school leader was founded in large part on his headship of the Mossbourne academy in east London. It has routinely been held up as a model for the academies programme, carrying more weight in that debate than any one institution can reasonably bear. But Sir Michael was not a compliant apparatchik of the Govian regime. Relations with the former secretary of state soured over budget issues and the Ofsted chief's reluctance to share the ideological frenzy in Mr Gove's entourage that treated the emancipation of schools from local authority control as an end in itself. Unlike most of his ministerial patrons, Sir Michael has retained an attachment to the unfashionable principle of public sector reform that what matters is what works. On that basis he has given short shrift to what he describes as Theresa May's "obsession" with grammar schools, saying the policy would be "socially divisive" and harmful to standards overall. A chief inspector would hardly be doing his job properly if he avoided controversy and Sir Michael has not been shy of politically charged intervention, nor of using a broad brush to depict a complex challenge. True to form, he used a final round of public appearances to stir debate. Speaking ahead of publication of the final Ofsted annual report of his four-year term, he cited the role played by regional disparities in education in the majority vote against European Union membership. In this analysis, failure to improve schools in parts of the north of England and the Midlands contributed to a sense of alienation and neglect by southern elites, feeding a "malaise" that underpinned support for Brexit. It was a typical Wilshawism – a bold generalisation, testing the boundary between non-partisan analysis, as is expected of an official with statutory obligation to stay at arm's length from government, and the kind of provocative, headline-generating remark more characteristic of a politician. Forthrightness is a permissible perk of valediction and Sir Michael is as well qualified as anyone to opine on educational inequality. Where drivers of Brexit are concerned, his view feels intuitively correct, although the case is unproven. A less dramatic but no less important valedictory observation was made in an interview earlier in the week, when Sir Michael was asked about the pace of constant upheaval in school structures and the curriculum at the education department during his time at Ofsted: "I have learned this not just as chief inspector but also as a headteacher: that change sometimes has to be slow and incremental." In a peripatetic political culture, that can be a hard lesson for politicians to heed. Sir Michael's many critics might be reluctant to take it from a man more often associated with restless impatience for action. It is nonetheless consistent with a creditable ethos at Ofsted, albeit one that is irregularly upheld: a preference for evidence over ideology. That impulse is too rare in the politics of education.

Ireland's central bank has reported a substantial increase in the number of inquiries from UK-based financial services companies to operate from Dublin in the wake of the Brexit referendum. Applications for an Irish base can take up to a year and deputy governor Cyril Roux said on Thursday that several overtures had moved from preliminary inquiries to the pre-application or application phase. "Since the UK referendum, there has been a material increase in the number of authorisation queries from UK-authorised entities," he said. Dublin is vying with other European cities, including Frankfurt and Paris, to lure banks and other London-based service companies concerned about the potential loss of financial passporting – the ability to operate across the continent – when the UK withdraws from Europe. "We're seeing applications throughout the whole spectrum. We have applications for new business, the licensing of firms who are not present here, but we also see very significant indications from regulated firms that are small today but want to be big tomorrow," said Roux. "We see the whole gamut of firms inquiring for establishing or growing in Ireland, it is Mifid (markets in financial instruments directive) firms, insurance companies, CSDs (central securities depositories), payments institutions." However he reiterated previous warnings by the central bank that financial services must have a substantive presence in Ireland and those seeking brass plate operations, without transferring substantial numbers of employees or operations, would not be licensed. Financial regulation was tightened up in Ireland following the bailout by the International Monetary Fund in 2010 and the central bank will be obliged under EU law to regulate those licensed in the country. "Outsourcing and insourcing are acceptable – up to a point. One may outsource activities, but one may not outsource responsibility. A firm may not outsource to the extent that it is effectively hollowing out its regulated activity," said Roux. While Dublin is positioning itself as the only other English-speaking country in the EU with a similar legal system to the UK, virtually all the big US banks who would lose passporting rights post-Brexit, including JP Morgan and Citi, are already licensed to operate in Ireland. Earlier this year Citi, which has 9,000 employees in the UK, said it could make a decision on relocation in the first quarter of 2017. Dublin is already one of the world's largest centres for operating investment funds and has a growing financial technology and insurance presence. Ireland's financial services minister told Reuters last week that some firms making applications would be waiting to see if there was any further clarity on the terms of Brexit before making any final decision to move.

The CNC, France's film certification board, has come under renewed pressure to review its practices by conservative organisations angry at what they perceive as an overlenient rating given to a Hollywood cartoon. Sausage Party, written and directed by Seth Rogen and Evan Goldberg, is an animated fable about the delusion of religion in a godless universe. Set in an American supermarket, its characters are horny and often blasphemous foodstuffs who at one point engage in a mass sex party. In the US, the film was rated R, and in the UK, it had 15. In France it has been given a 12 certificate, enabling children to legally watch it. Said Jean-Frédéric Poisson, president of France's Christian Democratic party: "An orgy scene for 12-year-olds! Everything remains to be done to combat early exposure to pornography." La Manif Pour Tours, which has campaigned against same-sex marriage, added on Twitter: "Hello CNC, explain how you can authorise the screening of a giant orgy for the whole family?" Meanwhile the Association of Catholic Families sought to alert parents to any potential confusion, warning that while Sausage Party gives "the appearance of being intended for young people and children" its "content is not only coarse, but also clearly pornographic, under cover of being 'politically incorrect'". In January, culture minister Audrey Azoulay announced that the CNC was to be overhauled and ratings regulations tightened. This was in part in response to lobbying by Promouvoir, an organisation purporting to strengthen "Judeo-Christian values", which scored high-profile victories against films by directors such as Gaspar Noé and Abdellatif Kechiche. Noé's film, Love, which contains explicit 3D sex scenes, had its rating raised to an 18 certificate three weeks after release because of the pressure group's campaign. Kechiche's Palme d'Or-winning lesbian drama, Blue Is the Warmest Colour, had its 12 rating removed by a Paris court after another Promouvoir appeal, while Lars von Trier's Antichrist, a psychological horror that includes scenes of genital mutilation, was banned in France, seven years after its release. The French ratings board has traditionally been more lenient when it comes to sexual content than its UK and US equivalents, the BBFC and MPAA. The 12 rating in France for Fifty Shades of Grey remains in place.

Lord Freud, who as welfare reform minister was the architect of the controversial universal credit system, is stepping down from government after six years, Downing Street has said. David Freud, 66, is a former banker who was brought in by Tony Blair's Labour government to advise on streamlining the benefits system. He subsequently took a Conservative peerage, and David Cameron appointed him as the coalition government's welfare reform minister in the Lords. He was the only minister who had held the same post since 2010. The introduction of universal credit has been beset with delays and technical glitches, and a series of deep budget cuts by the previous chancellor, George Osborne, means that for many recipients it will be significantly less generous than the plethora of benefits it replaces. Freud could also be gaffe-prone: he was forced to issue an apology in 2014 after appearing to suggest at a Conservative party fringe meeting that disabled workers were not worth the minimum wage. But, announcing his retirement, Freud, said he was proud of his achievement in simplifying the welfare system. "At the heart of our reforms is desire to give people independence to improve their lives. For too long people have been trapped by a byzantine benefits system, leaving them powerless. "This has always been my driving force: to give people back control over their own lives, to give support in times of need, but also to give a clear route out of the benefits system and into independence." Iain Duncan Smith, who worked closely alongside Freud before resigning in March, said the peer's departure from government had been planned since before Theresa May took over as prime minister. "He said he would see it through to Christmas," Duncan Smith said. He added that Freud, the great grandson of Sigmund, the legendary psychoanalyst, had a formidable grasp of the benefits system. "We were together all the way through," Duncan Smith said. "He likes to get right into the detail. That's his method of working, so he was a very good deputy to me." Damian Green, the work and pensions secretary, said Freud "combines vision with an impressive attention to detail". He added: "I want to thank him for everything he has done over the years at DWP, and for all the help and support he has given to me and his ministerial colleagues. His will be a legacy of which he can be truly proud." The government is expected to appoint a new Department for Work and Pensions (DWP) spokesperson in the House of Lords, but they will not take the title of welfare reform minister. DWP sources said Freud had been sharing his six years of accumulated knowledge about the welfare system with fellow ministers in the department Caroline Nokes and Damian Hinds, who will take up the mantle of delivering the changes. Conservative backbenchers, including Duncan Smith himself, have expressed concern in recent weeks about whether universal credit now provides sufficient incentives for low-paid employees to take up more work. The chancellor, Philip Hammond, announced in last week's autumn statement that he would partially reverse planned cuts to universal credit, by reducing the taper rate at which it is withdrawn as earnings increase, from 65p to 63p in every £1. But campaigners, including the Conservative Cambridge MP, Heidi Allen, have said they will continue to urge the government to make the system more generous.

Azymuth were one of the most successful Brazilian bands of the 70s and 80s, thanks to the samba/jazz/funk fusion they called "crazy samba" and their infectious dance hit Jazz Carnival. Keyboard player José Roberto Bertrami died four years ago, but drummer Ivan Conti and bass player Alex Malheiros are now joined by Kiko Continentino, on keyboards and synths, for an album dominated by laid-back lounge-funk. Songs such as Orange Clouds or Rio Doce are pleasant, if languid, with tight bass and drums matched by flurries of jazzy keyboard work or squeaky synth effects, while the best tracks are slightly more energetic. On Batucada em Marte they add heavy riffs and changes of mood, while Corumbá is an impressive drum and percussion workout from Conti and a second percussionist, Robertinho Silva, matched by spacey synth effects. Azymuth are classy musicians, but here they sound more soporific than crazy.

More than a dozen examples of British erotica are being made available to view by the British Film Institute (BFI). On Friday the BFI is releasing an online collection, called The Pleasure Principle, of newly digitised films dating from 1896 to the early years of this century. They range from a Victorian lady's frilly petticoat to a fuzzy, brief shot of a nude woman cavorting at the seaside, to a naked interview with a 1970s adult actor and model, Fiona Richmond. The BFI's curator, Vic Pratt, said there was a noble purpose behind making the material available. "We are trying to tell the story of illicit celluloid pleasure from the beginnings of film to the present day. It is a social and cultural journey across the 20th century with the kind of films people are sometimes embarrassed to talk about." Pratt said the British attitude to sex was often strange and unusual to other nationalities – the French, for example – and this was borne out in some of the films. "We are much happier when we can talk in seaside and Carry On innuendoes." The earliest film is Victorian Lady in Her Boudoir (1896), considered possibly Britain's oldest erotic film, if a petticoat and exposed ankle can be called erotic. The 1943 film Action in Slow Motion has the cavorting nude and the warning that it is for artists – and that anyone watching it could be liable for prosecution. Other films include a Soho burlesque film from 1961 and from 1960, Xcitement! featuring Pamela Green in the type of 8mm film that was delivered in brown paper to someone replying to an advert in the back of Exchange &amp; Mart. The films reveal early film-makers experimenting with just how much they could get away with. Many of the films were shown at private men's clubs. The BFI has digitised them as part of its ongoing Britain on Film project with 10,000 films from the BFI National Archive and the UK's national and regional film archives being made available online by the end of 2017. Around half will be free to view. Eyebrows might be raised at erotica but Pratt insisted: "We need to look at these films, they are interesting. There is a lot in here we can learn about ourselves. They play a really important part in social history. People have not really wanted to acknowledge it and I think we need to ... There is a lot we can learn from these films and there is a lot people will find fascinating. People will see how things have changed but also how things have not changed." A spokesperson for the BFI said the collection would be added to in the next few weeks and would also include a film called Boys and Girls Together from 1979, described as the "sexploits of a multi-racial group of tenants sharing a Hampstead house". It is also the first certificated sight of gay men making love. "It is accidentally quite groundbreaking," said Pratt.

Scotland's minimum age of criminal responsibility will be raised to 12 years, in line with UN standards, after the current minimum age of eight, the lowest in Europe, was labelled a "national embarrassment". Mark McDonald, minister for childcare and early years, announced on Thursday afternoon that the Scottish government would bring forward legislation to raise the age by four years, calling the case for it "clear and compelling". In a statement to Holyrood, McDonald told MSPs: "Having the lowest minimum age of criminal responsibility in Europe does not match with our progressive approach to youth justice and ambitions to give children the best start in life." A recent consultation with police, prosecutors and victims' groups found that 95% supported an increase to the age of 12 or above. In 2010, the Scottish government raised the age of criminal prosecution to 12, assuring that no one under that age could be prosecuted or sentenced in the criminal courts but would be dealt with through children's hearings. However, those outcomes would still be added to children's criminal records. McDonald said: "Raising the age of criminal responsibility will mean people no longer face potentially damaging and life-altering consequences, such as a criminal record, for events that took place when they were a young child." He added that he recognised the need for safeguards in exceptional cases, and that police would still have powers to investigate serious offences committed by children under 12s. The minimum age of criminal responsibility in England and Wales is 10. The UN committee on the rights of the child has stated that setting the age of criminal responsibility below 12 is considered "not to be internationally acceptable". Liam McArthur MSP, the Scottish Liberal Democrat justice spokesperson, welcomed the decision. His predecessor in the role Alison McInnes advocated the rise, but her attempts to alter the law by bringing forward amendments to a criminal justice bill in the last Holyrood session were voted down by the SNP. McDonald told the chamber on Thursday that he wanted to put on the record his thanks to McInnes for pressing the issue. McArthur likewise praised her "tireless work", adding: "Eight-year-olds should be treated as children not criminals. The fact they can receive convictions which need to be declared for decades, or even the rest of their lives, is a national embarrassment." The acting chair of the Scottish youth parliament, Amy Lee Fraioli MSYP, also welcomed the move, adding that children and young people across Scotland felt strongly about the issue. "Raising the age of criminal responsibility from eight to 12 is an important step towards fully incorporating the UN convention on the rights of the child into Scots law. Many children who find themselves in children's hearings are also victims themselves, and are often ill-equipped to deal with the situations they find themselves in. Raising the age will help ensure that Scotland is a fair place for children, and shift focus to supporting children instead of criminalising them."

I agree with Owen Jones (Labour would save the NHS – but it won't save labour, 1 December) that Labour needs to find a message that "chimes with the concerns of the overwhelming majority of society". However, he said nothing about how Labour must convince voters that it is a party of patriots, for patriots. When up against the forces of the Conservative right and Ukip, it is easy for some to conflate patriotism with nationalism but patriotism is, as George Orwell notes, "devotion to a particular place and a particular way of life", while nationalism is a poisonous force that disregards the national interest. Labour does not currently hold a strong record for patriotism. Its leader at one point chose not to sing the national anthem, its shadow foreign secretary poked fun at a house draped in St George's flags and the fact that the four most senior Labour MPs represent London constituencies makes the party seem as if it has turned its back on the rest of the country. What unites most parties and people is the love of their country and way of life. I have no doubt that Labour MPs are patriotic but they must hammer that message home. Gabriel Osborne Bristol How depressing to read the letters challenging and opposing Caroline Lucas's calls for a progressive alliance involving Labour, Lib Dems and Greens (Letters, 29 November). To Michael Meadowcroft, I would ask for a definition of the "philosophy" that includes the views of Jeremy Corbyn, John McDonnell, Liz Kendall and Hilary Benn but excludes those of Tim Farron. To the Greens who oppose the EU single market, I would like to highlight the many measures to protect the environment put in place through EU legislation and which can best be enhanced and developed through further cooperation. To those laboriously searching for the definition of a "party of the left", I would like to draw attention to the laughter and glee of Ukip, whose simplistic populism looks likely to trump a confused and chaotic Labour party. Rob Ratcliff Chippenham, Wiltshire The only way of defeating the forces of reaction electorally is for left-of-centre parties: Labour, the SNP, the Greens, Plaid Cymru and the Liberal Democrats to begin a conversation around how they can come together to defend the common values they share and offer hope to all those who are appalled at the implications of a further Conservative government. This will not be easy, but none of these parties has a monopoly on good ideas and all, including Labour and the Lib Dems, have made huge mistakes in the recent past. To pretend otherwise is disingenuous. Rather than criticising other left-of-centre parties, I suggest people come out of their silos and begin to talk about how we can come together to defeat the right and offer hope rather than despair. Sarah Perrigo Leeds Labour's old industrial heartlands have certainly given two fingers to today's Labour party and the political and financial establishment, but this doesn't mean they are about to jump into bed with Ukip (Douglas Carswell, Opinion, 29 November). They voted against the lack of decent jobs, low pay, austerity, the shortage of decent affordable housing, overcrowded schools and the wrecking of the NHS. They know that the UK is a low-wage economy and that the problem is not migrants or controlling our borders. It's about controlling the companies, company bosses and shareholders that are addicted to cheap labour. Turning the old Labour heartlands Green is now part of the Green party's strategy, as only the Green party has the policies to stop the wrecking of these communities. Jobs, especially green jobs, a decent minimum wage that is properly enforced, a return of trade union rights, an increase in energy-efficient social housing, an end to private landlords' greed, schools that educate individuals and an end to any form of privatisation of the NHS. How will this be paid for? By having the political will to collect tax. Michael Gold Green candidate for Walthamstow 2015 Ukip's latest "leader of the month", Paul Nuttall, has been spending too much time with professional politicians if he thinks that having a scouse accent and coming from the north-west will make his party an even greater threat to Labour (Report, 29 November). Labour has accepted the outcome of the referendum; now it must develop a coherent platform of policies that will remind past and present supporters that there are still many good reasons to vote for an optimistic social democratic alternative, rather than appealing to the pessimism and fear that has contributed to Ukip's rise. Les Bright Exeter, Devon What has Steve Bell (1 December) got against toads? Paul Houghton Towcester, Northamptonshire Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters

Oil prices have reached their highest level in a year amid hopes in financial markets that the Opec cartel will make a deal to curb crude production stick. The cost of a barrel of Brent crude rose by more than $2 to just over $54 a barrel as the rally that greeted news of an agreement reached by producing nations in Vienna extended into a second day. Sam Wahab, director of oil and gas research at Cantor Fitzgerald Europe, said: "Wednesday's] agreement has truly changed the landscape for oil over the coming years, putting a floor of $50 a barrel under oil prices. "It means 2017 will likely see prices around the $55-$60 a barrel mark, and we may yet see further jumps in prices as soon as next week if the non-Opec members also agree a production cut at their meeting on Friday 9 December." Motoring organisations warned the Opec deal could push petrol prices up by 9p a litre, adding an average £5 to the cost of filling a car. Changes in oil prices usually feed through to petrol prices in less than a fortnight. The deal triggered frenetic trading in the futures market. Activity in contracts for February and March 2017 – when the impact of the January output restrictions will be evident – hit record levels. Traders pushed prices higher after the biggest non-Opec producer, Russia, said it would also cut output – its first co-ordinated move with the cartel in 15 years. Azerbaijan, another non-Opec country, has also agreed to take part in a drive to reduce production by 1.8m barrels per day in an attempt to underpin the oil price. BP, whose shares jumped by 2.3% on the back of the rising oil price, announced it was going ahead with a $9bn expansion of its Mad Dog field in the Gulf of Mexico. Opec's deal was possible because Saudi Arabia abandoned its strategy of flooding the global market with oil in an attempt to drive US shale producers out of business. Despite the two-day rally, Brent crude is trading at less than half its recent peak of $115 a barrel reached in the summer of 2014. Dominic Rossi, of Fidelity International, said the deal may not hold: "I would not get too excited by the Opec cut. Compliance will be a problem, and the Russians will pump more gas instead. In the meantime, the long-run marginal cost of US shale continues to fall. I would not chase this oil price rally too hard." Jane Sydenham, investment director at Rathbone Investment Management, said: "While at present the news is good for the markets, it is much more difficult to say how this will play out in the longer term. "We're currently experiencing a knee-jerk reaction, unsurprising since this is the biggest co-ordinated action in eight years. It is likely that this will run on for a little while longer but how the markets price in the unexpected oil inflation is something we are yet to see." On the currency markets, the pound was up by 6% against the euro, 1.5% against the US dollar, and by 15% against the Japanese yen.

Barely a day goes by without Brexit being in the news. But despite the extensive coverage given to this most momentous of political events, it still seems that nobody really knows what's going to happen. Of course, we'll be here to guide you through the 'ins and outs' of it. But for the time being, our Christmas elves have created some commemorative Brexit crackers, complete with gifts and, naturally, a joke or two. Cracker prizes include: Brexit Bus Play with promises to the NHS Brexit plans notebook Finally discover Britain's exit strategy Fortune teller Put our island in the palm of your hand and predict its future EU legislation eraser Rub out those European laws The EU jigsaw Attempt to piece the European Union back together The yo-yo-ing Pound Endless fun as you watch the pound rise and fall and fall and fall The competition has now closed for entries. Season's greetings to all who entered and those who didn't. Terms and Conditions

Tree campaign groups across Sheffield have been at pains to garner expert inputs to substantiate their very clear arguments against the Sheffield chainsaw massacre (Letters, 29 November). The Woodland Trust is a longstanding critic of the Sheffield "Streets Ahead" programme and its epic and disastrous plans for street tree "management". Equally, the Sheffield Wildlife Trust has not been shy about its deep reservations. More recently, the Arboricultural Association has felt compelled to take a position. It is insulting to condemn them as "fanatics". Campaigners do not advocate saving every tree and have a clear position on the removal of the dead and the dangerous. Yet we live in a post-truth, post-factual world. Perhaps then we should be unsurprised when finding some rot and a little deadwood are being cast in the way of constructive dialogue. I am sure anyone wishing to interrogate the facts will be welcome at next week's lecture by Prof Ian Rotherham, details of which can be found at https://ianswalkonthewildside.wordpress.com Richard Ward Nether Edge, Sheffield It is a pity that your photographs did not make clear that there is an enormous wooded park two metres from the felled tree. It not only has ample space for the planting of replacement trees but is part of a near unbroken chain of woodland areas that reaches up to the high moors bordering this part of the city. One thing this bubble in the city is not short of is trees. But criticising private contractor Amey for attempting to reduce its costs is like telling lions it is wrong to eat zebras. Privatisation is a conscious and deliberate mechanism for syphoning off cash from local councils and the NHS at the expense of badly needed services. Malcolm Kesterton Sheffield Nobody within the campaign would remotely suggest that all trees be retained. Campaigners, whatever their degree of involvement, recognise that some trees need to go, and had Michael Miller taken the trouble to look on any of the social media sites associated with the campaign he would know this. Healthy mature trees, condemned because of a displaced kerbstone or some similarly trivial disruption, can and should be maintained, within the terms of the contract, at no extra expense to the council. If campaigners could force the council's hand, it would be to make it insist that the contractor do this, rather than washing its hands and turning a blind eye. Richard Thackeray, however, is quite right. The council's predicament is a difficult one, thanks to the policies of successive national governments and PFI contracts. This needs to be opposed for sure, but in the meantime approximately 4,000 mature healthy trees (not the "selected few" mentioned by Mr Miller) have been destroyed in Sheffield, including in poorer neighbourhoods which can ill afford to lose their splash of green. More than a thousand more are at immediate risk. They cannot be replaced, only substituted; once they are gone they are gone. A young tree does not provide the same benefits. Therefore I am fighting for the trees. Once they are safe, I will turn my attention to the political climate that allowed this to happen. Helen McIlroy Sheffield Street trees are the zenith of our connection with our planet. They stand as exemplars of a sustainable life for us all, even in the most human-influenced environments on the planet. Sheffield, given its importance in the industrial revolution, should recognise this more than most cities. Instead, Sheffield council has decided on a course that sets the very worst precedent for us all, everywhere. Pip Howard Silvicultural surveyor Stoke Gabriel, Devon Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters

In Scotland, where there are about 15,000 looked-after children (including looked-after children at home), we are committed to ending unacceptably long waiting times for a permanent home as experienced by so many children (Safety in numbers, 26 November). Delaying decisions on a child's permanent home can seriously impact on their life chances. While speed is of the essence, we need to be considered in our decision making, using all evidence available, and ensuring the child's welfare is considered at every step. Where in England "permanence" normally means fostering or adoption (ie, care outside the family home), in Scotland the definition and options are far broader: returning the child to the family home with an appropriate level of care and support; kinship care, where the child lives with another family member; adoption and fostering; and residential care. We believe that once families have had support to care for their child at home and are unable to do so, every child should be provided with a settled, secure and permanent place to live with minimum disruption to their young lives. We are working with the Scottish government on the Permanence and Care Excellence (Pace) programme, aimed at developing innovative and rigorous approaches to improve permanence for looked-after children. In Aberdeenshire, the permanence process has almost halved in time, which has exceeded the original aim – hence why the programme is now being rolled out to every local authority in Scotland. Jennifer Davidson Executive director, Celcis (Centre for Excellence for Looked After Children in Scotland) I work with under-18s presenting in mental health crisis. In many cases these children and young people are unsafe as opposed to mentally ill. Along with colleagues in child health and education, I often struggle to get a child or young person registered as a "child in need" let alone put on the child protection register. Removal is rare. I have worked with many local authority children's services over the last 20 years. Some have been really thoughtful and highly effective in their safeguarding practice. Others have been organised by the need to get child protection registration numbers down, and the need to save money. Under-18s in their authorities have frequently been subject to practices that simply repeat the abuse and neglect of their family of origin. Emotional maltreatment is often invisible, and is all too frequently deemed insufficiently risky for action. Authorities keen to manage care within the wider family system (the aim with family group conferences, which are not, as implied in the article, a new intervention) often choose cost-neutral interventions, such as special guardianship orders. The final irony, with such orders, is that care may well be given over to the same grandparent who was the progenitor of the child's abusive or neglectful parent. Dr Virginia Davies Consultant in paediatric liaison/under-18s mental health A financial crisis every bit as large as the one affecting adult social care is being faced by children's homes. Incomes flatline, costs rise (Letters, 30 November). One region has not paid an increase on fees for this year, others make arrangements that incur delays, meanwhile providers carry on caring. That children's homes have become invisible is a testimony that good-quality care isn't newsworthy. This means stories that could outshine past concerns are not publicly prominent. The prominence for elderly care is just. A new positive prominence for children's homes would be equally just. We already have the smallest sector in history so the loss of even a small number of providers will be to seriously affect safety, specialism and choice. Jonathan Stanley CEO, Independent Children's Homes Association Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters

London dominates estimates of national homelessness newly published by Shelter. This, of course, is no surprise. Neither are high levels of homelessness anything new in the capital. In his book London: The Heartless City, published in 1977, David Wilcox reported that "by the end of 1976, 15,000 families were recognised as homeless". And that was 10 years after Cathy Come Home. Has anything improved? Shelter calculates that 170,000 people are homeless in London today. The Department for Communities and Local Government (DCLG) has told the Guardian it does not recognise Shelter's figures and provided one of 52,820 homeless households in temporary accommodation in London as of the 30 June. However, as households frequently comprise more than one person and Shelter's figures are mostly drawn from the DCLG's own data on temporary accommodation and rough sleeping, the difference between the two might not be so great. Any comparison between these figure and the 15,000 homeless families of 1976 will be inexact, as counting methods and homelessness definitions have altered over the years. Moreover, London's population has gone up by about 1.5m since then which alters the percentages. But however you cut the numbers, they've been going in the wrong direction recently. Shelter claims that its methodology has "for the very first time" revealed "the true scale of homelessness" by adding up those DCLG numbers, others from social services departments secured through Freedom of Information requests and more on hostel bed spaces for single people gathered at Homeless Link. The venerable charity says its figures "should be viewed as robust, lower-end estimates" based on "conservative assumptions" and do not include the "hidden homeless" of so-called "sofa surfers" - usually young people staying with friends. The current DCLG figure is higher than the 50,970 it recorded for the final quarter of 2015, which, while lower than a peak of 63,800 at the end of 2005, was the first time it had topped 50,000 since 2008. In 2011 it was 35,620. Shelter says that Newham is the borough containing the largest number of homeless people in London with 12,246 of them, followed by Brent with 10,582 and Enfield with 9,285. The one with the highest proportion of homeless people is Westminster, whose total of 8,059 represents a striking one in 25 of its overall population. In Newham, the figure is one in 27, in Haringey approximately one in 28 and in Kensington and Chelsea it is one in 29. At the bottom of Shelter's "homelessness hotspots" top 20 is Wandsworth, with 3,987 homeless people and a ratio of one in 81. The Shelter report points no fingers of blame, recognising that this long running problem has many causes and manifestations which vary from borough to borough and age to age. In the capital, where nothing is straightforward and spending cuts are deep, local authorities are struggling to cope. "There is no single solution to this problem," says Lewisham Council, which has an imaginative "pop up" housing scheme in Ladywell among its policies: "Homelessness here continues to rise whilst the supply of suitable affordable accommodation is reducing and the cost of housing across all tenures has never been higher." Newham stresses that its similar problems are "exacerbated by the government's welfare reforms which have restricted the number of properties available to families on low incomes". It says a not-for-profit housing organisation it set up in 2006 provides some temporary accommodation. Across town, the story from Ealing Council is much the same: "The numbers of families presenting to the council as homeless is increasing year on year and, like many councils, we are struggling to find accommodation for them." They are developing small pockets of their own land and building their own modular homes as an alternative to housing people in expensive, temporary private accommodation locally. It's 50 years since Shelter was founded. Its work goes on.

Perhaps "Johnson's cake" can now replace Schrödinger's cat as the macroscopic manifestation of quantum superposition of states ('Have your cake and eat it' – is this the Tory Brexit plan?, 29 November)? Unfortunately, someone has to open the box at some point and observe the system... Mike Whittaker Stapleton, Shropshire Instead of putting a match to the sports section and other rejected weekend stuff, your correspondent (Letters, 29 November) could sit on a pile of them to do lengthy, low-down pruning jobs in the garden. All the hot air gives supplements extra insulation properties, it seems. Helen Yemm Wadhurst, East Sussex How pleasant, amid all the Brexit and Trump doom and gloom, to read your Public Service Awards supplement (30 November). An uplifting tribute to people who believe in the ethic of service to their communities and put it into practice so successfully in the face of constant government-imposed constraints. Paul F Faupel Somersham, Cambridgeshire I thought sundown only happened in westerns (Weather view, 29 November). In Kent, England, it is called sunset. Steve Vanstone Wolverhampton Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters

The government has been warned that up to 1 million EU citizens living in the UK could be at risk of deportation if it does not come up with a simple way of recognising their status in the country. The 3 Million, a grassroots group lobbying for the rights of non-British citizens who have made the UK their home, has told the home secretary it would take the Home Office 47 years to process applications from EU citizens for permanent residency (PR). "We are people with families, children, friends and work colleagues, and we are rightly worried about a very uncertain future," said Nicolas Hatton, chair of the 3 Million, in his letter to Amber Rudd. "EU citizens have been feeling very anxious about their future since the referendum, and this set of data will not reassure them. We call on you to remove the threat of deportation without notice and give us, today, guarantees that all EU citizens living legally in the UK will be able to exercise their right to remain before the UK leaves the EU." Theresa May has consistently said that rights for EU citizens were a legitimate part of Brexit negotiations, but on Thursday night the government seemed to go one step further by indicating their rights could be removed if not reciprocated. A Home Office spokesperson said: "The home secretary has been clear that she wants to protect the status of EU nationals already living here, and the only circumstances in which that wouldn't be possible is if British citizens' rights in European member states were not protected in return." The estimated time it would take the Home Office to deal with the 3 million EU citizens in the country is based on the latest immigration data, which shows a surge in applications for PR since the EU referendum, which has caused a backlog of 100,000 applications. PR was designed for non-EU citizens who wished to settle in the UK and involves an 85-page application form. Applicants not only have to provide five years of council tax bills, bank statements or utility bills to demonstrate residency, but also have to document each time they have been in and out of the country since they arrived in the UK. Monika Lutke-Daldrup from Germany, who is an executive with a large European firm and lives in Watford, told the Guardian: "I travel about 20 times a year and I have been here for 18 years. It is ridiculous." Paola Rizatto said: "I am an educated person, but I found the 85-page form so overwhelming that I decided to hire an immigration lawyer. I have already spent around £1,000." Several mothers who have British children say they are not eligible for PR because their household bills are not in their names. "Just to be married to a British person or to have British children is not enough," said one. Another, who asked not to be named, said she had been told to get her child's school to sign a statement that she had been picking up her child each day for the past five years. The 3 Million said the Home Office process for PR "is totally inconsistent and depends on what Home Office adviser you get". Data published on Thursday shows that 30% of applications are rejected, with many EU citizens unable to pass the paperwork test despite their legal right of residence as EU citizens. If the government requires all non-Britons to join the non-EU immigrants in the permanent residency queue, up to 1 million could face deportation the day the UK leaves the EU. The Home Office said there had been "no change to the rights and status of EU nationals in the UK as a result of the referendum". Its guidance was that EU citizens did not need to apply for permanent residence. "As such there is no requirement to register for documentation to confirm their status," a spokesperson said.

EU citizens who fear deportation from the UK post-Brexit have told of the "offensive" amount of paperwork they have to submit to the Home Office to prove they have lived in the country. Some have discovered they are not even eligible for permanent residency documents, simply because they did not think to take out private health insurance or because they were a homemaker and all the household bills and bank statements were in their partners' names. One woman, a full-time mother, who did not have the required five years of bank statements in her own name was told by a Home Office adviser to get her child's school to come to her aid. "I was then told in no uncertain terms that I need to go back home and get a statement from my kids' school to say I am there every day at drop off/pick up," she said. A spokeswoman for The3million campaign group, which has been lobbying the government to ensure EU citizens can remain in the UK post-Brexit with all the rights they presently have, said: "Some people are OK about the questions, others feel criminalised by the situation and find the whole application process offensive." Figures out on Thursday showed a surge in the numbers who are applying for permanent residency with a backlog of 100,000 trying to secure their place in Britain. Here, EU citizens tell their own stories. Sylvie Kilford, Polish, PhD student I live in constant uncertainty and dread. Like many others, I feel like I've invested my entire adulthood into this country. If I have to I can leave, but many others can't I've lived in the UK for 11 years now and have been married to a British man for the last four years. Yet I am not eligible for the permanent residency card. That's because I've not had comprehensive health insurance, and since I was a student and never earned enough money for a long enough time to count as "exercising my treaty rights" I can't apply. Before I knew about the health insurance issue, I passed the citizenship test, looking to apply directly for citizenship. Only after I passed and got all my papers together was I told about the insurance requirement. In the years that passed between the moment I'd been here long enough to apply for citizenship and now, the rules have changed several times (so now I'd have to apply for permanent residency first to even get to the stage of applying for citizenship) and the current government had made it increasingly more difficult to get the proper papers to show you can stay here. Suddenly, I find myself looking at the threat of either being deported or staying here illegally, unless the government issues a blanket decree that we can all stay. I live in constant uncertainty and dread. Like many others, I feel like I've invested my entire adulthood into this country. I've been encouraged to stay by my British lecturers who helped me get a scholarship and prodded me to do a PhD, and by my British husband. Since 23 June, suddenly I find myself explaining to people that I've never taken a penny in benefits and dread what might happen if someone listens carefully to my accent. It's become OK for people to say things like "Oh, don't worry, this isn't about you, you're basically British anyway" or "you're married to a British man, so they're not going to kick you out" as though I should be ashamed of who I am in reality, or hide behind my whiteness, and my ability to speak English well enough to "pass" if I don't say too much, or if I'm not listened to too carefully. As though being married to a British man could possibly shield me from deportation. Naturally, I hope Brexit doesn't happen. Not because of my particular situation, even though it does feel, on a personal level, like a huge injustice. But I am fortunate in that I'm young, educated and healthy and so, if it comes to that, I can move somewhere else. But there are lots of people who are not in that situation. People who are older, who have businesses here that they can't just leave. Mothers, who have spent decades raising a family, and therefore not "exercising their treaty rights". I feel for them, and I wish the British were better informed about our plight. Furthermore, I love this country and Brexit is going to harm it, as well as the EU. Charles Noblet, 44, French, programme director in IT and telecoms I have contributed to the UK for 21 years. But since 23 June, I have felt up and down about living in the UK. I feel betrayed, not at home, sad I came to the UK in 1995 on the Erasmus scheme and did an MSc by research at King's College London. Since then I have always lived in the UK. My wife Jayne is a British citizen and we live near Bristol and have a small cottage in Cornwall. We have dogs and horses and if we were asked to leave , it would be very complicated. I have contributed full time to National Insurance for 21 years and every year send between £35,000 to £40,000 to the tax man. Since 23 June, I have felt up and down about living in the UK. I also had a lot of anxiety, less now. My wife could sense how stressed I was and I presume I am not the only one. How many of us have lived and built our life in the UK (and legally). Interestingly, I am feeling more French than ever since the referendum. Unfortunately, we can't move back to France in an instant. My wife employs 15 British citizens at her company. We would have to sell our properties and find another job. I have looked into the application for permanent residency, thinking it might be a safety net. Four months ago, I decided not to apply, as I felt I was being treated like a second class citizen. Then I started looking at it again. But I will wait to hear what will happen by end of March – probably not much I think. Right now, we live in the UK legally and the state owes me a pension for all my contributions! If I have to apply for the permanent residency application or a simplified version, I will do this. The option of going back to France is not on the table right now. Monika Lutke-Daldrup, 46, German, senior director in customer service in large consumer company My worry is not so much about being kicked out but that my life is here I have lived here for 18 years, been employed and paid taxes without a break. I also hold a UK driving licence, pay council tax in my name and am on the electoral register for local and European elections. So you'd think I'm fairly "official" and my address and residence status should be well known to the authorities. I also have a mortgage in my name. As for the permanent residency application, it's taken me a few weeks already gathering residence documents for the past five years (who keeps bills from 2011?) Council tax bills qualify but who would have thought you would need to keep them? I also need to track my exact whereabouts for either five or all of the 18 years (it is unclear on the form) on a day-by-day basis, which is a nightmare. I travel a lot for work and am probably abroad about 20 times a year. The reason I am doing the PR application is partly for some "irrational assurance" in these uncertain times where just anything seems possible, and partly as it's a prerequisite to a UK citizenship application. My worry is not so much about being kicked out but that my life is here. I have a good job here, my friends are here. I just want to make sure I can stay here, make sure I can get the pension that I have been paying into, my health insurance is here. I am very angry about the situation. The latter is something I hadn't been too bothered about until now, but I do want the right to vote in this country going forward. I felt incredibly disempowered not being able to vote on my future in the referendum. Judit Szarka, 34, Hungarian, secretary in global insurance company Why would I want to become part of a nation who so strongly dislike EU citizens making an honest life in their country? When the government announced that they consider us bargaining chips in the negotiations with the EU I was outraged. I was a 2012 Games Maker and got my thank you letter from 10 Downing Street after the Olympic Games. I volunteer and raise money for charities as much as I can. I used to fill a shopping basket for the food bank every month. I felt being a part of something great up until the Brexit result. Now I feel betrayed. Sometimes I have trouble sleeping and get tearful easily. I was heartbroken when my friend, Zdenek Makar was killed in Poplar and since then I avoid speaking in public in case I get targeted because of my accent. My partner, who is British, didn't vote in the referendum. He doesn't understand my reaction to Brexit and thinks I'm paranoid and should feel safe in London. But it is hard to deal with uncertainty. But to cut a long story short, I now refuse to apply for permanent residency and citizenship. Becoming a UK citizen should be a happy celebratory moment. But I can no longer relate to Britain after Brexit. Why would I want to become part of a nation who so strongly dislike EU citizens making an honest life in their country? If my rights here won't be guaranteed as I feel I rightfully deserve, I will be truly happy to pack my bag and make my life elsewhere. I arrived with a suitcase and £50 in my pocket on 1 February 2005. I now have a very nice City job and my own flat in London. I am highly adaptable and a great problem solver. I have no doubt that it will be all right at the end of the day for me, regardless if it will be in the UK or if I will be making and living another dream of mine somewhere else. My only fear that my once beloved UK will be truly and utterly broken after Brexit. Axel Antoni, German, 43, business consultant I came here the year of Cool Britannia, now I fear for my future. We have no voice I first came to the UK from Germany in 1998 to study on a European exchange programme. It was the year of Cool Britannia. The Spice Girls were wearing Union Jack outfits to advertise our country on their world tours and Oasis and Blur were carrying British culture around the globe. There was no place better than Britain for a young person to be back then. I returned to Germany in 2000 to finish my studies and when the opportunity arose to return to the UK for work in July 2001 I packed my bags and came back to the country I fell in love with. I have set up my life here, actually I have lived longer in London than in any other place previous to coming to the UK. I have been married to my British wife for 10 years and have two lovely British children. Until 23 June my life seemed perfect. I would like to get back to the worries though that we, as non-British EU citizens, have in regards to quitting the EU. Apart from the palpable wave of xenophobia gripping the country there are real concerns about our legal status and especially the potential burden to have to prove our legal status on an ongoing basis. One of the main reasons for me to apply for permanent residency is the feeling of doing something during times when I feel total powerlessness. The government has not given us a voice, is declining to listen to our concerns and is using us as bargaining chips in their shambolic Brexit negotiations. Hence, I am doing the only thing that is in my powers, securing my legal status to protect myself and my family. Davis Barroso, 34, Italian, travel executive I feel like my position in UK is no longer safe I am an Italian citizen living in the UK for 15 years. Following the results of the referendum, I decided to apply for permanent residency, not because someone said it was necessary but because I have built a whole grown up life here and I feel like my position in UK is no longer safe. I was only 19 years old when I first arrived. I grew from a boy to man in the UK. Have always worked, paid taxes, made friends and family. I bought a property, never claimed benefits and also pay for a private retirement pension. I did not have any problems in acquiring the permanent residency because I still have a lot of paper documents since I arrived. But I still felt very uncomfortable to have to prove everything like an outsider. Before November 2015 there was no need of permanent residence for EU citizens to apply for British citizenship. Now there is. Once you are issued with a PR document you still have to wait another year to apply for citizenship regardless if you have been here for over 10 years. That just tell us it will only get worse after we are fully out of EU, doesn't it? Paola Rizzato, Italian, 43, between jobs I am married to a British citizen but that doesn't qualify me for permanent residency I am an EU citizen who has lived in this country for over 22 years of which three were as a student and the remaining as a worker. I am married to a British citizen, which leads people to think that it will be very straightforward for me to acquire permanent residency. That's not actually the case. My marriage doesn't give me an advantage, apart from being able to apply for naturalisation immediately after obtaining permanent residency (otherwise one has to wait a year). I am an educated person but I found the 85-page form so overwhelming that I decided to hire an immigration lawyer. I have already spent around £1,000 on legal fees but so far I feel it has been money well spent. My application has now been sent off – now I'm going to have to wait four to six months until I hear back. My solicitor tells me that I have nothing to worry about but unfortunately I can't help it and my levels of anxiety have soared since 23 Jun. I know I am not alone in this. I am lucky in that the Italian government allows us to have both a national ID card and a passport – I sent off my ID card to the Home Office and kept my passport, so I will still be able to travel. A new "passport checking" service has been introduced for PR but it's only for online applications and there are many reports of teething problems, with local authorities rejecting documents for all sorts of reasons. I hope that your article will help to challenge the "everything will be all right" comment I keep hearing from British people. I find that kind of comment well-meaning but very frustrating – people have no idea of what we are going through and of what our applications entail. Morten Ronne, Danish, owner of tour company, Scotland If it was up to me I would rather leave the UK if we were meant to feel not welcome. We are a family of five have lived in Edinburgh since March 2010 and we have been really happy about coming to Scotland. While I feel the debate about Brexit – before and after the referendum – has been quite civil all in all, at least compared to other countries, I do feel alarmed about our future prospects. I am first and foremost a bit worried about my children who have integrated well here in Scotland and feel that this is now their home country. Having said that I can tell from the Facebook group Forum for EU Citizens that apparently I am not nearly as alarmed as a lot of other people. We have indeed thought about applying for citizenship but 1) it's quite expensive and 2) it really shouldn't be necessary. For the time being we have decided not to go ahead with it and apply for citizenship and unless we are forced to do so I don't think we will. To be honest, if it was up to me I would rather leave the UK if we were meant to feel not welcome. On that note I do think it's important to mention that while I have read about a rise in reported hate crime or anger towards Europeans we have not experienced anything like that. I couldn't tell you if we have been lucky or if it's not really an issue in Scotland. We would obviously have preferred to stay in the EU and was a bit miffed about the fact that we were not allowed a vote in the referendum, but I guess what we are hoping for now, here in Scotland would be a second referendum – and hopefully with a different outcome than the first time. Gerhard Lohmann-Bond, 62, German, local Green party politician I wouldn't mind at all if the authorities throw me out. It would create such an outcry I am one of the EU migrants who refuse to entertain applying for residency documents out of principle. I have lived in the UK since 1977 with a break of 18 months from 2004-2006. My family (my wife, a teacher, and my two sons who are in further education) and I live in Lincolnshire in the constituency of Grantham and Stamford, which voted to leave the EU by a substantial margin. I sit on the local parish council and the East Midlands regional committee of the Green party and have recently been campaigning against local NHS cuts and closures. As a local politician I am on first name terms with a number of district and county councillors (mostly conservatives). I suppose you could consider me part of the fabric of Lincolnshire. As such, I would like to see anyone trying to kick me out. I wouldn't mind at all if the authorities throw me out. It would create such an outcry. I don't think that is going to happen and if it did, I reckon it would an outcry on both sides of the arguments surrounding EU membership. I shall therefore continue to live my life as before, but have every sympathy for those EU migrants who are fearful for their future in the UK and try to play by the Home Office's rules. This article was amended on 2 December to correct the spelling of Davis Barroso's surname.

Powered by Natalie Portman's fascinatingly mannered performance in the title role, Pablo Larraín's Jackie feels like a film without precedent. How is it, for starters, that Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis – irrefutably the most glamorous and independently famous first lady ever to take up residence in the White House – has never been the subject of her own big-screen biopic? We've seen plenty of her on television, but it's taken over half a century for the cinema to single out her story from the heavily pored-over mythos of Camelot – something Larraín's film does with a wry, caustic awareness of how political and celebrity legacies are constructed. "Objects and artefacts survive for far longer than people," Portman's Jackie says through a stiff smile on screen, in a re-enactment of Kennedy's 1961 televised tour of the White House. The film, jaggedly covering the immediate internal aftermath of John F Kennedy's assassination, shows how Jackie was sealed in the public imagination as both person and object – the glittering exception that nonetheless proved the limitations of how presidents' wives have long been presented to, and viewed by, the American people. Following a bitter election season in which former first lady Hillary Clinton fell afoul of the same restrictions at a more executive level, the defiantly exclusive focus of Larraín's portrait – in which JFK himself makes only the most fleeting of flashback appearances – carries a piquantly gendered subtext. After all, on screen as in life, first ladies have mostly been made to stand modestly to one side. Even the cinema's most vivid portrayals of White House wives, fictional or biographical, have largely been in service of a more dominant male characterisation: Joan Allen's Pat Nixon to Anthony Hopkins' Tricky Dicky, Sally Field's Mary Todd Lincoln to Daniel Day-Lewis's Honest Abe, or even Emma Thompson's Hillary proxy to John Travolta's thinly veiled Bill Clinton in Primary Colors. But rarely has one made it to title-role status. A forerunner to Jackie, in that sense if no other, is Magnificent Doll, a frothy 1946 vehicle for a non-dancing Ginger Rogers as Dolley Madison, wife of founding father and fourth president James, which framed her life principally as a love triangle between her, her eventual husband and future American veep Aaron Burr. The title alone should be a giveaway that Magnificent Doll isn't the most enlightened of studies, though it does at least offer us perhaps the most cheerful first lady in film history. Flirty, funny and fabulously behatted, Rogers' Madison certainly stands out in a gallery of portrayals that range from the tastefully demure – take Elizabeth Banks, who perfectly channelled Laura Bush's carefully pitched blandness in Oliver Stone's otherwise careering Dubya biopic W – to veritable Lady Macbeth in woolen skirt suits. It's certainly hard to think of a first lady much fiercer than Joan Allen's aforementioned Mrs Nixon. She's in just over half an hour of Oliver Stone's sprawling, sometimes scorching 195-minute Nixon, but her steely-sympathetic aura, clouded in stale cigarette smoke, permeates the entire film. Allen plays Pat partly as a resentful, long-suffering afterthought in her husband's life, and partly as a ruthless, invaluable abettor of his worst impulses; Stone's film may be riddled with crossing narrative byways about political process, but Allen makes it most memorably the story of an adoringly toxic marriage. Allen scored a supporting Oscar nomination for her pains, as did Sally Field in Lincoln, though she has a harder time escaping her onscreen husband's imposing shadow – even the scenes of marital dispute in Tony Kushner's densely woven script find Day-Lewis's noble leader wrestling with his own dueling philosophies while his wife objects in the background. That seems deliberate and poignant: after one key argument, Field plaintively collapses to the floor in a sea of crinoline, exasperated by the great man's verbiage. Between the lines, you sense an actor's frustration at being given the defeated end of the scene. Is it possible to outplay Abraham Lincoln, or his thespian impersonator? Greer Garson's Oscar-nominated Eleanor Roosevelt gets a little more rhetorical purchase in the little-remembered but still-sturdy stage adaptation Sunrise at Campobello, as she and a bedridden Franklin D Roosevelt clash with family and advisers over his political future following his paralysis in 1921 – though Roosevelt, like Jackie Kennedy, remains a celebrated first lady more generously documented on TV than on film. Still, spare a thought for poor Mamie Eisenhower, played by Melissa Leo in Lee Daniels' The Butler, a 2013 waxworks parade of 20th-century life in the White House as seen through the eyes of a long-serving butler. Minka Kelly puts in a brief turn as Jackie, while Jane Fonda is a fearsomely shoulder-padded Nancy Reagan – but Leo's Mamie, despite an individual credit in the film's trailer, remains mysteriously Awol from the final film. First ladies have received the short shrift on screen before, but never quite so brusquely. Also cut from Daniels' film was an actorly facsimile of Barack Obama, though the departing president – and crucially, Michelle – got an evenly matched tribute in this year's Southside With You, a winsomely low-key romance dramatising the future first couple's first date, a good-humoured occasion nonetheless marked by breezy intellectual and political sparring, quietly mapping out the ideological path the law-firm colleagues would eventually take together to 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue. Tika Sumpter takes a suitably smart, alert approach to playing history's most modern first lady to date; one wonders if her successor, Melania Trump, will ever be personified quite so coolly (or lit quite so glowingly) on screen. Perhaps a solo portrait as rigorously dedicated as Jackie is in the next first lady's future – paging Kristen Wiig, please – though it's awfully hard to imagine: Larraín's slyly feminist film looks to be an anomaly for some time to come.

There's a lot of talk about Sufism, mythology and the unconscious in the liner notes to this album by the ACT label's latest hotshot piano-trio recruits, and if you endorse Stravinsky's contention that music doesn't mean anything but itself, you could probably pass on those. On content alone, this album by Austrian pianist David Helbock's trio with bass ukulele player Raphael Preuschl and drummer Reinhold Schmolzer mostly accounts for their rising reputation in Europe, give or take the odd slightly selfconscious gesture, such as the clip from Beethoven's Seventh Symphony with a dulcimer-like prepared-piano sound. Otherwise, the ominously building, hooky rocker The Soul is pop-jazzily effective (Neil Cowley comes to mind), Spiritual Monk displays a soft ballad touch and glittering fast fills, a segue between Exodus and the Star Wars theme is both clever and lyrical, Preuschl's Louverture mixes eerie sonics with jazz-swing sprints, A Child Is Born lets the tune tellingly simmer, and world-jazzy rhythm-games such as Masks are effusively catchy. Clearly a very skilful threesome, even if leaning a little toward the showily hyperactive at times.

Michael Howard, the former leader of the Conservative party, has been convicted of failing to say who was driving his car when it was caught breaking the speed limit in south-east London. The Tory peer and his wife, Sandra, told Wimbledon magistrates court that either of them could have been driving their Toyota Prius when a speed camera clocked it travelling at more than 37mph in Lewisham, on 24 January, breaking the road's 30mph speed limit. Howard was fined £900 and ordered to pay £625 costs and a victim surcharge of £90 after being found guilty of failing to give police information relating to the identification of a vehicle. He received six penalty points, which will be added to the three points already on his driving licence for speeding in 2014. The couple had been returning to Westminster from a weekend at their house in Howard's former constituency of Folkestone and Hythe, in Kent, when their car was caught breaking the speed limit. Howard, a QC, fought the case himself, calling his wife as a witness to back up his account. "When I'm with my wife, which is regularly, we have no regular routine," he was quoted as telling the court. "We were driving back from Kent, a journey we make very regularly and who drives depends on circumstances of whether one of us is tired, has work to do or is reading." Asked if he recalled who was driving, Howard was quoted as saying by MailOnline: "I very much wish that I did, unfortunately I don't." His wife told the court: "We were not trying to hide anything. We simply couldn't remember." Howard claimed that because the speeding notification letter had arrived at his home while he and his wife were on holiday in Grenada, he did not open it until three weeks after the offence. "I tried as hard as I could to remember," he said. But prosecutor Andrew Perry said: "Shrugging your shoulders and saying, 'I can't remember,' is not enough." Despite that, district judge Barbara Barnes described the evidence given by both Howard and his wife as credible. "The defendant did speak to his wife to try and remember who was driving. They did rack their brains," she said. Howard said he intended to appeal against the verdict.

As a theoretical physicist based in Cambridge, I have lived my life in an extraordinarily privileged bubble. Cambridge is an unusual town, centred around one of the world's great universities. Within that town, the scientific community that I became part of in my 20s is even more rarefied. And within that scientific community, the small group of international theoretical physicists with whom I have spent my working life might sometimes be tempted to regard themselves as the pinnacle. In addition to this, with the celebrity that has come with my books, and the isolation imposed by my illness, I feel as though my ivory tower is getting taller. So the recent apparent rejection of the elites in both America and Britain is surely aimed at me, as much as anyone. Whatever we might think about the decision by the British electorate to reject membership of the European Union and by the American public to embrace Donald Trump as their next president, there is no doubt in the minds of commentators that this was a cry of anger by people who felt they had been abandoned by their leaders. It was, everyone seems to agree, the moment when the forgotten spoke, finding their voices to reject the advice and guidance of experts and the elite everywhere. I am no exception to this rule. I warned before the Brexit vote that it would damage scientific research in Britain, that a vote to leave would be a step backward, and the electorate – or at least a sufficiently significant proportion of it – took no more notice of me than any of the other political leaders, trade unionists, artists, scientists, businessmen and celebrities who all gave the same unheeded advice to the rest of the country. What matters now, far more than the choices made by these two electorates, is how the elites react. Should we, in turn, reject these votes as outpourings of crude populism that fail to take account of the facts, and attempt to circumvent or circumscribe the choices that they represent? I would argue that this would be a terrible mistake. The concerns underlying these votes about the economic consequences of globalisation and accelerating technological change are absolutely understandable. The automation of factories has already decimated jobs in traditional manufacturing, and the rise of artificial intelligence is likely to extend this job destruction deep into the middle classes, with only the most caring, creative or supervisory roles remaining. This in turn will accelerate the already widening economic inequality around the world. The internet and the platforms that it makes possible allow very small groups of individuals to make enormous profits while employing very few people. This is inevitable, it is progress, but it is also socially destructive. We need to put this alongside the financial crash, which brought home to people that a very few individuals working in the financial sector can accrue huge rewards and that the rest of us underwrite that success and pick up the bill when their greed leads us astray. So taken together we are living in a world of widening, not diminishing, financial inequality, in which many people can see not just their standard of living, but their ability to earn a living at all, disappearing. It is no wonder then that they are searching for a new deal, which Trump and Brexit might have appeared to represent. It is also the case that another unintended consequence of the global spread of the internet and social media is that the stark nature of these inequalities is far more apparent than it has been in the past. For me, the ability to use technology to communicate has been a liberating and positive experience. Without it, I would not have been able to continue working these many years past. But it also means that the lives of the richest people in the most prosperous parts of the world are agonisingly visible to anyone, however poor, who has access to a phone. And since there are now more people with a telephone than access to clean water in sub-Saharan Africa, this will shortly mean nearly everyone on our increasingly crowded planet will not be able to escape the inequality. The consequences of this are plain to see: the rural poor flock to cities, to shanty towns, driven by hope. And then often, finding that the Instagram nirvana is not available there, they seek it overseas, joining the ever greater numbers of economic migrants in search of a better life. These migrants in turn place new demands on the infrastructures and economies of the countries in which they arrive, undermining tolerance and further fuelling political populism. For me, the really concerning aspect of this is that now, more than at any time in our history, our species needs to work together. We face awesome environmental challenges: climate change, food production, overpopulation, the decimation of other species, epidemic disease, acidification of the oceans. Together, they are a reminder that we are at the most dangerous moment in the development of humanity. We now have the technology to destroy the planet on which we live, but have not yet developed the ability to escape it. Perhaps in a few hundred years, we will have established human colonies amid the stars, but right now we only have one planet, and we need to work together to protect it. To do that, we need to break down, not build up, barriers within and between nations. If we are to stand a chance of doing that, the world's leaders need to acknowledge that they have failed and are failing the many. With resources increasingly concentrated in the hands of a few, we are going to have to learn to share far more than at present. With not only jobs but entire industries disappearing, we must help people to retrain for a new world and support them financially while they do so. If communities and economies cannot cope with current levels of migration, we must do more to encourage global development, as that is the only way that the migratory millions will be persuaded to seek their future at home. We can do this, I am an enormous optimist for my species; but it will require the elites, from London to Harvard, from Cambridge to Hollywood, to learn the lessons of the past year. To learn above all a measure of humility. The writer launched www.unlimited.world earlier this year

A new £310m factory in Hull that makes wind turbine blades has been hailed by ministers as proof that manufacturing has a "glittering" future in the UK. The first batch of 75-metre blades have emerged from the plant, part of a vast "green port" built by Siemens and partners at docks that used to export Yorkshire coal. The facility, which started operating in September, is due to employ 1,000 by the new year, up from 700. The investment is considered a huge boost for a port area that had declined into a wasteland and a city with one of the UK's highest unemployment rates. Stephen Brady, the city council's leader, said the plant, combined with Hull being named city of culture for 2017, was a positive "perfect storm". "This place is proof that manufacturing in this country and in this great city has a glittering, hi-tech future," said the business and energy secretary, Greg Clark, at the site's inauguration on Thursday. Everything about Alexandra Docks is big, from the 90-metre turbine towers that stand waiting to be floated out in January to a windfarm off the coast of Cromer, Norfolk, to the blade factory itself, which spans an area the size of seven football pitches. Inside its cavernous halls sit the 28-tonne blades under construction, made of balsa wood and fibreglass. Hundreds will be built there each year, destined for bigger, more powerful offshore windfarms in deeper waters up and down the UK's coast. Surprisingly, the manufacturing process is almost entirely done by hand, rather than robots. The workforce includes former supermarket workers, aerospace industry experts on second careers and builders who learned fibreglass skills locally from fitting bathrooms and making caravan parts. The blades are precisely moulded, finely finished and then painted. "It's a million miles away from a supermarket," said Fiona Wright, 25, who used to work at Asda while studying biomedical science, and now makes the basic structure of the blades atop a mould. Like many of the new employees, she was sent for several weeks to a blade factory in Aalborg, Denmark, for training. "I loved it. It was a great experience," she said of her trip. Ian Deer, 48, used to work at British Aerospace in nearby Brough, where Harrier jump jets were built. "It's a different product but the skills are still the same. It's all hand skills, reading drawings, reading instructions," said Deer, a Siemens group leader with expertise in assembly work in metal, wood and fibreglass. He called the new facility "phenomenal" for the city. Siemens said 97% of staff live within a 30-mile radius of the site, in a riposte to complaints in previous years that the UK wind industry was benefiting only foreign workers. "For all those people that say there is this fear that we have German and Danish people taking away jobs for British people, this has been a perfect example of German and Danish people creating 700 jobs here in the UK," said Juergen Maier, chief executive of Siemens UK. For the next two to three years, the blades built at the site will be shipped to offshore windfarms around planned or under way in the UK, which has more offshore wind power than any country in the world. But the blades from the Hull facility were originally intended for export too, for burgeoning markets in the Netherlands and Belgium. "We are not yet looking at exporting but of course as we get more successful and bring the cost down of the technology [we hope we will export]," said Maier. The full order book for UK windfarms will initially insulate the plant from Brexit, but Maier said it was important that that "punitive" trade tariffs were not imposed as the UK left the EU. "If there are tariffs, it is not particularly helpful." Clark echoed those sentiments. "I want this plant to export," he said. "The ability to trade without tariffs is very important." There is also concern in the industry over what happens if the pipeline of British windfarms begins to dry up in coming years. Due to an overspend in recent years for renewable energy subsidies, partly because existing offshore windfarms were more productive than expected, there is little public money left for new projects in the run-up to 2020. Clarity on support into the next decade was due in the autumn statement, but to the disappointment of many it was bumped to the 2017 budget. However, Clark said investors should be reassured by the government's actions since he was appointed in July, and what he called the administration's "zeal" for clean energy. "There's no disguising, no ambiguity whatever, about the centrality of clean energy that we see not just to our commitments on climate change, vital though they are, and the energy sector, but to industry more generally," he said.

The Guardian Brexit Crackers prize draw (the "Prize Draw") is open to individuals aged 18 and over. The Prize Draw is not open to employees or agencies of Guardian News &amp; Media Limited ("GNM" or the "Promoter"), their group companies or family members, freelance contributors to GNM, or anyone else connected to the Prize Draw. Entrants into the Prize Draw shall be deemed to have accepted these Terms and Conditions. To enter the Prize Draw you must complete all information contained in the form on www.theguardian.com/brexit-crackers and submit. No purchase is necessary. If you have any questions about how to enter or otherwise in connection with the Prize Draw, please email us at brand@theguardian.com with "Guardian Brexit Crackers Prize Draw" in the subject line. Only one entry per person. Entries on behalf of another person will not be accepted and joint submissions are not allowed. You are responsible for the cost (if any) of sending your Prize Draw entry to us. The winners shall be the owners of the email address from which the selected winning entries are sent. GNM accepts no responsibility for entries that are lost, delayed, misdirected or incomplete or cannot be delivered or entered for any technical or other reason. Proof of delivery of the entry is not proof of receipt by GNM. The Prize Draw opens at 00.00 on 2 December 2016 and closes at 23:59 on 9 December 2016. Entries received outside this time period will not be considered. The winners will each receive 1 box of 6 Brexit Crackers. Only one winner per household. GNM accepts no responsibility for any costs associated with the prize that are not expressly included in the prize. The winners will be selected by way of a random draw from all entries received in accordance with these Terms and Conditions. The draw will take place on 12 December 2016. The winners will be notified by email on or after 13 December 2016 and given details of how to claim their prize. If a winner does not respond to GNM within 14 days of being notified of their win, the winner's prize will be forfeited and GNM shall be entitled to select another winner in accordance with the process described above (and that winner will have to respond to notification of their win within 14 days or else they will also forfeit their prize). If a winner rejects their prize or the entry is invalid or in breach of these terms, the winner's prize will be forfeited and GNM shall be entitled to select another winner. The prizes will be posted to the winners by 22 December 2016. The name and county of the winners can be obtained after 13 December 2016 by sending a stamped addressed envelope to the following address: Marketing Department, Guardian News &amp; Media Limited, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. The prizes are non-exchangeable, non-transferable and not redeemable for cash or any other prize. GNM reserves the right to substitute the prize with an alternative prize of similar value in the event that the original prize offered is not available. The winners may be required to take part in promotional activity related to the Prize Draw and the winners shall participate in such activity on the Promoter's reasonable request. The winners consent to the use by the Promoter and its related companies, both before and after the closing date of the Prize Draw for an unlimited time, of the winner's voice, image, photograph and name for publicity purposes (in any medium, including still photographs and films, and on the internet, including any websites hosted by the Promoter and its related companies) and in advertising, marketing or promotional material without additional compensation or prior notice and, in entering the Prize Draw, all entrants consent to the same. The Promoter shall use and take care of any personal information you supply to it as described in its privacy policy, a copy of which can be seen at http://www.theguardian.com/help/privacy-policy, and in accordance with data protection legislation. By entering the Prize Draw, you agree to the collection, retention, usage and distribution of your personal information in order to process and contact you about your Prize Draw entry, and for the purposes outlined in paragraph 12 above. GNM accepts no responsibility for any damage, loss, liabilities, injury or disappointment incurred or suffered by you as a result of entering the Prize Draw or accepting the prize. GNM further disclaims liability for any injury or damage to your or any other person's computer relating to or resulting from participation in or downloading any materials in connection with the Prize Draw. Nothing in these Terms and Conditions shall exclude the liability of GNM under law for fraud or fraudulent misrepresentation, or for death or personal injury resulting from its negligence GNM reserves the right at any time and from time to time to modify or discontinue, temporarily or permanently, this Prize Draw with or without prior notice due to reasons outside its reasonable control (including, without limitation, in the case of anticipated, suspected or actual fraud). The decision of GNM in all matters relating to the Prize Draw is final and no correspondence will be entered into. GNM shall not be liable for any failure to comply with its obligations relating to this Prize Draw where the failure is caused by something outside its reasonable control. Such circumstances shall include, but not be limited to, weather conditions, fire, flood, hurricane, strike, industrial dispute, war, hostilities, political unrest, riots, civil commotion, inevitable accidents, supervening legislation or any other circumstances amounting to force majeure. The Prize Draw and these Terms and Conditions will be governed by English law and entrants to the Prize Draw submit to the exclusive jurisdiction of the English courts. Promoter: Guardian News &amp; Media Limited, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London, N1 9GU.

The French National Assembly has approved a plan to outlaw abortion information websites that masquerade as neutral, official services with freephone helpline numbers but promote anti-abortion propaganda and pressure women not to terminate pregnancies. The Socialist government's proposal seeks to criminalise any websites that deliberately mislead, intimidate or "exert psychological or moral pressure" on a woman seeking information about terminating a pregnancy, with punishment of up to two years in prison and a €30,000 fine. It will now need to pass through the French senate. The issue has sparked a row in recent days, with a Catholic archbishop writing to François Hollande, the president, warning of a threat to freedom of expression. MPs debating the bill heckled each other and complained of vicious insults in committee hearings. France legalised abortion more than 40 years ago and already has a law that makes it a criminal offence to intimate or pressure a woman in order to stop her terminating a pregnancy. This law was initially aimed at anti-abortion protesters in the 1980s who tried to physically obstruct women from accessing clinics or advice centres, and was later extended to anyone exerting moral or psychological pressure on women. The government now wants to extend the law further to include websites, claiming that the anti-abortion battle that used to take place outside clinics has now moved online. A first attempt to pass the new law was blocked by the senate earlier this year. On Thursday the Socialist women's minister, Laurence Rossignol, told parliament that the government was not seeking to clamp down on anti-abortion opinion in general, but on sites that she said deliberately hid their true nature and tried to manipulate women with an "insidious" pressure. "Everyone is free to affirm their hostility to abortion online or anywhere else, but on condition of doing it in all honesty, because freedom of expression can't be confused with manipulating people," she told MPs. "Thirty years ago, campaigners chained themselves to the gates of family planning clinics or operating tables to stop women accessing terminations. Today the next generation continues this battle online." She said anti-abortion groups "now act in a masked way, hidden behind platforms that appear neutral and objective and which copy and compete with official government information sites", thus "deliberately seeking to trick women". She said these sites often had helplines run by "anti-choice activists with no training who want to make women feel guilty and discourage them from seeking an abortion." Rightwing opposition MPs firmly opposed the bill. Dominique Tian, a Republican MP, said there was a "very heavy atmosphere in parliament" and accused the government of "attacking freedom of expression". He said the government's proposals were "dangerous for democracy and probably anti-constitutional", and his party would do all it could to block them. Last week Georges Pontier, the archbishop of Marseille and head of the French bishops' conference, warned Hollande that the plans posed a threat to freedom of expression and "freedom of conscience", and represented "a very serious attack on the principles of democracy". Another bishop said the government was trying to act as "thought police". The issue of abortion also arose during the right's primary race to chose its presidential candidate. François Fillon, who on Sunday won the Republican party's nomination and is now favourite to win the presidency next year, had said earlier this year that because of his personal Christian faith he could not "approve abortion". During his nomination campaign, however, he stressed he would never make any changes to French abortion law.

David Davis has suggested that the government would consider making contributions to the EU budget in exchange for access to the single market, saying his Department for Exiting the EU would consider all options to get the best deal with the bloc. The pound rose after he made his comment in the Commons. See 12.40pm. Tony Blair has announced that he is creating a new organisation to support politicians who are fighting "the new populism of left and right". Explaining his plan on his website he said: This new populism may differ in some respects between left and right – the left anti-business, the right anti-immigrant – but in others what is remarkable is the convergence between them, especially around isolationism and protectionism, in what is an essentially closed-minded approach to globalisation and its benefits and to international engagement. So we want to add a fourth pillar to what we do. I emphasise this is not in place of our other work but in addition to it. This is the creation of a platform designed to build a new policy agenda for the centre ground together with the networks which link people up, and allow a reasonable and evidence based discussion of the future which avoids the plague of social media-led exchanges of abuse. This platform will have a policy unit which will draw on the best ideas and practical solutions, building partnerships with other organisations, in the public policy and private spheres, so that those in the frontline of politics have a bigger and better policy agenda to reflect upon; and a networking capability to join like-minded people up. This is not a think tank. There are enough of those, many doing excellent work we would want to utilise. It is a platform for engagement to inform and support the practising politician. Immigration to Britain hit its highest ever annual level of 650,000 in the run-up to the Brexit referendum, fuelled by record numbers of EU migrants coming to work in "the jobs factory of Europe", new official figures have revealed. Sir Michael Wilshaw, the outgoing Ofsted chief inspector, has linked the Brexit vote to the failure to raise education standards in parts of England. Theresa May wanted children of parents unlawfully in the UK to be dropped to the bottom of lists for school places, according to reports of leaked Cabinet Office letters. Voters have been going to the polls in the Richmond Park byelection. That's all from me for the moment. Tonight I will be blogging from the Richmond Park byelection count. I'll launch the blog at around 10pm and you'll find it here. Thanks for the comments. Ed Balls, the former shadow chancellor and Strictly star, was on the BBC's Victoria Derbyshire show this morning and he told the programme he would "love" to return to politics. He also said that he was not planning a comeback, and that he thought it might not happen, but nevertheless his comments were quite striking. It is a really, really difficult time for the country so it would be foolish for me to pretend that I don't miss it. I miss it very much, but I think maybe I had my time. Once you have been a cabinet minister, you always hanker after having that kind of responsibility and difficulty and public service again. So if I spent the next 15 years never having a chance to do public service again, I would feel as though I'd missed out. I'd love to do that, but how and in what way and where, I don't know and that's OK. I really wanted to be chancellor and I think I probably missed my chance last year and I've not been thinking about being re-elected again because it's a long process. But I'm not going to say to you that I can never imagine it because there is a little part of me that thinks that, having done it once and knowing how hard it is and how important and how people much people depend on you ... If I said to you that there wasn't a bit of me that hankered, that would be untrue, but it is not the plan and I think it is probably the wrong thing, but I don't know. Balls has never categorically ruled out a return to politics in any of the interviews he has given since losing his seat in the 2015 general election, but he has always implied that it is a remote possibility. Today's comments suggest that a comeback of some kind is less unlikely than we assumed. The pound rose in value this morning after David Davis's comment about the government considering paying the EU after leaving for access to the single market, my colleague Graeme Wearden reports. There is a byelection in Richmond Park today. And next week there is another, in Sleaford and North Hykeham. My colleague John Harris has been there to make this video, which is well worth watching. The department for business has put out a press release today about government support for EU postgraduates who are studying in the UK that says "funding support will cover the duration of their course, even if the UK leaves the EU". (My italics.) Does that mean Brexit might not actually mean Brexit? Er, no. The department says it would be wrong to read that as meaning it is planning for the possibility that the UK might not leave the EU. It just seems to be loose drafting. Often cabinet ministers can waltz through an hour of taking questions in the Commons without saying anything of interest, but David Davis, the Brexit secretary, is more willing to engage with questions than some of his colleagues and today's Brexit questions was quite revealing. Here are the key points. Davis said the government may continue to pay the EU after it leaves for access to the single market. Labour's Wayne David asked if the government would consider "making any contribution in any shape or form for access to the single market" after Brexit. Davis replied: The major criterion here is that we get the best possible access for goods and services to the European market. And if that is included in what he's talking about, then of course we will consider it. Davis said that he was opposed to the European commission's plan to conduct the Brexit negotiations in stages. According to Sky News, Michel Barnier, the commission's Brexit negotiator, wants to negotiate a transitional deal with the EU before negotiating a final trade deal. Davis said he was opposed to this. In response to a question from Labour's Pat McFadden about whether the government wanted to negotiate withdrawal from the EU and the final UK-EU trade deal at the same time, Davis replied: The answer is yes. We want to see them both done in parallel, inside the two years. In Brussels jargon the approach Davis is advocating is now known as "parallelism". Later, in response to a question from Labour's Emma Reynolds, Davis confirmed that seeking a transitional deal was still an option. We are seeking to ensure a smooth and orderly exit from the European Union, and it would not be in the interests of either side, Britain or the European Union, to see disruption. To that end, we're examining all possible options, focusing on the mutual interests of the UK and the European Union. But he also restated his opposition to conducting the negotiation in stages. On the subject of whether the negotiation is conducted "in parallel" or "in series", Davis said: We do not accept the "in series" approach. In terms, we've made that plain to the European Union and we need to deal with that before we come to the detailed question of whether there's a transition or not. On transition itself, I just make this important point ... Transition when it's raised by various people means different things. For example, at least one of the Europeans talking about this has effectively meant a much, much longer negotiation period, whilst other people are concerned about matters such as financial stability. The different issues need to be dealt with in different ways. This suggests that Davis might agree to a transitional period if, when it starts, it has already been decide what will happen when it ends, but not if the transitional period is just a means of extending the two-year Brexit negotiation. He said he did not believe reports saying Boris Johnson has told EU ambassadors in private that he personally favours free movement of people. Davis said: What I've seen in the papers this morning strikes me as completely at odds with what I know about [Boris Johnson's] approach to this matter. He believes very clearly, and he made this clear in the leave campaign because he was a much more major part of it than I was, that some immigration is useful. We all believe that. That is not the same as thinking that free movement of people as it now stands is a good idea. Davis said the government expected to see "pretty free movement of highly talented labour". Asked about immigration policy after Brexit he said: The function of my department, and this strategy, is to bring back control of migration to the British government, the British parliament. That will be exercised in the national interest. That means we would expect to see pretty free movement of highly talented labour and, in other aspects of the economy, it is no part of the national interest to cause labour shortages. So I think businesses should be aware, this is not a shutting the door, this is a taking back control. He dismissed reports that the European commission could ask the UK to pay €60bn to leave the EU, saying that was just an "opening bid". When Labour's Matthew Pennycook asked about this, Davis replied: We have seen from the European Union an opening bid - it's nothing more than that - an opening bid for the maximum price on departure from the union. Frankly, I'm not going to engage in chipping way at that bid. We will start from scratch when we go in that door when the negotiations start in March. David Jones, the Brexit minister, said that government had not yet decided what powers repatriated from Brussels would be devolved to Scotland. Jones said it was "extremely difficult" to see how Scotland could stay in the EU single market if the rest of the UK left, despite this being one of the Scottish government's key Brexit objectives. Jones said: I have to say I find it extremely difficult to see how one part of the United Kingdom could remain part of the single market while the rest was not. I would refer you to what the first minister of Wales Carwyn Jones said only the other day, when he said he couldn't see how there could be separate market arrangements between different nations in the UK that share the same land mass. Jones claimed UK regions were a "European construct". In response to a question from fellow Conservative James Duddridge who labelled regions a "pernicious invention", Jones said: Indeed. The regions of course are a European construct and post-Brexit we will be able to choose which parts of our country benefit from Government support. Labour's Jenny Chapman said she did not agree. She told Jones: I can assure him that not where I come from in the North East, they are very much not a European construct, they are something about which we are intensely proud. Here is the key quote where David Davis said the government would consider paying the EU after Brexit for access to the single market. Labour's Wayne David asked if the government would consider "making any contribution in any shape or form for access to the single market" after Brexit. Davis replied: The major criterion here is that we get the best possible access for goods and services to the European market. And if that is included in what he's talking about, then of course we will consider it. Brexit questions is over. I'll post a summary shortly. The DUP's Sammy Wilson asks if Davis is disappointed by Donald Tusk's "petulant" response to the request for an early resolution of the issue about EU nationals in the UK. Davis says that was disappointing. But he is not going to be rude about Tusk. He says over the next two years he intends to be polite to everyone. Davis says he expects to see "pretty free access" to the UK for skilled labour. And the government does not want to create labour shortages, he says. He says the government's focus is on taking back control of immigration. Davis says the government is giving very high priority to achieving tariff-free access to the EU. That could be achieved by a number of methods, he says. Davis says people should be wary of taking economic assumptions underlying a forecast as a statement of what will happen. The SNP's Roger Mullin asks Davis where in the OBR documents it shows the financial bonanza the UK will have after Brexit. Davis says John McDonnell, the shadow chancellor, has spoken about the possible benefits coming to the UK. Sadly Keir Starmer does not agree, Davis says. Labour's Mary Creagh says Andrea Leadsom, the environment secretary, told the environment committee that between a quarter to a third of EU environmental legislation would not be transposed into UK law in the great repeal bill. What will happen to it? Davis says that may require separate primary legislation. The SNP's George Kerevan says Philip Hammond gave strong backing at a speech this week for a transitional deal for the financial sector. Does Davis agree? Davis says he will say when he has seen what Hammond said. But he says what transition means is a moot point. Davis says the hard economic data since the referendum has been better than people expected. The UK is well placed to deal with challenges that may arise from leaving the EU, he says. David Davis says the aim of the government is clear in relation to EU nationals: it wants to guarantee the rights of EU nationals living in the UK, and the rights of Britons living in Europe. Labour's Helen Hayes says the government should unilaterally guarantee the rights of EU nationals living here. Davis says most EU nationals living here already have the right to stay because of how long they have been here. If they have been here two and a half years, they will certainly be able to stay. David Jones, the Brexit minister, says he finds it "extremely difficult to see" how Scotland could remain part of the single market if the rest of the UK was out of the single market. Labour's Emma Reynolds asks about a possible transitional deal. What will the government do if it cannot conclude Brexit talks within two years? David Davis says Theresa May has said we want a smooth and orderly exit. How that occurs will be affected by a number of things. He says the government does not accept the Brussels views that the negotiation will have to take part in stages. The Labour MP Wayne David has tweeted to say that he thinks David Davis's comment about being willing to pay for access to the single market was significant. Davis says the government's preparatory Brexit work covers around 30 separate policy areas. If ministers appeared before select committees to discuss them all, there would not be any time for making policy, he says. Davis says, if the government has to pass a bill after the supreme court judgement, there will be time to get it through parliament before the end of March. David Davis says the government wants to see the EU withdrawal negotiations, and negotiations for a new trade deal with the EU, done in parallel within the two-year withdrawal process. David Davis the supreme court decision on article 50 will not just be a yes/no outcome. The nature of any bill that parliament may have to pass may be decided by the judgment, he says. David Jones, the Brexit minister, tells MPs that the government is still considering what powers repatriated from Brussels will be devolved to Scotland. Sir Keir Starmer says the government says there will be no running commentary on the government's Brexit plans. Yet there is a running commentary, based on leaks and what Boris Johnson is saying. This is damaging. So when will the government set out its plans. Davis says the government has already set out its strategic aims. It does not want to, at this stage at least, go into great detail. The key issue is what's best for Britain, Davis says. Starmer says Davis told MPs recently that the government would reveal in due course whether the government will seek to remain in the customs union. There are just 121 days until article 50 has to be invoked, he says. Davis says 121 days is a long time in policy terms. The government is doing the analysis first before deciding its policy. Starmer will have to wait until the analysis is complete. Davis confirms government is still analysing its Brexit options and has not yet finalised its policy. David Davis says what he has seen in the papers today about Boris Johnson - he is referring to this Sky story - is completely at odds with what Johnson thinks. Johnson thinks some immigration is valuable. But that is not the same as saying that there should be free movement, he says. Davis says Boris Johnson does not support free movement, contrary to claims based on what he allegedly told ambassadors in private. David says we are four months from triggering article 50. That will be the point when the government is very clear about where it is going, he says. David Davis, the Brexit secretary, is responding to questions in the Commons now. Labour's Wayne David asks if the government will consider making any contribution to the EU after Brexit in return for access to the single market. Davis says the government's priority is to get the best possible access to the single market. So if that would involve paying the EU, then the government would consider it. Davis says government considering paying EU for continued access to single market. Labour's Hilary Benn says, in the week when it has has been reported that Boris Johnson is telling ambassadors about the government's plans, does Davis understand why MPs are fed up with not being told about the government's plans. Davis says Benn knows full well that the success of the negotiations depend on keeping things secret. He says the "scribbled note in Downing Street" did not represent government policy. Matthew Pennycook, the shadow Brexit minister, says it has been reported that Britain may have to pay €60bn to leave the EU. How much will the government spend? Davis says that 60bn figure was just an opening bid from Brussels. And here is my colleague Alan Travis's story on the immigration figures. And here is how it starts. Immigration to Britain hit its highest ever annual level of 650,000 in the run-up to the Brexit referendum, new official figures have revealed. But the latest official figures show that since the Brexit vote in June new national insurance registrations by workers from the European Union have fallen, with the largest drop – 17% – among workers from Poland and other east European countries. The latest quarterly figures show that annual net migration to Britain in the 12 months to June 2016 continued at a record level of 335,000, according to the Office of National Statistics. Here is the ONS statistical bulletin with the quarterly migration figures. Here is the first take from the Press Association's story on the immigration figures. Net long-term migration to the UK has remained around record levels at a third of a million as the inflow of EU citizens hit a historic high, official figures show. The headline measure - the overall difference between the numbers arriving and leaving the country - was estimated at 335,000 in the year to June. This was just below the previous peak of 336,000 in the previous year. Immigration, which covers the numbers of people coming into Britain only, was at 650,000 - the highest estimate recorded, the Office for National Statistics said. An unprecedented 284,000 EU citizens are estimated to have arrived in the UK in the year to June, which covers a period up to and just after the referendum, while net migration from the bloc, which excludes UK citizens who went to other EU states, was at 189,000. The migration figures are out. At 335,000, net migration is still more than three times higher than the government's target, 100,000. We have known for a long time that Theresa May has hardline views on immigration - David Cameron reportedly told colleagues that she seemed to be the only person in his cabinet, apart from him, who actually wanted to hit the Tory target of getting net migration below 100,000 - but a leak today sheds new light on her thinking on this topic. Last year May wanted schools to "deprioritise" the children of migrants living in the UK illegally. As letters leaked to the BBC reveal, the education department opposed the idea strongly and it was dropped from the immigration bill. The episode helps to explain why Nicky Morgan, then education secretary, was sacked when May became prime minister. This morning Angela Rayner, the shadow education secretary, has described the proposal as "disgusting" and said it is worrying that May was even considering it. Rayner told the Today programme: It shows that actually Theresa May was not just considering it, her department was pushing it and I'm deeply concerned about it. I think it's a terrible idea. Denying innocent children because of the circumstances of their parents the right to a good education is disgusting, it's not a British value that we have. There will be more on this topic today when the immigration figures come out within the next hour. Here is the agenda for the day. 9.30am: Immigration figures are published. 9.30am: David Davis, the Brexit secretary, takes questions in the Commons. 10am: Sir Michael Wilshaw, the outgoing Ofsted chief inspector, publishes his final report. And people are voting today in the Richmond Park byelection. As usual, I will also be covering the breaking political news as it happens, as well as bringing you the best reaction, comment and analysis from the web. If you want to follow me or contact me on Twitter, I'm on @AndrewSparrow. I try to monitor the comments BTL but normally I find it impossible to read them all. If you have a direct question, do include "Andrew" in it somewhere and I'm more likely to find it. I do try to answer direct questions, although sometimes I miss them or don't have time. Alternatively you could post a question to me on Twitter.

Donald Trump may have been democratically elected president, but there are plenty of people who find this appalling. That nearly 73 million American voters rejected the xenophobia, racism, sexism and hatred that fueled Trump's campaign could be an opportunity – for corporate America. Companies are now faced with the prospect of millions of potential customers willing to boycott brands that associate with the toxic politics of Trumpism or to support those who repudiate them. For many Americans, resisting the normalization of Trumpism includes distancing themselves from the brands that have a real or perceived affiliation with the president-elect. It's no longer enough to simply try and provide products that consumers want while keeping profit margins as high as possible. Corporate America in the age of Trump will have to be aware that a misstep could mean that their brand will be associated with white supremacy, misogyny and xenophobia. (New Balance found this out last month when a company official appeared to support the president-elect and a social media uproar ensued.) Over 50 companies are now being actively boycotted, and as more connections with Trump are made public, we should expect that list to grow. At least six companies have already refused to sell Trump-branded products. Macy's was first taking Trump-branded products off their shelves soon after Trump made his now-infamous Mexican rapist comments. Shoes.com was not far behind in removing Ivanka Trump's footwear line from its site, followed by Bellacor, Wayfair, Zulily, RueLaLa and Stein Mart ditching Trump-branded goods. Others companies are protesting Trump by withholding their ad dollars. Kellogg, Warby Parker, Allstate and a host of other companies have pulled advertisements from Breitbart.com. Breitbart, long known for its antisemitic, racist and misogynistic articles, was co-founded by Steve Bannon, now a Trump White House senior adviser. Even company officials are under scrutiny. Fortune noted in September that no Fortune 100 company CEOs backed Trump, and Silicon Valley bigwig who did donate to a Trump-related organization, Palmer Luckey of Oculus Rift, faced backlash for it. Corporate America would be wise to align itself with the Americans who rejected what Trump stands for. It will prove to be smart for their bottom lines.

Air quality alerts have been issued at bus stops, tube stations and roadsides across London because of high pollution levels, said a spokeswoman for the mayor of London, Sadiq Khan. The alerts will notify Londoners on Thursday evening during their commute home from work. People in London who suffer from lung or heart problems have been warned to avoid strenuous exercise. The risks from heightened levels of air pollution enveloping the city have been exacerbated by settled and cold conditions, which have prevented pollutants from being dispersed. Individuals at risk have been warned to particularly avoid outdoor exercise, while those with asthma may need to use their inhaler more often, according to the London Air Quality Network, based at King's College University. Anyone from the wider population who experiences sore eyes, a cough or sore throat should also consider reducing their physical activity, particularly outdoors, the pollution monitoring service said. Air pollution campaigners called on the government and city authorities to restrict traffic during smog episodes. "When pollution episodes are high, the mayor should introduce emergency traffic restrictions to bring pollution levels down quickly," said a spokeswoman for Friends of the Earth. "The solutions proposed for dealing with the latest smog have things backwards: the first step should be restricting traffic not people. "It's outrageous that those with vulnerable lungs, including children and the elderly, are told to stay at home when the air is bad. Everyone should be able to go about their business, without being afraid of the air they breathe." According to the London Air Quality Network, winter smogs are formed when pollutants from traffic and industry are trapped at ground level because of a temperature inversion. The pollution is a mix of ultra-fine particulates of unburned carbon, known as PM2.5s, and the toxic gas nitrogen dioxide (NO2) which is largely created by diesel cars, lorries and buses. Thursday's pollution episode took place on the same day as Nice, the government's independent health advisers, proposed that councils in England should be given powers to set up clean-air zones. This would allow them to restrict certain vehicles entering some areas. About 9,500 people die early each year in London due to long-term exposure to air pollution, more than twice as many as previously thought, according to new research. Air pollution is now Britain's most lethal environmental risk, killing about 40,000 people prematurely each year. Air pollution monitors showed high or very high pollution along all major London roads, with extremely high pollution recorded in the city centre. On Thursday, a Defra pollution monitor on Marylebone Road also registered very high levels. Khan made tackling London's air pollution a priority issue in his election campaign. This summer he announced his intention to issue alerts for high pollution. However, there have been no incidents of particularly high pollution until now. Khan said: "Londoners need to know when the city is suffering from high pollution levels so they can take any necessary appropriate measures to protect themselves from poor air quality. This is particularly crucial for Londoners who are vulnerable, such as asthma sufferers."

A renewal of a longstanding dialogue for Manchester's guitar giants, the former Cinematic Orchestra sideman Stuart McCallum, and Salford's bluesy world-class virtuoso Mike Walker – largely a lyrical conversation (with a little string-quartet help) savouring the contours of seductive themes by the participants, as well as by Bacharach, Beethoven and Debussy. Walker's power to soar thrillingly out of a deceptively cool groove to rock-blues wails is soon evident, as he bursts from folk-guitar hints of the Ode to Joy and the pattering electronic pulse of the opener. Alfie is left respectfully unbent in a tender acoustic duet, the folk dance of Yewfield has a spaciously Pat Metheny-like country feel, and McCallum plays Debussy's String Quartet in G minor not as a strings feature but a reharmonised and flawlessly crafted solo. The McCallum ballad As the Trees Waltz has its poignant theme creatively swept up by Walker, and the latter uncorks the set's fiercest electric outburst on the rolling, Indian-inflected Sky Dancer. A treat of an album for guitaristas, maybe a little mellow for some jazzers.

A constitutional row over devolution has erupted ahead of next week's article 50 case in the supreme court, setting the attorney generals in London and Belfast at odds with their counterparts in Cardiff and Edinburgh. A submission by the Westminster government's legal team has dismissed Scottish and Welsh arguments that triggering article 50 of the Lisbon treaty will diminish the legislative powers of their administrations. When the case opens in the supreme court next week those seeking to assert their authority will include the counsel general for Wales, Mick Antoniw, who is a Labour member of the Welsh assembly; James Wolffe QC, Scotland's lord advocate; John Larkin QC, attorney general for Northern Ireland; and the attorney general for England and Wales, Jeremy Wright QC, who is a Conservative MP. The main thrust of the legal dispute is over whether the government's executive powers, derived from the royal prerogative, trump parliamentary sovereignty in terms of triggering the UK's departure from the EU. The question of whether Brexit can take place without the devolved assemblies' agreement will, however, also be raised. The supplementary skeleton argument released by the Westminster government on Thursday states: "The devolution legislation expressly does not give competence to the devolved legislatures or administrations over the conduct of foreign affairs, including relations with the EU. The prerogative power to withdraw from treaties is deliberately unaffected ... no issue concerning the Sewel convention arises in this case because there is no legislation before the court. This case concerns the proper use of the prerogative." The Sewel convention says that the UK parliament may not legislate for devolved matters without the consent of the devolved legislature. The submission by Wright and his legal team continues: "The [supreme] court is being invited by the lord advocate and the counsel general to stray into areas of political judgment rather than legal adjudication. The court should resist that invitation, particularly where the underlying issue is one of considerable political sensitivity." The position adopted by Larkin, that the article 50 case does not raise any devolution issues even in relation to the Good Friday agreement, was praised by Wright. In a footnote the document refer to "the considerable repetition by the lord advocate and counsel general of submissions". At another point it quibbles over the Welsh and Scottish approaches, saying: "That [Welsh] argument, in contrast to that of the lord advocate, at least has the merit of focusing on the issue of use of the prerogative, which is the issue before the court." Skeleton arguments, submitted to judges before court hearings, sometimes do contain personally dismissive asides. The tone of some of the language in Wright's submission has, however, drawn sharp comment, including from Sir Paul Jenkins QC, a former head of the government legal department. Jolyon Maugham QC tweeted: "Translated from lawyer, para 39 says the Welsh assembly is wrong but, unlike the Scottish government, at least is not stupid to boot."

An Iranian musician who is serving a three-year prison sentence for distribution of underground music has been taken to hospital after one month on hunger strike. Mehdi Rajabian was released on furlough from Tehran's notorious Evin prison at the end of last week but has since been taken to Buali hospital in the province of Mazandaran, where he is originally from. The Guardian understands that the judicial authorities have asked for him to return to Evin by Sunday despite his deteriorating condition. He was jailed in June alongside his brother, Hossein Rajabian, a 31-year-old film-maker, who has also been given a three-year jail sentence. A three-minute trial in 2015 found the brothers and their musician friend, Yousef Emadi, 35, guilty of "insulting Islamic sanctities", "spreading propaganda against the system" and "illegal audio-visual activities". It is not clear if Emadi has also been summoned to prison to serve his jail term. The three men worked in the same office in Sari before their initial arrest in October 2013. The two brothers embarked on a hunger strike more than a month ago and have refrained from eating any food, although they have been forced to drink water from time to time. Hossein Rajabian remains in Evin prison, where the condition of his health is unknown. Philip Luther, research and advocacy director for Amnesty International's Middle East and North Africa programme, has criticised their imprisonment. "Expressing yourself through art is not a crime and it is outrageous that the Iranian authorities have resorted to locking up artists and musicians simply for their artistic work," he said. "Mehdi and Hossein Rajabian are prisoners of conscience who shouldn't be forced to spend a single minute behind bars. The Iranian authorities must order their immediate and unconditional release." The three artists were first sentenced to six years in jail but the appeals court subsequently commuted the sentences to three years in jail with a further three years suspended, conditional on their "good behaviour". They have also each been ordered to pay a fine of 200m rials (£4,500). "Their imprisonment is yet another nail in the coffin for freedom of expression in Iran," Luther said. "The human right to liberty is sadly so undervalued by the Iranian authorities that they are prepared to condemn individuals to years in jail just to silence artistic voices that they deem as 'anti-Islamic' and 'anti-revolutionary'." The Rajabian brothers' arrest is part of the hardline judiciary's clampdown on those who defy the permitted norms. Last week, the authorities locked up a 29-year-old human rights activist and campaigner, Atena Daemi, to serve her seven-year sentence. "Daemi is a prominent activist in the field of children's rights as well as a vocal opponent of the death penalty," according to the New York-based international campaign for human rights in Iran (ICHRI). "She was arrested on 21 October 2014 by the [elite Revolutionary Guards'] intelligence organisation and accused of meeting families of political prisoners, criticising the Islamic Republic on Facebook and condemning the 1988 mass execution of political prisoners." The artistic freedom news website artsfreedom.org published a letter by the Rajabians sent from prison last month in which they pleaded for solidarity from world artists. The brothers said the authorities separated them in prison, which led to them starting their hunger strike. "This separation and keeping us apart caused us great mental, physical and financial distress," they wrote. "This went so far that we eventually went on a hunger strike, which led to both of our pre-existing illnesses to worsen." Mehdi Rajabian suffers from muscular dystrophy, which he has allegedly developed after facing rigorous interrogations. They also wrote: "The most peculiar thing of all is that through all of this we have been denied our legal rights to see an attorney." The brothers did not have access to lawyers while being interrogated, nor during the course of their trial.

La La Land, Damien Chazelle's musical ode to Hollywood starring Emma Stone and Ryan Gosling, continues its quickstep towards the Oscars by dominating nominations for the Broadcast Film Critics Association Critics' Choice awards. The film, about the relationship difficulties of a jazz pianist and aspiring movie star, took 12 nods, including best picture, director, actor and actress. Trailing by two nominations were Arrival, the Amy Adams-starring story of the linguistic fallout from an alien invasion, and Moonlight, Barry Jenkins's story of a young black gay man at three stages of life. Also landing best picture nominations were Fences, Hacksaw Ridge, Hell or High Water, Lion, Loving, Sully and Manchester by the Sea – which topped the National Board of Review's poll of the best film of the year earlier this week. There was space for glitzier, more mainstream movies in the 27 categories, including Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice (which landed a nod for Gal Gadot) and Suicide Squad (whose Margot Robbie was honoured. The winners will be announced at a ceremony on 11 December. The full list of nominations Best picture Arrival Fences Hacksaw Ridge Hell or High Water La La Land Lion Loving Manchester by the Sea Moonlight Sully Best director Damien Chazelle (La La Land) Mel Gibson (Hacksaw Ridge) Barry Jenkins (Moonlight) Kenneth Lonergan (Manchester by the Sea) David Mackenzie (Hell or High Water) Denis Villeneuve (Arrival) Denzel Washington (Fences) Best actor Casey Affleck (Manchester by the Sea) Joel Edgerton (Loving) Andrew Garfield (Hacksaw Ridge) Ryan Gosling (La La Land) Tom Hanks (Sully) Denzel Washington (Fences) Best actress Amy Adams (Arrival) Annette Bening (20th Century Women) Isabelle Huppert (Elle) Ruth Negga (Loving) Natalie Portman (Jackie) Emma Stone (La La Land) Best supporting actor Mahershala Ali (Moonlight) Jeff Bridges (Hell or High Water) Ben Foster (Hell or High Water) Lucas Hedges (Manchester by the Sea) Dev Patel (Lion) Michael Shannon (Nocturnal Animals) Best supporting actress Viola Davis (Fences) Greta Gerwig (20th Century Women) Naomie Harris (Moonlight) Nicole Kidman (Lion) Janelle Monáe (Hidden Figures) Michelle Williams (Manchester by the Sea) Best young actor/actress Lucas Hedges (Manchester by the Sea) Alex R Hibbert (Moonlight) Lewis MacDougall (A Monster Calls) Madina Nalwanga (Queen of Katwe) Sunny Pawar (Lion) Hailee Steinfeld (The Edge of Seventeen) Best adapted screenplay Luke Davies (Lion) Tom Ford (Nocturnal Animals) Eric Heisserer (Arrival) Todd Komarnicki (Sully) Allison Schroeder, Theodore Melfi (Hidden Figures) August Wilson (Fences) Best original screenplay Damien Chazelle (La La Land) Barry Jenkins (Moonlight) Yorgos Lanthimos/Efthimis Filippou (The Lobster) Kenneth Lonergan (Manchester by the Sea) Jeff Nichols (Loving) Taylor Sheridan (Hell or High Water) Best cinematography Arrival (Bradford Young) Jackie (Stéphane Fontaine) La La Land (Linus Sandgren) Moonlight (James Laxton) Nocturnal Animals (Seamus McGarvey) Best costume design Allied (Joanna Johnston) Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them (Colleen Atwood) Florence Foster Jenkins (Consolata Boyle) Jackie (Madeline Fontaine) La La Land (Mary Zophres) Love &amp; Friendship (Eimer Ní Mhaoldomhnaigh) Best editing Arrival (Joe Walker) Hacksaw Ridge (John Gilbert) La La Land (Tom Cross) Moonlight (Nat Sanders, Joi McMillon) Sully (Blu Murray) Best hair &amp; makeup Doctor Strange Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them Hacksaw Ridge Jackie Star Trek Beyond Best production design Arrival (Patrice Vermette, Paul Hotte, André Valade) Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them (Stuart Craig, James Hambidge, Anna Pinnock) Jackie (Jean Rabasse, Véronique Melery) La La Land (David Wasco, Sandy Reynolds-Wasco) Live By Night (Jess Gonchor, Nancy Haigh) Best score Arrival (Jóhann Jóhannsson) Jackie (Mica Levi) La La Land (Justin Hurwitz) Moonlight (Nicholas Britell) Lion (Dustin O'Halloran, Hauschka) Best song Audition (The Fools Who Dream) from La La Land City of Stars from La La Land How Far I'll Go from Moana Can't Stop the Feeling! from Trolls The Rules Don't Apply from Rules Don't Apply Drive It Like You Stole It from Sing Street Best visual effects Arrival Doctor Strange Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them The Jungle Book A Monster Calls Best animated feature Finding Dory Kubo and the Two Strings Moana The Red Turtle Trolls Zootopia Best foreign language film Elle The Handmaiden Julieta Neruda The Salesman Toni Erdmann Best acting ensemble Fences Hell or High Water Hidden Figures Manchester by the Sea Moonlight 20th Century Women Best action movie Captain America: Civil War Deadpool Doctor Strange Hacksaw Ridge Jason Bourne Best actor in an action movie Benedict Cumberbatch (Doctor Strange) Matt Damon (Jason Bourne) Chris Evans (Captain America: Civil War) Andrew Garfield (Hacksaw Ridge) Ryan Reynolds (Deadpool) Best actress in an action movie Gal Gadot (Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice) Scarlett Johansson (Captain America: Civil War) Margot Robbie (Suicide Squad) Tilda Swinton (Doctor Strange) Best comedy Central Intelligence Deadpool Don't Think Twice The Edge of Seventeen Hail, Caesar! The Nice Guys Best actor in a comedy Ryan Gosling (The Nice Guys) Hugh Grant (Florence Foster Jenkins) Dwayne Johnson (Central Intelligence) Viggo Mortensen (Captain Fantastic) Ryan Reynolds (Deadpool) Best actress in a comedy Kate Beckinsale (Love &amp; Friendship) Sally Field (Hello, My Name Is Doris) Kate McKinnon (Ghostbusters) Hailee Steinfeld (The Edge of Seventeen) Meryl Streep (Florence Foster Jenkins) Best sci-fi/horror movie Arrival Doctor Strange Don't Breathe Star Trek Beyond 10 Cloverfield Lane The Witch

My friend Michael McGinty, a soldier, teacher and remarkable man, who has died aged 73, was once asked at an interview if he wasn't a little on the old side for a teaching job at a college in China. He was in his mid-60s at the time. "See that running track out there," he said to his youthful interviewer. "I'll beat you comfortably over a couple of laps." The interviewer agreed to the challenge. Michael proved his point and was given the job. Although he was very fit, he never quite regained the full strength that he had enjoyed before the train crash near Selby, North Yorkshire, in 2001. It almost claimed his life and led indirectly to a late career in teaching. Michael was born in Glasgow and brought up in Pumpherston, West Lothian, the son of Neil, a crane driver, and his wife, Catherine. He joined the British army at the age of 15 and became a sergeant in the Parachute Regiment, undertaking more than 2,000 jumps. He spent 20 years in the army. During the following two decades his working experiences, as an airport baggage handler in Manchester and later as head porter at a London hospital, were not untypical of many men after leaving the forces. In his late 30s he took up running, and completed 200 marathons, with a best time of around two hours 40 minutes. On one occasion, when a cab driver failed to pick up him up in Didsbury for the Manchester marathon, he ran five miles to the city centre startline. His life changed dramatically with the Selby crash, which claimed 10 lives. Michael was working at Ashford hospital, Middlesex, at the time and was returning from a trip to see his family. More than three years after the accident, he was still seeing consultants about the complex shoulder fractures he received. It took a similar period to win medical retirement. Michael's engaging personality enabled him to maintain a huge network of friends. He also had a tough streak. After the crash he rebuilt his physical fitness, did a degree in international politics and history at Aberystwyth University, and spent 10 years as an English teacher in China before a cancer diagnosis forced him to return to West Calder, Scotland. Michael was a lifelong fan of the Bhoys. One of his daughters has Celtic as her second name, for which she has forgiven him. He married Mary Sarsfield, a home carer, in 1966. Army life took its toll on their marriage but the couple remained on good terms after they split up. He is survived by his two daughters, Bernadette and Kathleen, and nine grandchildren.

After a day of rain slowed down raging fires in Tennessee, local officials began a cleanup on Thursday as thousands of evacuees hoped to return to their homes. The fires raged for two days, ravaging the Great Smoky Mountains and the town of Gatlinburg, killing seven people and leaving dozens more injured. The Southern Area Incident Management Team said on Wednesday that only ten percent of the fire had been contained and the day of rain was not enough to put out the flames completely. "Fire activity will increase until significant rainfall is received over several days," the team said in a statement. "The rain we received may have slowed this fire for a day or two at a critical time, but the threat from this fire is still there." Seven hundred buildings throughout Sevier County were destroyed in the fire, including some homes of the more than 14,000 people who were evacuated since Monday. Mike Werner, the mayor of the popular resort town of Gatlinburg who also lost his home in the fire, said the city may be opened on Friday to allow victims to evaluate the damage to their homes. One of the seven people killed in the fire was 70-year-old Alice Hagler, according to local outlet WBIR. Her son, James Wood, told the station he received a frantic phone call from her on Monday evening. "My mother called me frantically that the house was on fire, yelling that the house was on fire, and I told her to get out of the house," Wood said. "I made my best to get to her ... The fires were absolutely, entirely impossible to get through up on Wiley Oakley Road. I did make it to the road, but two miles up I couldn't make it any further." Three people who were trapped in the fires were rescued on Wednesday, as the search and rescue operation continued. The Southern Area Team Management said in its statement the fire was "human caused" and began on 23 November in a remote part of the park which was difficult for firefighters to access. The fire was exacerbated by strong winds and extremely dry conditions due to an ongoing drought which has afflicted southern states and made conditions ripe for wildfires in Tennessee, Georgia and North Carolina. A telethon by the Red Cross Tennessee has so far raised $47,000, the emergency response group said on Thursday. Dolly Parton, who is from the area and whose DollyWood theme park is located nearby, also joined the fundraising efforts by creating her own fund. In a video released on Wednesday evening, Parton said the My People's Fund had been created through The Dollywood Company and The Dollywood Foundation with the hopes of providing $1,000 per month to families who lost their homes in the fire. Dollywood, the theme park in the area named after the country music singer, was relatively unharmed by the wildfires. "I have always believed that charity begins at home," Parton said in a statement. "We want to provide a hand up to those families who have lost everything in the fires ... until they get back up on their feet."

The chancellor, Philip Hammond, has ruled out any prospect of Scotland winning special concessions on trade or immigration in the Brexit deal, despite its strong vote in June to remain in the EU. On a visit to Edinburgh, Hammond appeared to chide Nicola Sturgeon, Scotland's first minister, for pursuing a more favourable deal for Scotland. "I look forward to us moving on from this slightly backward-looking, clutching at straws, trying to resist the will of the people to embracing it, recognising it's going to happen and committing to work together to make sure it's done in a way that is most supportive of the United Kingdom economy and the Scottish economy," he said. Sturgeon's officials suggested that his stance directly contradicted a pledge by Theresa May to listen carefully to Scottish proposals and ensuring the Scottish government was "fully engaged" in the discussions on the UK's Brexit proposals. In the strongest rejection yet of the Scottish National party's goal from a cabinet minister, Hammond said it was unrealistic to think Scotland could negotiate its own terms or expect a different outcome from the rest of the UK. "This is a United Kingdom issue and the will of the people of the United Kingdom was to leave," he told reporters shortly before holding talks with Sturgeon. "We're clear that we can't have a different deal or a different outcome for different parts of the United Kingdom." Even so, Hammond hinted very heavily he favoured a soft Brexit, stressing that he wanted the UK to be open minded and make concessions to get the best EU deal. "It has to work for both sides; if it doesn't work for both sides, then it won't get done," Hammond said. "And we should be flexible and open-minded about how we put that deal together." Speaking during first ministers' questions, Sturgeon said: "I am absolutely consistent on the question of the single market: the United Kingdom should stay in the single market. There is no mandate or economic, social or cultural justification for taking the UK out of the single market. I will make that point to Philip Hammond this afternoon, as I have made that point to the prime minister and others in the UK government." After the first minister and Hammond met, her spokesman said the chancellor had reiterated May's offer to study Sturgeon's plan but refused to get drawn on Hammond's earlier remarks to reporters. "The chancellor said he looked forward to hearing our proposals on Scotland's place in Europe and that they will be considered fully by the UK government – in line with the specific undertaking given to the first minister by the prime minister when they met in Edinburgh in July," the spokesman said. Sturgeon is preparing a detailed options paper on how Scotland could win a more favourable EU deal, particularly on extra rights within the single market and tailored immigration powers, which is due for publication before Christmas. Options including special Scottish passports, a special deal with the European free trade area and extra immigration powers have all been floated. After a series of tours to other EU capitals, including Dublin earlier this week, Sturgeon has campaigned vigorously to build up her case that Scotland's strong pro-EU vote, by 62% to 38% in favour of remain, deserved special recognition. Sturgeon has sought to build a cross-party consensus on that stance but the latest opinion polls suggest while Scottish voters remain strong supporters of EU membership, they are ambivalent about her strategy and pessimistic about her chances of succeeding. A YouGov poll for the Times this week found 42% agreed with her stance and 41% opposed it, not counting those who did not know. Only 22% of voters thought a special EU deal would be achievable. It suggests support for a fast second independence referendum is also receding, with only 31% agreeing that Sturgeon should campaign for independence before the UK leaves the EU in 2019 with 56% against. Even among those who voted yes in the 2014 independence referendum, it only got 60% support. Hammond said the UK was keen to collaborate with the devolved administrations in Edinburgh, Cardiff and Stormont but only to arrive at a unified, collective deal which "secures the best possible deal for all parts of the United Kingdom". It would be impractical at the UK level to have more generous immigration to Scotland than in other areas, he claimed, adding that it would be counterproductive for Scotland to have different trading deals with the EU and the rest of the UK, adding extra tariffs or costs, given that Scotland's trade within the UK was four times larger. Despite his complete rejection of any compromises for Scotland, Hammond repeatedly insisted the UK was entitled to pursue a flexible deal with the EU and its member states, so long as the UK itself was flexible. He said that David Davis, the UK's Brexit secretary, was "absolutely right" to suggest that a deal could include the UK paying the EU for some form of access to the single market. Hammond said the UK had to go into the talks with "as many tools in our tool box as possible ... You can't go into any negotiation expecting to get every single objective that you set out and concede nothing on the way. It will have to be a deal that works for both sides. I think David Davis is absolutely right not to rule out the possibility that we might want to contribute in some way to some form of mechanism."

I heard pianist Ethan Iverson at London's Vortex club in 2013, playing enthrallingly lateral bebop without his band the Bad Plus, and this album with former Miles Davis bass supremo Ron Carter and artful New York freebop drummer Nasheet Waits is that and then some, like a Thelonious Monk trio that's time-travelled through hip-hop and avant-funk. Iverson's lurchingly Monkish title track sounds like stretched and squeezed fragments of Rhythm-a-ning. Waits mixes floating snare tattoos and clipped swing into Benny Golson's Along Came Betty, as the patient leader assembles new melody lines with trenchant invention, in solos that sound increasingly like purposeful narratives and not chord-cycles as the set progresses. Carter's big-toned walk and slurred chords drive the bebop classic Confirmation, Iverson tenderly handles Waits's pretty ballad Kush, the pounding Strange Serenade is the most Bad Plus-like track, and Annette Peacock's So Hard It Hurts, a tribute to the late Paul Bley, is a dirgey, barely mobile solo-piano finale. An album of delightfully rugged character, as might be expected from the lineup.

Bodybuilders seeking to enhance their physique by injecting natural oils risk lasting damage and even death, doctors have warned. They fear that a case in west London in which a 25-year-old man suffered scarring and restricted function after injecting coconut oil may be the "tip of the iceberg". Instances have been recorded in recent years of bodybuilders using other oils, including sesame oil, walnut oil and paraffin, which are less costly than other synthetic compounds, in the hope of boosting muscle size and definition. There has been little medical literature on the subject to date, but a paper published in BMJ Case Reports on Thursday says the practice is well documented among Arab and Middle Eastern communities and online. The 25-year-old man was referred to Ealing hospital because of pain and loss of function in his right arm, into which he had injected the coconut oil over several months. An ultrasound scan showed a rupture in his triceps – a rare condition in young patients – and multiple cysts within the arm muscles. Surgery to repair the rupture was successful but he was left with scarring and limited elbow flexion. Dr Ajay Sahu, of London North West Healthcare NHS trust, who co-authored the report, said: "He has lost significant function in his tricep and he's right-handed. If he had injected the coconut oil into one of his veins by mistake it could have been fatal. It could cause an embolism in the heart, the lungs or the brain. You need to think about the implications." Sahu said the case was difficult to diagnose because the patient did not initially admit what he had done, and Sahu was not aware at the time that injecting natural oils was something people did to try to build muscle. He suggested resort to such drastic measures was symptomatic of increasing concern among young men about how they look. "People do all sorts of things [to gain muscle] and these things are very unreported," he said. "These people will never come to the doctor and say all the things they do. This is just the tip of the iceberg."

A professional violinist has been jailed for conning more than £300,000 out of well-wishers by pretending that she had cancer. Bethan Doci, 38, claimed she needed the money for her treatment, but was fit and well and instead funded a lavish lifestyle including holidays abroad, luxury cars and expensive handbags. Doci, who has performed with the Royal Shakespeare Company and with orchestras around the world, cheated one man out of his life savings, Swansea crown court was told. Jailing Doci for 32 months, the judge, Keith Thomas, said: "You committed these offences in a callous and heartless manner, saying you were suffering from cancer and needed treatment which you couldn't afford. You took the money but used it on a lavish lifestyle." Thomas said her treatment of a retired chartered accountant, Liam Donnelly, 64, whose wife had died from cancer and who handed over £170,000 to help Doci, was especially harsh. "Your victims were devastated, especially Mr Donnelly, who you treated particularly cruelly by taking all his life savings," the judge said. The court heard that Doci had no assets left, having spent all the money, and she was ordered to repay a nominal £1 in compensation. Doci, who used the professional name Bethan Morgan, wept as she was led away. As well as Donnelly, Doci duped retired businessman Bruce Pilley, 58, out of £168,000, and former Royal Navy officer Neil McKelvie, 56, out £30,000 after advertising her fake illness on the Craigslist website. Doci, who lived in a riverside apartment in Swansea, admitted 11 counts of fraud from 2010-13. Catherine Richards, prosecuting, said Doci provided those who expressed a desire to help with false doctor's notes. Richards said: "Her lies and deception became more and more elaborate." Paul Spreadborough, defending, said: "She was gaining a professional reputation as a violinist and was a dedicated performer. But she was caught in a classic spiral of lies, debt and deceit. She fell into a pattern and fell deeper and deeper." After the case, Supt Kath Pritchard described the investigation as "complex and protracted". She said: "Thanks to the overwhelming evidence against Bethan Morgan, she pleaded guilty, which is testament to the tenacity and professionalism of our detectives. Bethan Doci/Morgan had a total disregard for her victims, who all trusted her. I hope her victims find some comfort in today's outcome, which also sends out a clear message to criminals intent on committing fraudulent offences." A spokesman for the Crown Prosecution Service said: "She exploited the trust, emotional vulnerabilities and generosity of ... persons whom she met on the internet. Her conduct amounted to a calculated protracted web of deceit to fund her lavish lifestyle and foreign travel. A thorough and lengthy investigation revealed the breadth of her crime and a number of victims. "We hope her conviction and sentence provide some solace to those who were betrayed and suffered as a result of her crime, and we hope it deters others from committing like offences."

Right, that's all for today. A quick recap. December has got off to a lively start in the financial markets, with big moves in the commodity and foreign exchange arenas. Traders have driven the oil price sharply higher for the second day running. Brent crude has hit its highest level since October 2015, jumping by almost 5% to $54.31 per barrel. Despite questions over compliance, yesterday's Opec deal is being seen as a real game-changer that could push prices higher - meaning fresh inflationary pressures and higher prices at the petrol pumps. The pound has also romped higher today, after Brexit minister David Davis offered the tantalising prospect of the UK paying to access the EU single market. The comments, made in parliament, fuelled hopes that Britain might avoid a 'hard Brexit'. Sterling hit two-month highs, before dipping a little -- and is currently up 0.5% at $1.257. Government bonds have also sold off today, driving up the yield on benchmark US debt. UK borrowing costs also rose, with the yield on 10-year gilts up from 1.5% to 1.51%. And European stock markets have closed in the red: FTSE 100: down 30 points at 6752, -0.45% German DAX: down 106 points at 10534, -1% French CAC: down 17 points at 4560, -0.4% Investors are fretting about Sunday's Italian referendum on constitutional reforms, and Austria's presidential election (between a far-right candidate and a Green). Get swotting up now! Over on Wall Street, machine and equipment firm Caterpillar briefly suspended its shares today so it could warn that analysts profit expectations are 'too optimistic'. Caterpillar cited various headwinds, such as Brexit uncertainty, Europe's slow recovery and volatility in the oil price. It also warned that any infrastructure programme from Donald Trump probably wouldn't help its earnings in 2017. This is the key slide from its presentation to analysts: Caterpillar's share price has been rising for weeks, on speculation that Trump's plans to upgrade America's highways, airports and schools will mean more demand for its diggers and trucks. But Wall Street isn't too worried by today's warning; Caterpillar's shares have resumed trading, up 0.25% on the day. Now this is interesting....oil giant BP has signed off on a $9bn project to expand its Mad Dog oil field in the U.S. Gulf of Mexico. The decision follows extensive work bringing the cost of the project down (at one stage, it was going to cost $20bn). And it shows that oil firms are prepared to invest in new projects, if they think the oil price makes it worthwhile. BP chief executive Bob Dudley says: "This announcement shows that big deepwater projects can still be economic in a low price environment in the US if they are designed in a smart and cost-effective way. "It also demonstrates the resilience of our strategy which is focused on building on incumbent positions in the world's most prolific hydrocarbon basins while relentlessly focusing on value over volume." But.... BP can never shake off memories of an earlier project in the Gulf, the Deepwater Horizon disaster at the Macondo oil field in 2010. Eleven workers were killed when the rig caught fire, creating one of the worst environmental disasters ever. Central Bank news! Agustin Carstens, head of the Bank of Mexico, has resigned. Carstens, one of the world's most experienced central bankers, has been appointed to run the Bank of International Settlements (BIS is basically the central bankers' central bank). He will leave the Bank of Mexico in July 2017, and start at BIS three months later. Carstens deserves a change of job, having been battling to handle the impact of Donald Trump's pronouncements on the Mexican Peso. Bloomberg's Michael McDonough says the news adds extra uncertainty, with Mexico already expected to hike interest rates next month: The top rung of central banking is a little like Formula 1 -- with a small number of candidates moving between a limited number of seats. So Carstens' appointment may have a knock-on effect on the European Central Bank; board member Benoît Cœuré could possible have got the BIS job, but is now free for other challenges... Boom! The Brent crude oil price has just hit its highest level of the year. A barrel of Brent for February delivery just changed hands at $53.79, which is the most expensive since October 2015. Opec's surprise supply cut is forcing traders to rapidly reassess their expectations. Jane Sydenham, investment director at Rathbone Investment Management, calls it a 'knee jerk' reaction to yesterday's deal: "Whilst at present the news is good for the markets, it is much more difficult to say how this will play out in the longer term. We're currently experiencing a knee-jerk reaction, unsurprising since this is the biggest co-ordinated action in eight years. It is likely that this will run on for a little while longer but how the markets price in the unexpected oil inflation is something we are yet to see." Former cabinet minister Iain Duncan Smith, who campaigned for Brexit, has criticised the idea that Britain might make payments to the EU after leaving the bloc. He was responding to David Davis's suggestion that the UK would consider the idea. PA has the story: Prominent Brexit-backer Iain Duncan Smith claimed Mr Davis had given a "convoluted" answer and may have been talking about "bridging arrangements" to phase out UK contributions to the EU. The former cabinet minister insisted there was no way of reaching a deal to pay the EU for access to the single market. He told BBC Radio 4's The World At One: "My sense is that I don't think that he was absolutely answering the question that was posed to him. "What he's talking about here is how do you get a deal that allows British and Europeans to access each others' markets without the necessity of tariff barriers or artificial barriers against service etc. "I don't think there's any way in which you can reach a deal whereby you say 'I'll pay some money in and therefore you allow us access', because you might as well have tariff barriers at that point." Other Brexit supporters have also expressed disquiet about this idea in the past; but it all depends on the kind of Brexit deal that Theresa May goes for. Today's pound rally follows the currency's best month since 2009. Sterling gained 6% against the euro in November, 1,5% against the US dollar, and almost 15% against the Japanese yen. It may show that the markets are becoming less worried about the UK, following more solid economic data since June's Brexit vote. Kathleen Brooks of City Index says: Momentum is particularly strong against the yen and its recent performance has been staggering, GBPJPY is up more than 14% since the start of November! Political risks around Brexit are receding, as political risks elsewhere start to bite. The cost to insure UK sovereign debt has fallen sharply since spiking back in June. Good economic news from America: its factory sector is growing at its fastest pace since the Brexit vote. The ISM manufacturing index has jumped to 53.2 in November, from 51.9 in October, which is the fastest rate since June. Firm said they were benefitting from strong domestic demand. A rival survey, from Markit, was also just released. It's even more encouraging, showing activity rising at a 13-month high. No wonder City traders may be looking frazzled: The US crude oil price has hit a five-week high, as traders push it through the$50 per barrel mark. Oil is surging even higher, as commodity traders continue to react to the Opec supply cut deal hammered out yesterday. Brent crude is now up 3% at $53.44 per barrel, a near two-month high, and a really substantial surge from $46/barrel before the Opec meeting. Opec's decision to cut output by 1.2m barrels per day looks like a real game-changer. The group's secretary general, Mohammed Barkindo, is telling Bloomberg TV right now that it was a "historic landmark" Sam Wahab, director of oil and gas research at Cantor Fitzgerald Europe, believes the price could keep rising: "Yesterday's agreement has truly changed the landscape for oil over the coming years, putting a floor of $50 a barrel under oil prices. "Prior to this agreement, the environment of sub $50 oil was likely to persist, but this move sufficiently addresses the supply/demand dynamics, with some 3.5% of supply being cut from January. "It means 2017 will likely see prices around the $55-$60 a barrel mark, and we may yet see further jumps in prices as soon as next week if the non-OPEC members also agree a production cut at their meeting on Friday 9th December. Today's rally has pushed the pound to nearly a three-month high against the euro. That means it's just 8% below its pre-referendum levels (having been down 15% at one stage). The pound just spiked even higher against the US dollar, after the latest American unemployment figures hit the wires. Sterling hit $1.268, up 1.7 cents, as data showed that the number of Americans filing new claims for jobless benefit has hit a 5-month high. The initial jobless claims figure rose to 268,000 last week, up from 251,000. Here's some more reaction to David Davis's comments, and the bounce in the pound: Craig Erlam, chief market analyst with retail brokerage Oanda: "The idea that single market is still a priority is a move away from the 'hard Brexit' line. Since the two or three major selloffs we saw earlier this year, the Bank of England has changed its stance to holding rates next year, the data has been better and now the rhetoric has softened." Neil Wilson, senior market analyst at ETX Capital: "Sterling is on the tear this morning on hopes for a soft Brexit. "David Davis said the UK could contribute to the EU budget in return for access to markets and that has fuelled a rally for the pound." Chris Saint, senior analyst at Hargreaves Lansdown Currency Service "Sterling's rehabilitation is gathering steam, having broken through the €1.19 level against the euro today for the first time in almost three months. A surge of nearly 1% versus the US dollar has also lifted the pound back above US$1.26. Gains come amid signs of a more compromising approach to upcoming Brexit negotiations from the UK government, with Brexit minister David Davis saying Britain would consider contributing to the EU budget in return for retaining access to European markets. Our Politics Live blog has full coverage of David Davis's comments on Brexit: David Davis's suggestion that the UK could pay for access to European markets after Brexit have also sent the pound rallying against the euro. Sterling has gained nearly one eurocent to €1.19, its highest point since September 7th. Caxton FX analyst Alexandra Russell-Oliver says that Davis's comments are pushing the pound up. She also points out that the euro is suffering from fears of political instability, with two important votes taking place on Sunday: The pound rally, which has occurred against most major currencies has follows comments from Brexit Secretary Davis, which indicate that the UK may be willing to make trade-offs for access to the single market. The euro is currently under pressure in anticipation of the Italian Constitutional Referendum and Austrian Presidential Election, taking place on Sunday, where shock results could result in further volatility. The pound has surged by 1% this morning after Brexit secretary David Davis suggested that the UK could make payments in return for access to the European markets. The comments have fuelled hopes in the City that Britain might avoid a 'hard Brexit', and that Britain's financial services industry, for example, could retain access to the single market after 2019 (the likely exit date). Our political reporter Jess Elgot explains what happened: David Davis has suggested that the government would consider making contributions to the EU budget in exchange for access to the single market, saying his Department for Exiting the EU would consider all options to get the best deal with the bloc. During questions in the House of Commons, the Labour MP Wayne David asked if the Brexit secretary would "consider making any contribution in any shape or form for access to the single market". Davis said the government would look at the options during the article 50 process over the next two years. "The major criterion here is that we get the best possible access for goods and services to the European market," he said. "And if that is included in what he is talking about, then of course we would consider it. Here's her full story: This chart shows how the pound surged by one and a half cents, or 1.2%, since Davis's comments, to $1.2650. That's its highest level since the US election three weeks ago. Neil Jones, head of FX hedge fund sales at Mizuho, told Reuters that some traders have been racing to buy the pound -- or unwind bets against sterling. "These headlines suggesting Britain may be able to access the single market are generating substantial sterling demand from traders and investors looking to reduce their short positions and unwind hedges." Consumers should brace for higher petrol prices soon, warns Michelle McGrade, chief investment officer of TD Direct Investing: "It's been clear for some time that the low price of oil has been hurting producers. In my view, it was only a matter of time before OPEC decided to cut production. A higher oil price, together with a strong US dollar, makes things tougher for UK consumers because not only will petrol be more expensive, but this could fuel a stronger surge in inflation than originally expected, as inflation is highly correlated to the price of oil. The combination makes for an unwelcome gift just before Christmas. We've checked with the AA about the report that filling up a car will soon cost an extra £5. They say that's based on oil hitting $60 -- so we're not there yet. But the 12% jump in the oil price this week is still going to hurt drivers... Back to Opec.... and the oil price is clinging onto today's gains, as analysts keep kicking the tires of yesterday's deal. Brent crude is hovering around $52.50, a 1.2% gain today. That means it has surged by 12% since yesterday morning, just before Opec's members sat down and hammered out the supply cuts deal. City traders are pondering: Will Opec members actually deliver the production cuts they signed up to yesterday? Will non-Opec members support the deal by cutting supply (as Opec hopes)? Neil Wilson of ETX Capital says this uncertainty means the oil price could fall back: OPEC has suggested the deal is contingent on getting this 600,000 b/d from non-OPEC – we don't yet know if it could unravel if this doesn't happen. There are lots of pieces in the jigsaw that are yet to fall into place. If OPEC members stick to the script and if non-OPEC comes up with the goods we might be on for further gains in crude. If not this rally could easily lose momentum and fade. And.... the more the oil price goes up, though, the more incentive there is for US shale producers to turn their pumps back on. Bloomberg Gadfly writer Liam Denning reckons this issue will be crucial: Supporting the market in this way hands an opportunity to U.S. exploration and production firms to hedge future production at higher prices and expand their own drilling budgets to fill some of the gap left by Saudi Arabia, Russia and others. Over the next six months, we will see if OPEC's coalition can hold. Assume it does -- a huge assumption at this point -- and in the following six months we will see how much the frackers will do to undermine it. His full take is here: Now this really is a moment..... unemployment across the eurozone has fallen below 10% for the first time in over five years, and is now at a seven-year low. Eurostat reports that the jobless rate fell to 9.8% in October. September's figure has been revised down to 9.9% (from 10%). Eurozone unemployment hasn't been below 10% since April 2011, and October's reading is actually the lowest since 2009. Over the last year, unemployment has fallen in 24 of Europe's 28 members. The largest annual decreases were registered in Croatia (from 16.1% to 12.7%), Spain (from 21.2% to 19.2%) and Slovakia (from 11.1% to 9.1%). Italy and France have also reported falls in unemployment, as Europe's slow-but-steady recovery continues. Economists fear that British factories could hike their prices to help them handle a sharp rise in raw material costs since the summer. George Nikolaidis, senior economist at EEF, says the weaker pound is both a challenge and an opportunity for manufacturing: While the more competitive exchange rate means UK manufacturers are well positioned to capitalise on the recovery in demand in key export markets, higher input costs are coming through the manufacturing supply chain thick and fast to put the squeeze on profit margins. Manufacturers are inevitably looking to pass these costs on to customers adding to the inflationary pressures already building up in the UK economy." Mike Rigby, head of manufacturing at Barclays also believes consumers will be hit by higher prices next year: Exporters continue to take advantage of a weak sterling but it is increasingly looking like a case of having to take the rough with the smooth as businesses start to pass on higher import costs, which could accelerate inflationary pressures as we enter 2017." And Jeremy Cook of World First fears that the recent jump in output could be slowing: Breaking: Growth in Britain's manufacturing sector slowed last month, despite the weak pound helping firms export abroad. The UK factory PMI, which measures activity across the sector, has fallen to 53.4, down from 54.4 in October. That's weaker than the City expected, but it does still show that the sector has expanded for four month running -- as the initial Brexit shock quickly ebbed away. Firms reported that output and new orders both expanded at a solid date. Markit, which compiles the figures, also warns that the weak pound is driving up import costs -- as well as making UK goods more attractive to overseas buyers. The effects of the weak sterling exchange rate continued to be felt by manufacturers during November. On the plus side, the boost to export competitiveness led to a further increase in new business from abroad. Companies reported improved demand from the USA, mainland Europe and the Middle East. The negative impact of the exchange rate was felt on the cost side. Average purchase prices rose at a pace close to October's near six-year record and again at one of the fastest rates in the survey history. The Financial Times has a good piece about how some Opec members are paying a higher price than others to get the deal through: Here's a flavour: Saudi Arabia and its Gulf Arab allies, including Kuwait, United Arab Emirates and Qatar, have agreed to shoulder the bulk of the cuts. They are banking on a quick recovery in price to ensure they do not lose revenues or surrender market share to other suppliers. Iran and Iraq, which sit outside the Gulf bloc in the Middle East, have sacrificed less. Most oil analysts see the limited concessions they made to let the deal succeed as largely face-saving technical measures to placate the Saudis. Other members from Venezuela to Angola, which have agreed to cut part of their output in support of a 1.2m barrel-a-day reduction, have a patchy record of compliance with past deals. Despite Wednesday's price surge, they may need an ongoing recovery to be convinced to do their share. Newsflash: Europe's factor sector has posted its strongest growth in close to three years. Data firm Markit's monthly manufacturing PMI has risen to 53.7, up from 53.5 in October. Any reading over 50 shows an expansion, and this is the best reading since January 2014. The sector was driven by the Netherlands, Austria and Spain - while poor old Greece suffered its biggest contraction in a year. Factories also reported that cost pressures are rising sharply, meaning they're paying more for raw materials. Opec's production cut may make that worse.... Dominic Rossi, global CIO equities at Fidelity International, urges caution: "I would not get too excited by the Opec cut. Compliance will be a problem, and the Russians will pump more gas instead. In the meantime, the long-run marginal cost of US shale continues to fall. I would not chase this oil price rally too hard." City experts are a little sceptical that Opec's deal will actually push oil prices much higher. Spanish banking group BBVA suggest warn that "implementing and monitoring" the deal could be constrained by "geopolitical factors" (for example, Saudi Arabia and Iran are already backing rival sides in the Yemen conflict) Australia's ANZ bank point out that US shale producers could boost their own output, keeping a lid on prices. City analyst Louise Cooper questions suggests Iraq can stick to the deal: (Some of Iraq's oil fields are based in Iraqi Kurdistan, to the north of the country, where the peshmerga military forces are based) The Wall Street Journal has created an excellent graphic, showing how Opec has created the current oil glut by pumping harder, while US shale producers have cut back: The WSJ also explains how Saudi and Iran managed to settle on a deal: The member countries were faced with a "very deep" abyss of low oil prices, and that won out over politics, said Daniel Yergin, vice chairman of IHS Markit and a longtime oil-market watcher. "OPEC is back in business," Mr. Yergin said in an interview. "This will rank as one of their historic decisions." Saudi Arabia and Iran, whose differences blocked a deal that aimed to freeze production earlier this year, made the deal possible by coming to a tortured compromise on production figures. Iran was allowed to increase its production by 90,000 barrels a day, a significant victory for the Islamic Republic as it tries to rebuild its economy after the end of Western sanctions. But the deal allows both Iran and Saudi Arabia to claim a win, by pointing to different sets of numbers. Iran, using production figures generated by OPEC, can say it is raising output, while Saudi Arabia can point to the Islamic Republic's output figures and say that Iran is agreeing to a cut. "It's a good day for the oil market, it's a good day for the oil industry," Saudi Arabian Energy Minister Khalid al-Falih said after the deal was reached. Shares in energy companies are jumping today too. In London, Royal Dutch Shell and BP are leading the risers on the FTSE 100; a higher oil price should mean higher profits. Mike van Dulken of Accendo Markets says trader are ignoring concerns that the deal may not stick (especially if non-Opec members don't agree their own cuts). Long-term apprehension surrounding the deal (and the potential for a pick-up in US shale production) will be thrown to the back of investors' minds as Brent regains a $52 handle and US Crude fast approaches $50 per barrel. How long can the post-deal rally last? Opec's deal is bad news for motorists, as higher crude prices will swiftly lead to more expensive petrol. The front page of today's Times declares that it could mean a litre of fuel costs 10p more, which swiftly adds up: Motorists face paying £5 more to fill up an average family car after a Saudi-led cartel struck a rare deal to boost the price of oil. Oil prices jumped by 8.9 per cent to $50.45 a barrel yesterday after the Organisation of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (Opec), which pumps a third of the world's oil, agreed to limit output for the first time in eight years. Motoring groups warned that the agreement was likely to create an "unwelcome Christmas present" for families by sharply pushing up prices on the forecourt. Petrol fell to 101p a litre in February after oil plunged to $27 a barrel as Iran increased production when sanctions were lifted. Some analysts now predict that oil could rise to $60 a barrel. According to estimates, this could push petrol to a two-year high of 123p a litre, from 114p today. The oil price has extended its gains this morning as the financial markets continue to digest Opec's output cut deal. US crude oil smashed through $50 per barrel for the first time in a month this morning. Brent crude - oil sourced from the North Sea - jumped by another 1% to $52.73. Yesterday, oil surged by over 8% as it became clear that Opec had, for once, come up with a plan to tackle the oil glut. Traders are genuinely surprised that Opec members put their differences behind them in Vienna this week, and agreed to cut 1.2m barrels off their daily output, to 32.5m. Russia also caught the experts out; it is backing Opec's deal by promising to trim its own output by 300,000 barrels per day. That means that non-Opec members may, as Opec hopes, chip in with a 600,000bpd reduction. Chris Weston of IG explains that this could give the deal extra teeth: The consensus was that we would get some sort of loose agreement from the collective that kept oil supported, but left the market asking many more questions. What we have seen however has been real meat on the bone, not just from gaining an understanding around production cut allocations from the more tricky OPEC members, including Iran and Iraq, but it seems Russia was so enthused by what they heard that they have increased their own production cut levels from 200,000 to 250,000 to 300,000 a day through the first half in 2017. Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. Opec members are still in celebratory mood after agreeing their first output cut in almost a decade. The oil cartel defied the sceptics yesterday, by announcing it would slash production by 1.2m barrels per day, in an attempt to tackle the glut of crude oil in the market. As we covered yesterday, this sent the oil price soaring - and we're seeing further gains this morning. Analysts are now wondering if the deal will hold, and what it means for other producers, consumers, and the global economy. Also coming up today... Data firm Markit is publishing its latest manufacturing PMI reports, showing how factories around the globe fared last month. The big news overnight is that China's manufacturing sector beat forecasts, expanding at its fastest rate in over four years. This may signal that China is, once again, relying on traditional smokestack "industries" industries for growth, rather than transforming into a consumer-driven economy. We find out how Britain, and Europe, performed in the next couple of hours: Here's what to watch out for: 9am GMT: eurozone manufacturing PMI 9.30am GMT: UK manufacturing PMI 2.45pm GMT: US manufacturing PMI And there are also signs today that Britain's housing market is slowing. The Nationwide building society has reported that prices only rose by 0.1% in November, meaning prices were just 4.4% higher than a year ago.

A good book is a vital part of the gardener's winter survival kit: when you can't get outside, you can dream big about next year, lose yourself in someone else's plot or discover new plants from the comfort of your reading chair. Here's a selection of my favourite books published this year: all perfect for your Christmas wishlist. 1. Rhapsody in Green by Charlotte Mendelson (Kyle Books, 16.99) This is without doubt my favourite gardening book of 2016. Charlotte Mendelson is a novelist who has fallen so hard for growing edible things that she considers it an addiction. Usually these kinds of books are written by people who have at least an acre of ground to play with: Mendelson, on the other hand, has what she calls a "comically small town garden, a mere six square metres of urban soil and a few pots". Rhapsody in Green is frank, funny and full of sentences that will make gardeners jump for joy: the wonders of lemon verbena; an obsessive need to lay your hands on at least ten varieties of lettuce leaf; hunting the neighbourhood for damsons to forage. If you want more of a taster of this book, Guardian Weekend published an extract back in September. 2. Gardenista: The Definitive Guide to Stylish Outdoor Spaces by Michelle Slatalla (Artisan, £28.99) Gardenista is the stylish gardening blog of the same name in book form. It's packed full of tasteful gardens that offer a welcome escape from your own sodden/boring/non-existent (delete as appropriate) garden. There's plenty of useful advice here, too, although I suspect most of us would rather simply salivate over the 'twelve gardens we love' section (An outdoor shower! A beautiful greenhouse!) than get cracking on any of the DIY projects this Christmas. But there's lots of good advice on designing your garden too, from hard landscaping to planting. The section offering seven classic garden planting palettes is particularly useful. 3. RHS A-Z Encyclopedia of Garden Plants 4th edition, edited by Christopher Brickell (Dorling Kindersley, £75) This encyclopedia is described as "the definitive garden reference", packed with 15,000 entries, all lavishly illustrated. If you are the kind of gardener who likes to look a plant up in a book rather than go online for an answer, this is a must-have. This is a beast of a book - the rope handle may look decorative, but you really will need it to haul this book about, as it weighs several kilos: it is a coffee table book for the simple reason that it may well break your bookshelves. 4. RHS How Do Worms Work? by Guy Barter (Mitchell Beazley, £14.99) The Q&amp;A is a well-worn staple of garden writing, but Guy Barter, the RHS's chief horticultural adviser, livens up the format and makes this book a joy to read, with answers to questions like "how do bulbs know when to come up?" and "why is it that pests eat my favourite plants, but ignore the weeds". The best questions, though, are the quirky ones you haven't even thought of. My favourite is "which is the tastiest soil"? Nope, me neither. This is a lovely book to dip into, and you may even find yourself reading it cover to cover. 5. Wild Flowers of Britain Month by Month by Margaret Erskine Wilson (Merlin Unwin, £8.99) This is a jewel of a book, containing watercolour paintings of British native plants arranged by flowering month. The painter, Margaret Erskine Wilson, was an amateur botanist and watercolourist who produced her work over 45 years, starting out as a guide to help a friend learn the names of service tree, bladder campion and bird's eye. From garden escapes such as fuchsias to hedgerow charms such as dog rose, the plants are arranged not alone, like botanical illustrations, but as wonderful plant tapestries that can be appreciated as a tool for learning as well as things of beauty. 6. A Botanist's Vocabulary by Susan K Pell and Bobbi Angell (Timber Press, £17.99) If you don't know your palmate from your pandurate leaf, you may find this well laid-out guide to botanical terms a wonderful resource. It's tempting to think that botanical terms are just there to bamboozle the average amateur grower. But by learning the parts of a flower head, or what a viviparous plant can do that others can't, it's possible to enrich your whole gardening experience, whether you're a botany student, a gardener or simply someone who wants to learn more about plants. Simple line drawings help to make the definitions crystal clear. 7. New Small Garden by Noel Kingsbury (Frances Lincoln, £20) If you are starting out on a new garden in 2017, or even dreaming of doing so, Noel Kingsbury's book is a great source of ideas. His vast knowledge of plants means this isn't one of those books on small gardens that just treats the space like a set to be dressed with objects. Kingsbury is best known for his work with Dutch landscape designer Piet Oudolf on naturalistic planting, but here he brings some of those principles to a small garden setting. Add to that the beautiful photography by Maayke de Ridder, and this makes for a most covetable book. 8. Wonderful Weeds by Madeline Harley (Papadakis, £25) Most of us - gardeners included - are plant-blind when it comes to what we consider to be weeds. 'Dandelion' can mean anything with a yellow flower, and beyond nettles and daisies, the rest is just greenery that's getting in the way of what we want to grow. This book by botanist Madeline Harley isn't a weed guide in the traditional gardening sense - it's not the place to look for the merits of glyphosate versus a dandelion grubber - but it is a repository of information about common British weeds and their uses in folklore and medicine. The photographs show weeds not just in flower but as seedlings, their seeds and how they look in different settings, helping you to identify specimens more easily. Sections on pollination and regeneration strategies will be useful for anyone trying to control a particular weed, as well as illustrating the important role they have to play in our garden ecosystems. 9. An Orchard Odyssey by Naomi Slade (Green Books, £24.99) An orchard sounds like a terribly grand thing, but in this age of dwarfing rootstocks and patio trees, it's possible to have your own orchard in the smallest of spaces. Naomi Slade's book is part-practical guide to creating your own orchard, and part inspirational journey through the history and culture of growing fruit trees. In my experience fruit trees offer the least work for the greatest return of any edible in the garden: you'd be a fool not to get some in the ground (or in a pot) this bareroot planting season. Let this book be your starting point. 10. Petal, Leaf, Seed by Lia Leendertz (Kyle, £16.99) Is this a recipe book or a gardening book? This is a distinction people are desperate to make, but to me, anyone who grows food should automatically be just as interested in how to cook it. Lia Leendertz has written the perfect book for those of us who are never going to have 10-pole allotments' worth of produce to use; rather, we have a handful of raspberries or coriander seeds, a courgette flower or two, or if we're lucky, a brace of banana leaves. This book shows how to use tiny, unexpected harvests from all corners the garden - some unexpected - to make delicious dishes. We ran an extract of this book, including some of Leendertz's fabulous recipes, earlier in the year, if you want to try before you buy. Is there a gardening book published in 2016 you'd like to recommend? Please add your thoughts below.

The latest official figures showing that immigration from the European Union rose to a historic high in the run-up to the Brexit vote will not make comfortable reading in Downing Street. But Theresa May's policy advisers will be less interested in the confirmation that Britain remains, as it has been for the past 20 years, a country of mass migration and more interested in any detail that might help them frame the future post-Brexit migration policy. The numbers that will really capture their interest will be those showing the record rise in the number of EU citizens arriving in Britain looking for work without a definite job offer and the numbers on overseas students. The figures show that 189,000 EU citizens arrived in Britain looking for work in the 12 months to June and 57% of them had a definite job offer. The remaining 43%, or 82,000, came looking for work – a rise of 21,000 over the previous year. Most find a job within weeks and are barred from access to welfare benefits. They come because Britain has become the "jobs factory of Europe", while Italy and Spain – the traditional destination, in particular for Romanians – have faltered. The prime minister made it clear when she was home secretary that she wanted to see severe restrictions on those who came to Britain without a specific job offer: "When it was first enshrined, free movement meant the freedom to move to a job, not the freedom to cross borders to look for work or claim benefits." There have been clear signs in recent weeks that May still thinks this could be the way to go. EU labour migration has been the main driver behind the increase in the headline net migration figure. If she could secure a deal that meant restricting the numbers coming without an immediate job she would also achieve a big reduction in the record headline 335,000 net migration figure. The irony is that such a migration policy is entirely possible within the original Treaty of Rome and could be done without leaving the EU. The other big number Downing Street policy advisers will focus on is the 30,000 reduction, to 163,000, in the number of overseas students coming to Britain, indicating that the squeeze on higher education is now really biting. Most come from outside Europe, particularly China, the USA and India. The biggest falls in the last year have been in further education (-8%), English language schools (-9%) and private schools (-3%), but universities also saw a 1% drop in visa applications. May's next big move on immigration is to tighten the curb on overseas students even further by tying the quality of the visa offer to the quality of the institution and the course. It is no secret that half the cabinet, including the chancellor, think overseas students should be taken out of the firing line and removed from the net migration target altogether. Despite May's renowned stubbornness, it remains an open question. The battleground is over what proportion of students overstay their study visas to settle in Britain. May's advisers have claimed up to 80% for certain types, while others claim it is as low as 1%. The current ONS migration data, based on the international passenger survey, is not fit to answer the question. Early results from the new system of exit checks circulating among ministers could settle the question. They should be published as soon as possible.

Many novelists studiously avoid hearing opinions about their writing, but Jane Austen not only encouraged it, she meticulously compiled them in thorough, sometimes hilarious notes. Next month the British Library will put on display Austen's handwritten notes of what friends, family and correspondents thought of her third novel, Mansfield Park. A display marking the bicentenary of Austen's death will also include three volumes of writings from her teenage years, being brought together for the first time in 40 years. The Mansfield Park document is fascinating. It shows that Austen's mother, Cassandra, thought the novel not as good as Pride &amp; Prejudice and found the heroine, Fanny, "insipid". Her sister, also called Cassandra, on the other hand was "fond of Fanny" and "delighted much in Mr Rushworth's stupidity". A lady called Augusta Bramstone is recorded by Austen as thinking Sense &amp; Sensibility and Pride &amp; Prejudice "nonsense ... but [she] expected to like M.P. better, &amp; having finished the 1st vol. – flattered herself she had got through the worst". The library's manuscripts curator Sandra Tuppen said Austen was keen to know the opinions of as many people as possible. "She wasn't getting published reviews, so this was a way of justifying what she was doing by getting these opinions. I don't think she would have done it if she felt completely confident." Austen collected dozens of opinions and documented them faithfully, good or bad. Mrs Bramstone, for example, was much pleased, particularly with Fanny. She preferred it to Austen's other books, although she "imagined that might be her want of taste – as she does not understand wit". A man called Charles "did not like it near so well as P&amp;P – thought it wanted incident." Austen, one suspects, would have been a regular self-Googler, but other writers prefer not to know. In a Radio Times interview this week, Julian Barnes revealed he allowed his agent to send him only the "three best" reviews of the latest novel. And as for online reviews: "I never go there. I think a lot of mad people operate there." Tuppen said what was striking about the Austen notes was that she had phrased them in her own voice: "It is creative writing as well as just gathering information." Mansfield Park was published in 1814 and is sometimes, unfairly, called Austen's dullest book. Her notes about it will be displayed next to three volumes from her formative years, two owned by the library and one being lent by the Bodleian in Oxford. They include a spoof version of English history featuring illustrations of kings and queens by sister Cassandra, with her drawing of Mary Queen of Scots looking suspiciously like young Jane. The library's chief executive, Roly Keating, said it was impossible to mark every literary anniversary, but it felt it had to for Austen. "This is the British Library ... we can't let the moment pass without a bit of a celebration." The objects going on display said much about "her humour. and wit, and liveliness, and invention, even at that young age," he said. The library also formally announced that it was making the archive of PG Wodehouse publicly available for the first time. Containing letters, manuscript drafts and notebooks, it is being loaned by the writer's step-grandson Sir Edward Cazalet. Jane Austen Among Family and Friends is at the British Library 10 January-19 February.

It wasn't until the late 1960s – when Lois Olsen moved into a newly built house in her small farming village in Alberta, Canada – that she got her first taste of life with indoor plumbing. "I thought I was in heaven, I had running water and I had a telephone," she recalled. So when the 80-year-old found out earlier this month that she had won C$50m in the lottery, she was stumped for ideas on what she might do with all the money. "For my family, it's going to help them out a lot," she said. "For me, I'm too old for this. I would have liked to have won this 20 or 30 years ago." Olsen, who is a great-grandmother, learned of the windfall during a grocery run at her local supermarket. A brief stop to check her lottery ticket in the self-checking machines suggested she had won $15. "I pulled it out, put it back in. It looked like $500," Olsen told reporters this week as she accepted her big cheque. "I said to the girl, 'There's something wrong with this machine.'" An employee came over to help. "She says, 'No you just won $50m.'" Speechless, Olsen started shaking. "I just grabbed my groceries and left." The news travelled fast in her central Alberta village of Irma, home to about 450 people. "I dodged the media once there," she said, laughing as she described watching an out-of-town TV crew ask locals at an event about the big lottery winner. "They didn't say anything, so I was able to escape home without anything." She has few plans for the money, save for helping out her three children, nine grandchildren and eight great-grandchildren. For her, the money comes too late to make a big difference, she said. "I milked cows for I don't know how many years by hand, then we finally got a milking machine," she said. "We milked cows for about 25 years. We had a bunch of pigs, we had range cattle, I raised chickens, turkeys; I had everything. A lot of hard work." When pressed by reporters, she said she might replace her 11-year-old car. "I think I'll buy an SUV, something a little higher for me to get in and out of," she said. "That will be the big purchase." Beyond that, she said little else would change. "Money doesn't mean a whole bunch to me. I had hard times," she said. With a laugh, she added, "Maybe not now."

Four billion dollars. Regardless of the kind of life you live, that's an eye-catching figure. If you're among the 500 mixed martial artists contracted to the UFC, that figure may as well pulsate across the Las Vegas skyline in neon green lights. Since the Hollywood talent agency WME/IMG purchased the UFC for a reported $4.2bn over the summer – the richest in sport history – the chorus of fighters expressing frustration with the UFC has only grown stronger. On Wednesday, five distinguished veterans spoke in a similar tone about their financial concerns and how they might be remedied. This made the introduction of the Mixed Martial Arts Athlete Association unique from other attempts at organizing fighters affiliated with the UFC. For the first time, a prominent group of the UFC's big attractions declared their intention to support themselves and their compatriots. "The association's sole concentration is to fight for the rights of MMA fighters and force UFC's ownership to dramatically alter the company's decade-plus outrageous treatment of its athletes," the group said in a statement. "UFC without fighters is only three letters of the alphabet," said former welterweight champion Georges St-Pierre. "It's time for us to make our voice heard and make change happen for the best of the UFC and fighters." "We're all afraid, but it's time to join up," added the 35-year-old, one of the most lucrative draws in the history of the UFC. "It's a fight for what is right and what is wrong. We should never be afraid to stand up for our virtues." St-Pierre joined Cain Velasquez, TJ Dillashaw, Tim Kennedy and Donald Cerrone in becoming the first headline-worthy fighters to advocate for more money, improved healthcare and other financial protections. Without significant backing, fighters have primarily been forced to fend for themselves. "I know a lot of fighters want to remain anonymous," St-Pierre said, "but I'm telling you guys, come see us. It's time to stand together." Since a union was first mooted a few years ago, the idea has been met with apathy from the public and the fighters at large. A contingent of UFC veterans, most of whom had moved on from the company, aligned for an antitrust lawsuit against the UFC that was filed in 2014. Though the case continues to make its way through the courts, it apparently wasn't convincing enough to rouse fighters into making headway towards meaningful labor representation. These were past-their-prime fighters derided as bitter and unimportant. This is a cut-throat business, and organizing MMA fighters in the UFC has always been a long shot for that reason alone. Never mind that for the past 15 years the UFC has been helmed by casino owners who shrugged their shoulders at sanctions from the National Labor Relations Board. But when the sale went down and the Fertitta family handed control of the UFC to WME/IMG this summer, the baked-in sense of the way the MMA world worked was quickly challenged. In 2015, the year preceding the sale, the UFC generated over $600m in revenue, three-quarters of which was from fights, according to documents. This was the most successful revenue year in the history of the UFC, and it prompted a cadre of fighters – from MMA's biggest star, Conor McGregor, to Cole Miller, a mid-tier veteran approaching 20 consecutive Octagon-housed contests – to voice discontent about not getting what they felt they deserved. The media attempted to discover just how much of UFC's revenue was going to the fighters. As a private entity, the UFC never needed to answer directly. When its executives were seriously pushed, they said the split was in the ballpark of major American sports like baseball, football and basketball. Around half, Lorenzo Fertitta protested to ESPN in 2012, following a report that indicated the number was likely around 15%. Throughout Wednesday's two-hour call, when the MMAAA was introduced, the fighters were joined by former Bellator president Bjorn Rebney."What the association is going to achieve for the athletes is a settlement to address the past wrongs, driving up [the revenue split] to 50% up from 8%, and a benefits package that provides a safety net," Rebney said. Ironically, Rebney earned a reputation at Bellator for pursuing long-term contracts thought to be more restrictive than those UFC offered. "Bjorn created the most egregious working conditions ever to exist in combat sports," said manager Jason Genet. "He forced fighters to sign with managers that would not question those contracts and punished those that did. He may be the most qualified to rid the sport of injustices that people like him ushered in or he will be the reason this fails. I will wait and see. None of my athletes will be involved." Former two-division UFC champion Randy Couture, who attempted to fight for his freedom from the UFC in a court battle in 2007 before acquiescing and returning to the Octagon, says Rebney's motives are worth exploring. "I suspect that Bjorn is interested in creating an organization and being a promoter again and doing it with fighters, owned by fighters, sort of like what the Professional Bull Riders is," Couture told BloodyElbow.com. "That's my take on why Bjorn is involved here. It's certainly more than just an advisor to fighters." Couture is involved with the Mixed Martial Arts Fighters Association, a separate body that seeks to organize all fighters in the sport, not just the UFC, in a trade association. The MMAFA has spearheaded the antitrust lawsuit against the UFC, and Rebney noted this is reason enough for his group, the MMAAA, not to align with Couture's. The main reason being that he sees no point in signing over a third of the potential settlement over to lawyers. Four of the five fighters on Wednesday's call are associated with Creative Artists Agency, an entertainment powerhouse rivaling WME/IMG. Rebney denied the formation of the new group would lead to a new rival to UFC, and noted that while Creative Artists supports the group because of the fighters involved, no explicit relationship exists between it and the association. That relationship is closer than Rebney let on, sources said, though he called any suggestion otherwise a "conspiracy theory." The structure and backing of the MMAAA remains a mystery outside of its 501c6 status. Rebney would not yet name its investors, and said the association will be headquartered in Anaheim Hills, California. Over the coming months those involved, particularly the fighters, will seek to expand its roster, relying on board members like Velasquez, Cerrone, Kennedy, St-Pierre and Dillashaw to recruit in the major MMA gyms across the US. One of the goals of the association is a formal collective bargaining agreement, presumably before the UFC's media rights are up for renewal following the completion of its deal with Fox in 2018 that pays $115m annually. WME is pushing for a $4.5bn deal over 10 years, according to the Sports Business Journal. Could fighters strike to compel UFC to negotiate? James Quinn, an attorney who in October advised St-Pierre that he should consider himself a free agent after claiming a breach of his UFC contract, made strong statements at the time regarding the need to challenge the UFC's contracts. Quinn has taken up the role of counsel for the MMAAA. "It is a great organization and I will help in every way I can," he said. "This is about these terrific athletes standing tall together." But Lucas Middlebrook, a labor lawyer, raised two concerns about the formation of the MMAAA. "If you're not certified or voluntarily recognized [by the National Labor Relations Board] the UFC has no legal obligation to sit down at the bargaining table with you," Middlebrook said. "They can tell you to pound sand, and there's no legal repercussion you can bring on them. If you're the union or you were voluntarily recognized or certified, not only do they have to sit down with you they have to bargain in good faith." Rebney rejected the idea that a union would be the best route, claiming it would be "the worst possible option" because it delays movement towards a new relationship between the UFC and its talent for four to five years. Asked how serious they were about the prospect of a holdout, fighters on the call described a strike as an option of last resort and said their hope would be to resolve any issues face to face with the UFC. Rebney said he was waiting on the UFC's call. If that doesn't work, Kennedy, a middleweight contender in the UFC and an Army Ranger with tours of duty in Afghanistan, made his intentions clear. "We're here to never leave somebody behind," Kennedy said. "We're here to make sure every step that no UFC fighter gets left behind."

Today brought confirmation of what we at the Against Borders for Children campaign have suspected for months: the government is trying to make schools part of its agenda to create a "hostile environment" for migrants accused of entering the country illegally. The BBC revealed that Theresa May, as home secretary in 2015, had planned to use the last immigration bill to introduce a requirement on schools to check children's immigration status, and to shunt the children of the migrants to the back of the queue for school places. The then education secretary, Nicky Morgan, intervened to block the proposals. Similar plans were leaked in 2013, and as recently as last year, the Department for Education (DfE) was talking about cracking down on "education tourism". In October it was revealed that the data of hundreds of children has been shared with the Home Office for immigration enforcement purposes. That's why when we saw that the DfE had announced plans to begin collecting nationality and country-of-birth data from almost 8 million pupils this autumn, we knew that this was not about targeting English language provision to schools that need it, but about undermining migrant children's universal right to education, as guaranteed by national and international law. The BBC's political editor, Laura Kuenssberg, confirms precisely that suspicion: the DfE and the Home Office compromised in 2015 on immigration enforcement in schools with an agreement that country-of-birth data would be collected. Policies designed to create a hostile environment function by denying people access to essential services and forcing them to live under the radar – unable to take exploitative employers to court; excluded from health services; condemned to unsafe and often uninhabitable dwellings; fearful to send their children to school. But the effects of the government's obsession with reducing net migration reverberates well beyond the lives of the migrants whom it targets. Not only are Britons without ID hit by these checks, but by requiring doctors, teachers, employers and landlords to check nationality and immigration status, the government forces us to inhabit a society in which our neighbours are suspect, and we are all potential informants. The Labour MP Angela Rayner has decried the plans leaked to the BBC, arguing that excluding the children of irregular migrants from school is "not a British value". I appreciate the sentiment, but there is strong evidence to suggest that discrimination, injustice and downright brutality are an integral part of Britain's moral vocabulary when it comes to immigration control. Let us not forget that the current prime minister in 2013 chartered a private jet to remove Isa Muazu from the UK. He had fled here to seek sanctuary from Boko Haram. By the time he was removed, was said to be seriously ill after refusing food for about 100 days. There is a huge breadth of evidence to show that our immigration system produces unfair outcomes. Cuts to legal aid for immigration cases, increases in immigration and asylum tribunal fees (although currently suspended), poor Home Office decision-making at first instance, and removal of appeal rights all mean that children and families end up without regular immigration status for all manner of bureaucratic reasons – often when they have a right to be here, or cannot be returned home because of threats to their safety. However, I think the point is something more fundamental: are we the kind of society that is prepared to segregate and punish children for whatever papers their parents may have failed to get in order? The problems Britain faces are not down to irregular migrants, and they are certainly no fault of their children. If there is pressure on school places, that is because for the first time in a decade the government has cut spending per pupil; if there is pressure on the NHS, that is because of a naked refusal to resource it properly; if jobs are few, and pay and tax revenues are falling, that has far more to do with labour market deregulation and global capital than it does with migrants. Although parents and campaigners have managed to force a U-turn on immigration data collection from two- to five-year-olds, the government currently plans to press ahead with its plans to draw up lists of foreign children who are school age in January, despite the controversy that beset the last school census, and a clear message from teaching unions, Ofsted and politicians across the political spectrum that schools should not be used for policing immigration. All parents have the right to refuse to give this data and to retract data they have already submitted. It's a small and easy thing to do, but it sends a clear message to the government that we will not let migrant children bear the brunt of problems that it has helped to create, and which it has an obligation to resolve. Boycott the school census.

I live in one of the poorest parts of Virginia, and I'm one of the few members of my family and community who do not support the president-elect. The fact that my own rust-tinged trailer is distinguished by a lack of signs in favor of Trump is a personal point of pride. I begin each day by mentally preparing myself for whatever Donald Trump's latest assault on working people is. His choice for treasury secretary, Steve Mnuchin, was especially difficult to swallow. It is a horribly dangerous choice for poor people everywhere, including the rural, white and working class like me and my neighbors. It will hurt many of those whose support for Trump has been among the most stringent and vocal. Here in the Appalachian mountains that I love, the bucolic scenery is offset by stark markers of rural poverty. Dilapidated barns, abandoned farm- and outhouses, and mobile homes. Areas in nearby small towns and communities reveal more than a few empty, bank-owned homes. This isn't all that surprising, considering that the area I live is one of the poorest in the state of Virginia. Yet despite their relative ubiquity, I'm gobsmacked by the juxtaposition of the name Trump, synonymous with exorbitant wealth, in front of a rusting mobile home every time I see one. According to the many Trump supporters I know, Trump won their loyalty because of his so-called outsider status and promise to not only take on, but dismantle, a corrupt, ineffectual political establishment. Many of these people, myself included, have struggled financially due to job loss and foreclosure. We often have had to rely on things like public assistance to get by. Is our collective financial instability the fault of a crooked political establishment? Many people here sure think so. One of Trump's most apparent and effective ways of playing up anti-establishment credentials was calling out and criticising Hillary Clinton's ties with Wall Street bigwigs like Goldman Sachs. Despite being a billionaire himself, Trump's lack of political experience helped enable his populist appeal. He claimed to want to save the middle class – in part by changing current tax laws that allow billionaires to pay lower taxes on their enormous paychecks. Trump singled out hedge fund managers in particular as "getting away with murder" because of the current tax laws. And yet Mnuchin, the man Trump has tapped to lead the Treasury, is a former Goldman Sachs banker, Hollywood film financier and hedge fund founder and manager who profited so greatly from the global financial crisis of 2008 that he was called "the foreclosure king". Mnuchin has been widely criticized for profiting from increasing the number of foreclosures, particularly those involving reverse mortgages that are typically held by the elderly. The bank he chaired has also been accused of banking practices that discriminate against people of color. Like the rest of Trump's appointees, Mnuchin is an affront to poor people who have been victims of foreclosure, including the white, working-class ones in my community. Many people here lament the fact that the size of their families and networks have dwindled because people have been forced to relocate out of economic necessity. I can't help but worry and wonder how many more empty homes (mobile or otherwise), will be soon dot the landscape I love so well if his appointment is confirmed.

I thought we all knew why independent school students do better than those in the state sector. They have more money, more funding and better resources and they don't have the more challenging students we get in the state sector. That was before I became a teacher-researcher in a two-year project led by my college, Christ the King Sixth Form College, aiming to find the best way to support high-ability students. With funding from the London Schools Excellence Fund, we teamed up with some of the country's top private schools, like Eton and St Paul's, as well as a number of state schools, to find out how to bring the knowledge-rich learning that characterises independent schools into the state sector. Before the project, I'd never been inside an independent school and hadn't had much contact with people who had been educated there. But the first thing I found when I visited was that teachers are the same. In the independent sector, they have challenges too – just different ones. At St Paul's, one of the things I really enjoyed was spending time with other physics teachers and just talking about the subject. I've always been the only physics teacher at the schools I've taught in, and chatting about it reminded me of why I had gone into teaching in the first place. The students, too, were inspiring. I wanted to bring that culture to myclasses. After two years, our research project has produced a huge set of findings, pinpointing the factors that help high-ability students achieve top grades and get in to leading universities. For example, it highlighted the importance of teachers having strong subject knowledge, and being able to convey this confidently and unapologetically. Subject learning should go beyond the syllabus, with top GCSE students tackling A-level questions, for instance. Our collaboration also revealed the power of challenging students in the right way. Teachers should question students in a way that provides intellectual stimulus to explore the subject more deeply. Academic, subject-specific language should be the norm in the classroom: we found that lower academic language skills often hold back top students in the state sector who struggle to use subject terminology. One of the most useful findings I took away from our collaboration was the importance of independent learning and developing appropriate study habits outside the classroom. I decided to research this further, thanks to a new bursary scheme set up by my college to support staff, and soon started to see how my teaching could develop. I realised that although I was always telling students that they needed to do four to five hours of private study a week, they didn't have a clear idea of what this could look like beyond making notes. So I set them a range of different activities including reading articles, doing activities and completing booklets of examination questions. I started to put much more emphasis on activities outside the classroom, like researching relevant topics beyond the syllabus or discussing things in the news. And I praised anyone who asked questions in class, so we created a culture where students were proud to ask a question rather than seeing it as a way of flagging up the fact they hadn't understood something. My research is beginning to have a real impact. My students now come to class and tell me what they want to know about. But they no longer expect me to do the research – they want to find out for themselves. At the end of the year I gave students a questionnaire on independent learning to find out if there had been a change in attitude. One wrote: "Independent learning is something I didn't do a lot of. My view was that it would restrict the help I got from my peers. Now I see it as something that unlocks your potential and helps you to think for yourself." I wasn't in school one day last week. When I saw my A2 students in the next lesson, I mentioned that we would look into cryogenics, which had been in the news because of a court case. They said they'd already covered the topic. When I asked who had taken the lesson they said that they had researched and discussed the topic themselves in my absence. Follow us on Twitter via @GuardianTeach. Join the Guardian Teacher Network for lesson resources, comment and job opportunities, direct to your inbox.

Britain could pay into the EU budget in exchange for access to the single market, David Davis has told MPs, because ministers are considering all options to get the best Brexit deal. The Brexit secretary said the government would not rule out making future payments indefinitely in order to secure favourable access to European markets, in remarks that were endorsed by the prime minister's spokeswoman and the chancellor. During questions in the House of Commons, the Labour MP Wayne David asked if the Brexit secretary would "consider making any contribution in any shape or form for access to the single market". Davis said the government would look at the options during the article 50 process over the next two years. "The major criterion here is that we get the best possible access for goods and services to the European market," he said. "And if that is included in what he is talking about, then of course we would consider it." Such an approach would see Britain adopt a similar model to Norway, which pays €869m a year to trade in the single market, take part in EU research programmes and for criminal justice cooperation. Similar access could cost the UK €5bn a year, according to some MEPs. Sterling leapt up 1% against the dollar to $1.26 after Davis's remarks, its highest level in three weeks. Against the euro, the pound added 0.63%, rising to €1.18, aided by the eurozone currency's struggles in the face of the Italian referendum on Sunday. The chancellor, Philip Hammond, said Davis was "absolutely right" and stressed that the UK would need to make concessions to secure the most favourable deal. Risking irritation from his party's Eurosceptic wing, Hammond said the UK needed to give way to Brussels and other EU member states on some issues or face the clear risk that any deal would collapse. Hammond said that Davis meant that the UK had to go into the talks with "as many tools in our toolbox as possible". He was speaking in Edinburgh before he met Scotland's first minister, Nicola Sturgeon. "You can't go into any negotiation expecting to get every single objective that you set out and concede nothing on the way," he said. "It will have to be a deal that works for both sides. I think David Davis is absolutely right not to rule out the possibility that we might want to contribute in some way to some form of mechanism." The prime minister's spokeswoman said Davis's view on EU budget contributions was "consistent with what we have said to date, which is that it will be for the UK government to make the decision about how taxpayers' money will be spent". Downing Street stressed that no decision had been made, but that options were being kept open. "Let's not get ahead of ourselves. We are at the stage of preparing for negotiations," the spokeswoman said. "What we have said is that we will look at how we get the best possible deal. People are suggesting we should consider [paying contributions], and that was the response he [Davis] gave." Iain Duncan Smith, the leave supporter and former cabinet minister, said he did not believe Davis was necessarily talking about paying for access to the single market. "I don't think he was answering the question that was posed to him, what he was talking about here is: how do you get a deal that allows British and Europeans to access each other's markets without tariff barriers or artificial barriers for services?" he told the BBC's World at One. "I don't think there's any deal where you can say, we'll pay money in and you'll allow us access, because you might as well have tariff barriers." German Christian Democrat MEP Reimer Böge, the former chair of the European parliament's budgets committee, has said the UK could pay up to €5bn a year for the highest levels of access to the single market, equivalent to the status of Norway. "If you want something, you are obliged to pay for it. This is part of the deal," Böge said. "If you take the Norway calculation for the UK, it will be €4bn to €5bn." The UK's net contribution was £8.5bn a in 2015, so a Norway-style deal would amount to around half the current annual EU bill based on current exchange rates). Theresa May has repeatedly stressed that she will seek a bespoke deal for Britain, rather than plucking an existing model "off the shelf". EU diplomats are also sceptical that the UK would opt for maximum access to the single market, which would require accepting EU rules on free movement of people and the writ of the European court of justice. EU politicians say it is up to the UK to spell out what this bespoke deal means. Jens Geier, a German Social Democrat MEP, who negotiated the 2016 EU budget, said recently it was impossible to come up with an estimate without knowing the government's Brexit plan. "It is on the British government to make a proposal," he said. Only then would the European commission be able to outline how much the British bespoke model would cost. During departmental questions in parliament, Davis said he was keen not to rule out any option before the end of March, the government's self-imposed deadline for triggering article 50. "There is one chance in this negotiation. It's unlike almost anything else that comes in front of this house. Anything else, we can come back and repeal it, change it or amend it," he said. "This is a single-shot negotiation." The shadow Brexit minister, Matthew Pennycook, also asked Davis whether the government was expecting to pay an estimated "divorce bill" of up to €60bn to the EU after the UK leaves. Davis described the figure as "an opening bid, that's all it is, nothing more, the maximum price on departure". He said: "I'm not going to start chipping away at that bid. We will start from scratch when we go in that door before the end of March, when the negotiation starts." Hammond said that Scotland had no chance of securing its own favourable deals or opt-outs on either immigration controls or enhanced access to the single market. "You only need to think about it for a few moments to realise a separate immigration deal for any part of the UK would be impracticable," he said. There would be no other opt-outs for Scotland. "This is a UK issue and the will of the people of the UK was to leave and we're clear that we can't have a different deal or a different outcome for different parts of the UK." The shadow Brexit secretary, Keir Starmer, said Davis's department's strategy was being revealed by "leaked memos, notes caught on camera and the foreign secretary to any one who will listen to him." He said: "This is serious, because it is damaging the prospects of negotiations getting off to a good start. The secretary of state must realise this will go on for two years unless he releases the basic plan."

Hopes of resolving the prisons crisis in England and Wales have risen after the Ministry of Justice and the prison officers' union reached a deal on improved pay and pensions. The proposed package, which will be subject to a staff ballot, includes a £1,000 "retention and recognition" package for each officer, a reduction of up to three years in their retirement age to 65, and annual pay rises on top of performance-related pay increases for the next three years. The justice ministry said the package had been on the table since before the Prison Officers' Association staged protests outside prisons across England and Wales last month over health and safety concerns. The protests, which were later halted by a high court injunction, followed a series of incidents behind bars including a murder at Pentonville and a rising tide of violence and suicides among inmates. The justice secretary, Liz Truss, said the proposed agreement would pave the way for delivery of major reforms to the prison system. "The agreement represents a good offer which rightly recognises the hard work and dedication of officers across the country doing a tough job. I am pleased the POA's leadership has endorsed the package, which forms part of a wider drive to improve training and promotion prospects for staff," Truss said. She said she wanted to make sure prison officers were properly recognised and rewarded for the challenging work they did. "If accepted by members, this is a deal which will benefit thousands of prison officers who I hugely respect and for whom I want to see safe working conditions." The deal includes a proposal for consolidated pay rises of 0.5% and 1% for each of the next three years for uniformed staff, on top of usual performance-related pay rises. A further 0.5% unconsolidated payment next year will be made for staff in "closed" conditions. The reduction in the retirement age to 65 will be at no cost to staff and with full pension benefits. The £1,000 recognition and retention package will be spread over two years. The government has already announced a plan to recruit 2,500 extra prison officers over the next two years. A £4,000-a-year extra payment is also being made at some prisons in the most difficult recruitment areas or with the highest levels of staff turnover.

The Leeds coach, Brian McDermott, has expressed his disappointment that James Segeyaro has expressed his wish to leave the club but says he still expects the hooker to return to the club next season. In July Segeyaro, who was born in Papua New Guinea and raised in Australia, agreed a two-year extension to the short-term deal under which he joined the Rhinos earlier this year. Yet he told Australian media last week he did not want to return to Leeds in 2017, citing homesickness as the main reason for his wish to try to secure a new contract in the NRL next year. McDermott still holds out hope the 26-year-old will return in January as planned. "We're expecting him to be back," he said. "We made a commitment to James and he made one to us, so we're expecting him to return. I spoke to him on the phone and he expressed some concerns – which I don't want to say too much about – in relation to coming back. "We've made an obligation to him and he engaged in an agreement with us and they aren't to be broken lightly. If he looks you in the eye, says he'll be back whenever and doesn't come, that's a big thing." McDermott also admitted Segeyaro's comments about his time in Yorkshire had disappointed him. "I feel bad for some of our staff who spent an unbelievable amount of time looking after him," he added. "It's disappointing with some of the things he's said about being here and staring at four walls, which leads people to believe he was brought here and shoved into a concrete room. You've got to understand how big this is." However, McDermott did concede they have contingency plans in place should Segeyaro fail to return and fulfil his obligations with the Rhinos, who finished top of the Qualifiers Super 8s last season to retain their Super League place. He said: "There's always a plan B. I don't want to go into it too much but agents are always in contact with a fluid list of players. I still expect he'll come back in the right frame of mind, but of course we've got plans in place."

BREAKING NEWS Around 350 victims have come forward to report child sexual abuse within football clubs, according to the National Police Chiefs' Council. "We will listen and treat all reports sensitively and seriously," said chief constable Simon Bailey. Meanwhile, the former Newcastle United footballer Derek Bell, who was subjected to years of sexual abuse by a boys club coach who subsequently worked at Newcastle, has accused the club of a cover-up for their limited response after Bell raised the alarm in 1998. KANE'S FABLE The rumours started in September. "Show me the money!" screamed the Sunday People on the 4th. "Harry Kane is chasing a bumper new contract at Spurs." Over the next few weeks a string of Tottenham's best players scrawled their signature upon bumper new contracts, and it seemed but a matter of time. In October, as a trickle of tittle-tattle became a stream of stories, Lahn's Lahn E'nan Stannah claimed that "Tottenham would like to double Kane's weekly wage". As we entered November the rivulet of reports became a deluge of dispatches, one that showed no sign of abating even when, on the 10th day of the month, the Telegraph declared that "Tottenham claim there are currently no contract talks ongoing with Kane", presumably on the basis that it was quite obviously a fib. A week later Mauricio Pochettino told fans to "be calm and happy" because "Harry Kane is very happy to be here, to commit to the future of the club", and a couple of days after that the striker himself revealed that "we are in talks and I'm sure we will get something sorted". Finally on 1 December – this glorious morn, this day of days – they got something sorted. "Everyone knows how much I love this team and how I feel about this club. I had no hesitation in signing," gushed Kane, puzzlingly. No hesitation is what the English goal-grabber shows when he sniffs a chance in the opposition penalty area. When contract talks began Kane didn't so much hesitate as lapse into a full-blown stupor. It's a couple of weeks since Kane announced his approach to the negotiations consisted of "not panicking and not demanding anything". The Fiver would imagine that the road from "Tottenham would like to double Kane's weekly wage" via "I'm not demanding anything" to "I had no hesitation in signing" would be more penalty run-up than Ironman triathlon. We would certainly like to reassure The Man that, if he harbours a Tottenhamly desire regarding the salary of his star semi-humorous email-scribe, he should go ahead and speak up, safe in the knowledge that our enthusiastic agreement will be genuinely hesitation-free. Kane's negotiations were rumoured to have started back in the days when Tottenham were looking forward to discovering Wembley's morale-boosting properties and the world knew nothing of Sam Allardyce's predilection for pints of wine and regrettable accompanying chit-chat. Still, the effort was all worthwhile. After scoring twice in a 3-2 victory over West Ham last month Kane announced that "there aren't many better feelings than being at White Hart Lane and scoring in a London derby". A newly-secured guarantee of earnings running to at least £32m over the next five-and-a-half years would appear to be one of them. "It's amazing," he cheered on Thursday. "To sign another contract is a special feeling." Still, the important thing is that the deal is done. What a boon for Spurs, who now have all the key members of the team that wasn't quite good enough to win a particularly weak league last season signed up on generous long-term deals except for Hugo Lloris. And there's news on that front too, with Pochettino revealing today that "Hugo is very happy and he wants success here and to stay here at Tottenham", and adding that "maybe in the next few days you will receive some news". Watch this space, reader! And then keep watching. And a bit more. Might as well make yourself comfortable, this might take a while. QUOTE OF THE DAY "The club might put on a pre-match meal for us. It's not normally a given because of money so we only have it on big occasions. We had one before Gateshead because we'd travelled a few hours. But normally we take our own packed lunch. The lads cook their own stuff and heat it up - the microwave on the bus gets a lot of action" – Macclesfield defender David Fitzpatrick looks ahead to Friday night's televised FA Cup second-round match with Oxford United. RECOMMENDED VIEWING Just Baroka FC keeper Oscarine Masuluke scoring a 96th-minute equaliser against Orlando Pirates in South Africa's top flight. With an overhead kick. And then celebrating duly. FIVER LETTERS "The ageless Tim Cahill wins the FFA Cup for Melbourne (yesterday's Bits and Bobs). Surely your report should give it its full title of the flamin' FFA Cup?" – Ross McEwan [apologies – Fiver Ed]. "Re: Paul Fowler's comparison of his coffee make to Theo Walcott (yesterday's Fiver letters). Judging by his letter I can only assume that Paul writes Hollywood films: I was intrigued by the start, kept interested through the build-up, but completely let down by the ending" – Craig Hills. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And if you've nothing better to do you can also tweet The Fiver. Today's winner of our prizeless letter o'the day is ... Rollover. SUPPORT THE GUARDIAN Producing the Guardian's thoughtful, in-depth journalism – the stuff not normally found in this email, obviously – is expensive, but supporting us isn't. If you value our journalism, please support us by making a one-off or recurring contribution. RECOMMENDED LISTENING Join AC Jimbo Max Rushden and co for the latest thrilling instalment of Football Weekly Extra. BITS AND BOBS Players, staff and 45,000 supporters of Atlético Nacional paid an emotional tribute to the victims of the Colombian plane crash at a mass wake. Doves were released into the air as fans holding white candles chanted: "Please remember across the continent, we will never forget the champions Chapecoense." Manchester United will face Hull in the Milk Cup semi-finals, while Liverpool take on their south-coast feeder club. Contrite Melbourne City captain Bruno Fornaroli has explained that it was fatigue-knack that caused him to drop a spectacular – and very public – F-bomb after his club's flamin' FFA Cup final victory over Sydney FC. "You win, you run a lot ... it's not my fault ... this moment I'm very tired ... but I say sorry for what I say," he sniffed. Joe Hart reckons his future at Manchester City looks about as rosy as a piece of scorched earth. "I've not been sent [to Torino] to see how I do or see if I improve. I've been sent out because I wasn't wanted," he sobbed. Barnet manager Martin Allen, whose chairman Tony Kleanthous declared last year that he's "like a girlfriend you can never get rid of", has upped and done one down to non-league Eastleigh. "The approach came out of the blue yesterday but it was quite clear that Martin had decided that he wanted to take the opportunity they were offering to him," sniffed Kleanthous. And top, top pocket-watch swinger John Milton has been getting his third person on to explain how he helped Tigres' André-Pierre Gignac recover from a two-month bout of goal-scoring-knack and score a hat-trick against Pumas. "What John Milton does is not magic, they aren't powers," he cooed. "It is a psychological treatment, an alternative treatment to traditional clinical therapy. Through hypnotherapy you carry out a mental treatment, trying to access conflicting thoughts. With a professional-level goalscorer of his stature, we forget that he is also a human being who has certain conflicts that don't allow him to give his best. With therapy, you focus and mentalise to perform as you should." STILL WANT MORE? Inside Italy's ultras: Tobias Jones investigates the power and reach of some of the country's most notorious supporters. Pep Guardiola and Antonio Conte are two men obsessed by tactics, writes Jonathan Wilson – and he should know. It'll be brooder v extrovert when Manchester City meet Chelsea this weekend in an intriguing contest, he adds. When free-kick routines go wrong, a Roma rabona and managers going down too easily after being struck by paper planes are among the Classic YouTube clips presented for your enjoyment this week. The latest chapter of the Wayne Rooney Revival didn't quite go to script, writes Paul Wilson, what with a yellow card ruling him out of the meeting with former club Everton. D'oh! Oh, and if it's your thing ... you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. AND INSTACHAT, TOO! STANDING BY IT, OBVIOUSLY

'Streaming has been invaluable," begins Glass Animals singer Dave Bayley, from the back of a tour bus bound for Glasgow. His band's 2014 song Gooey currently stands at nearly 68m Spotify streams, and was instrumental in turning Glass Animals into what Music Week recently described as "international streaming sensations". Bayley looks back on the initial streaming success of Gooey with a mixture of confusion and amazement: "We looked at all the streaming services' viral charts and, for some reason, we were at the top of them. Off the back of that, everything else happened." You could be forgiven for raising an eyebrow at the notion of a "streaming artist". Ten years ago, an unknown singer called Sandi Thom stormed to No 1 after livestreaming gigs from her south London basement. Her success was a masterpiece of implied causality. It wasn't the livestreams, whose true popularity has since been queried, that rocketed her to No 1 – it was the fact that they provided an irresistible story to the established media. But times have changed: in a landscape dominated by services such as Spotify, Apple Music, Tidal and Amazon, it is possible to have a hit without the press and radio (or much of the public) even noticing you. Kiiara, hardly a household name, is currently enjoying a global hit with Gold, off the back of 312m streams on Spotify alone. (Other services don't make their numbers public.) You could look at British artist James TW, whose song When You Love Someone has 35m streams. Then there's Australian teen Joel Adams, whose one and only song Please Don't Go has chalked up 320m streams on Spotify. US music consultant John Geraghty lays out the idea of the streaming artist in plain terms. "A streaming act is one who entered the mainstream due to support from major streaming services," he explains. This would account, for instance, for the success of Lukas Graham's 7 Years. "Alternatively, it's an act whose streaming support may not have translated, but at the very least earned them recognition within the industry and among their target audience." Industry exec Chris Anokute has experience of both examples. As senior vice president of A&amp;R at Epic Records, he oversees acts including 2016's pop crossover success story Zara Larsson, who recently passed 1bn Spotify streams. He also manages the emerging singer-songwriter Léon, whose Tired of Talking hit more than 30m streams. Anokute mentions the artist Starley, whose song Call On Me appeared as an independent release in July before being picked up by Epic. "It came out of nowhere," Anokute says. "She signed to an indie, put out the record and, before you know it, the song's raising its head. It's performing on Spotify faster and better than any record of the last year. She was unknown a couple of months ago." He also cites US duo Timeflies, whose Once in a While reached 220m streams. Epic signed the band to a one-off single deal, making what Anokute describes as "a very small investment". Spotify alone will pay out over $1m (£800,000) for the streams of Once in a While. How much of this filters down to Timeflies depends on their deal with Epic, and there's no ignoring the music industry's legitimate concerns over standard payout rates. Regardless, a million-dollar song is a million-dollar song, and you can understand why a major-label exec would find that exciting. But the most notable shift for unsigned or independent artists is that streaming success needn't rely on marketing muscle or heavyweight financial backing. The Swedish producer Neiked was unsigned when Spotify threw its weight behind his song Sexual – its streaming success inspired mainstream radio support, and it has been in the top 10 for the last five weeks. "Spotify has democratised the universe," is the dramatic, understandably Spotify-centric view of Spotify's George Ergatoudis, who joined the service this year after a decade as pop's most powerful tastemaker at BBC Radio 1. "One of our editors can find something, believe in it, put it in a playlist, see an interesting result from the audience then accelerate the song." Systems inside Spotify automatically create playlists of what Ergatoudis describes as "emerging stories" (songs) which editors then trawl through when they're compiling the playlists vital in achieving true hugeness. "There's a lot of human curation time spent on saying, 'Right, there's some noise there, but what do we think about it editorially?'" Ergatoudis says. It's reassuring that discovery isn't left entirely to algorithms, but this editorial aspect creates another question. Namely: has streaming liberated new artists from the constraints of regimented radio playlists and the whims of ego-crazed music critics, only to replace that system with a different set of gatekeepers? Some music journalists (including the one writing this article) may have curated playlists for the likes of Spotify and Apple Music, but in a broad sense is it not more dangerous, in light of Spotify's market dominance, that there's now only one gate? "The term 'gatekeeper' assumes we're blocking something worthy coming through," Ergatoudis insists. "I'd argue we're not doing that. We're letting good stuff through, and amplifying it." Ergatoudis argues that the gate being kept is now an extremely large one, or perhaps a load of different gates, through which different artists can pass. Demographics differ from service to service – Apple Music and Tidal skew urban – but as streaming services aren't restricted by hours in a day, like mainstream radio stations, we're looking at the possibility of multiple concurrent musical zeitgeists. For the first time, something like the UK's long-trumpeted guitar-music resurgence wouldn't have to come at the expense or, say, grime's increasing popularity. Dave Bayley from Glass Animals has seen this shift first hand. "Streaming has definitely levelled the playing field," he says. "It has allowed this tiny band from Oxford – us – to be given the same opportunity as Drake." It's worth speculating what might have happened to a band like Glass Animals if, in a pre-streaming landscape, their first album had received little to no mainstream support. "I don't think our label would have pushed us in a certain direction," Bayley says. "Though I do think they would have said, 'Maybe you should try something different.' As it is, we'd released what was quite an obscure record, it somehow did quite well through streaming, and our label then gave us freedom on our second record to make whatever noises we wanted. They were like, 'We don't know how that happened, but we'll let you guys do that again.'" When we speak, Glass Animals have just played the 3,300-capacity Roundhouse in London. However, translating streaming success into actual popularity is by no means a given. James TW, with his 35m streams of When You Love Someone, is one artist hoping to make the transition ahead of a full artist launch through Island Records. His manager, Glenn Oratz, is frank about the challenges facing artists who, overnight, have a streaming hit on their hands. "There will continue to be artists who have very significant responses to single songs on streaming platforms but can't necessarily convert it to what you and I would think of as being a well-established artist," he says. "It's nothing new – there's a reason we came up with the term 'one-hit wonder'. You've got to back it up with other high-quality material. The day before we speak, Oratz had visited Apple HQ; that was followed by James TW performing at a radio conference. "In a perfect world you'd have a combination," Oratz adds. "A presence on streaming, supported by radio. You can develop a meaningful fanbase and awareness [with streaming], but you're missing a key component. I don't know an artist who has been able to develop their brand and their awareness at the level you'd think of as well established, without some type of radio support." Also standing on the precipice of pop stardom is Anne-Marie, the UK-based singer whose current single Alarm has received huge support from streaming services (147m Spotify streams) and Radio 1. When we talk, Spotify has her listed as the world's 76th most listened-to artist, "which," she admits, "is quite amazing when I've only had one song out properly. That's against artists who have been around for ever." (Anne-Marie, by that measurement, is twice as popular as Bob Dylan.) We talk about Spotify's New Music Friday playlist, which operates as a showcase of big artists' new releases, and as a testing ground for unheard-of acts. Each week the playlist gets a new "cover image", depicting the artist at the top of the list. "It's like being on the front of a magazine," Anne-Marie says. "It's strange. I'd love to be on actual magazine covers – that's the dream – but you've got to move with the times, haven't you? I'm not like, 'Oh, for fuck's sake, I wish it was still like it used to be.'" A pause. And then, with words that echo those of many in the music industry: "I mean, I don't even fucking know what's going on any more." Somewhere in the confusion, Annie-Marie is converting her streaming stats into fans. She has a cunning plan to build on the success of Alarm ("I'm just not going to put out a shit song"), and is steadily building up a live following. Global artist launches were once plate-spinning exercises that could take years of schmoozing international media, starting from scratch in a second territory while continuing to nurture relationships in the first. Now, analytics provided by some streaming services allow some artists to hit the road before a single radio play. Chris Anokute is evangelical about the data that's now at his fingertips: in the back end of Spotify, for instance, fans are split into three categories: streakers (who have listened to the artist every day in the last week), loyalists (who have listened to them more than to any other over the past 20 days), and regulars (who listened to the artist on the majority of the days in the month). "They used to laugh at you if you did research as an A&amp;R guy," Anokute adds. "They'd say you weren't talented or that you didn't have good ears." They are, it's fair to assume, not laughing now. Anokute used analytics to leapfrog traditional gatekeepers to a point where his artist Léon, with one streaming hit and virtually no radio support, could headline 400-capacity venues in multiple territories. "I know exactly who's listening to Léon, and where," he explains. Combining this information with extra data on factors such as age and sex, it's possible to book tours with incredible efficiency. "It works!" he hoots. "I know, because I've done it! I've put Léon in markets where nobody would believe she could sell tickets, and I've sold out the venues." And for those streaming artists who don't, or can't cross over from streaming glory to the household-name status that has traditionally defined success? Anokute suggests a recalibration of our notion of hit songs, once again bringing up his experience with Timeflies. "We took their song to radio in America," he says. "The song did not succeed – it wasn't a radio hit. Does that mean it wasn't a hit? It has 220m streams on it. It has made a million dollars. That doesn't mean it's not a hit, it just means we need to focus on the future. And the future's streaming."

The UK Investigatory Powers Bill has passed into law. This bill legalises a variety of tools for intercepting and hacking by security services and was waved through without complaint by both houses. Academics should be concerned – and engage in some serious discussion about the (mis-)use of technological advances. Digital surveillance poses a real threat to academic freedom. Not only is our engagement with research participants no longer guaranteed to be secure, but the internet we access is increasingly censored. This impacts researchers engaging with vulnerable subjects, whether they're former prisoners or animal rights activists. Our communication and data could be used against them. The bill is just one way in which the digital environment is changing for academics. Blocking and filtering of content on university networks has become standard and embedded in internet-specific measures such as those set out in the Prevent strategy. This particularly affects security and terrorism scholars, whose research can be restricted or flagged up as suspicious. There is also a growing worry among ethic committees – made worse by the Boston College tape lawsuit – about whether to allow studies that touch the edges of the law. Alongside these changes, profiling technologies for monitoring students' behaviour and performance are now flourishing. As someone working on the sensitive research topic of hacking and politically motivated hacking – so-called hacktivism – these issues matter to me. Both phenomena are relevant to discussions on technical security, which has made me think more carefully about the safeguarding of my research data, and also our understanding of what constitutes security and insecurity online. 'Nothing to hide' My frustration about the rapid deterioration of privacy and unimpaired academic inquiry has been fed by the lack of critical engagement from fellow staff and students. "I have nothing to hide" is a common response when I raise the topic with colleagues. And while I genuinely admire the certainty with which people believe themselves to be inculpable, I do think that academics underestimate the importance of thinking about these questions – if not for themselves, then at least for their participants. Let's reflect: we are teaching students about research ethics and methods. We require researchers to protect participants' privacy and confidentiality. We have to pass institutional review boards, comply with good practice standards, and appoint data protection officers. Yet, in my experience, the most fundamental question of digital security remains absent from our lecture halls and daily practices. I have seen research projects on vulnerable subjects pass ethics boards because someone claimed that they would lock transcripts or store them on password-protected computers. I have seen researchers going to conflict regions without proper clarity on how to save and transport their digital data. I have been to lectures that advise on moral dilemmas and methodological approaches but fail to outline how to effectively safeguard information. None of this protects researchers and participants if devices are stolen or forcefully taken from them. While I acknowledge that these concerns might not affect and apply to all researchers equally, there is a risk of academics collecting data with potential unintended consequences such as the confiscation of research material and its use in court cases. A changing landscape Raising awareness of the need for digital security is one way to tackle the challenges of surveillance and censorship. The use of encryption and other tools such as The Onion Router or virtual private networks is key. Although their usage requires some basic technical familiarity, they make communication with vulnerable participants more secure and can protect data from unauthorised access or interference. It is also important to keep up to date with the changing landscape of these tools through, for example, the CryptoParty movement, which runs autonomous global meetings introducing the public to cryptographic techniques. These meetings can be attended free of charge and without any prior knowledge or skills. Academics must be more critical in the application of digital technologies; academia needs a public debate about the level of protection that scholars and participants can expect. We need to be outspoken about the increase of surveillance and censorship practices. Scientific advancement relies on scholars' ability to conduct unobstructed inquiry. Most importantly, institutions need to prepare staff and students for these challenges, and give them not only an ethical and methodological toolkit but also the ability to anticipate the effects of information being restricted, participants exposed, or intellectual property being stolen. The UK Investigatory Powers Bill could be a wake-up call for the academic community. Hopefully we will respond. Leonie Tanczer is one of the authors of Censorship and Surveillance in the Digital Age: The Technological Challenges for Academics Join the higher education network for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow us on Twitter @gdnhighered. And if you have an idea for a story, please read our guidelines and email your pitch to us at highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com

The Guardian has been awarded five prizes at this year's Editorial Intelligence Comment Awards. The awards, which are now in their eighth year, celebrate the achievements of the UK's finest and most influential print and online commentators and their editors. Gary Younge picked up the comment piece of the year award. Jonathan Freedland was recognised in the newly created commentariat of the year category. Hannah Jane Parkinson was named young commentariat of the year. The Observer's Rachel Cooke was awarded arts and culture entertainment commentator of the year and Kenan Malik took home the prize for society and diversity commentator of the year. The full list of winners can be found here.

It rained for 48 hours straight in New York this week and, stuck inside with two kids and no childcare, we watched the movie Paddington approximately 108 times. There is nothing I can't tell you about this film, from the fact that the first exterior shot of Paddington station is, clearly, Marylebone, to the insanity of its timeline. (Briefly: the film is set in present-day London, but Paddington's aunt and uncle were discovered in Peru by an Edwardian explorer, whose 10-year-old daughter grows up to be Paddington's arch-enemy. By rights, she should be about 117, but is instead played by Nicole Kidman as a sexy evil lady of not even 50.) Why does no one have mobile phones? Why does the Trellick Tower loom so large in the landscape? Why do I want Hugh Bonneville to adopt me and let me live either in his attic in Windsor Gardens, or anywhere in Downton Abbey? Mrs Brown is played by Sally Hawkins, who is my age, and Bonneville is 13 years older, but why do I still identify with the children in these movies and never the parents? At A-level, we were made to read King Lear on a continuous loop for two years until the two funniest lines became: "out, vile jelly!" and "Give me an egg, nuncle, and I'll give thee two crowns." I can say with some confidence that the two funniest lines in Paddington are, "Your call is moderately important to us" and "It's more a set of guidelines than a binding ethos", although when Julie Walters says to Kidman, "Oh, shut your cake hole," I laugh out loud every time. This may be a sign of nervous exhaustion. Doris Lessing, in the kind of statement novelists make and that is taken by non-novelists as proof that they ought to get out more, once said she believed she might stare at a wall for years and never exhaust its possibilities. Now I understand what she was saying, for I feel the same way about Paddington. Yesterday my dad came by for an hour and watched the first half of the film with us. "That's Marylebone, not Paddington," he said, and it felt like the start of a new shared religion. A novel approach to fashion In the New York Times this week the writer Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie voiced her ambivalence about appearing in the current ad campaign for Boots No 7, and talked about fashion in a way that reminded me there is almost nothing you can say on this subject that doesn't damn you in someone else's eyes. Even Adichie, who is excellent, was mildly annoying. "I very quickly realised that if you want to be seen as a serious writer, you can't possibly look like a person who looks in the mirror." (Really? Still?) She made the case that fashion, the provenance of women, is belittled in a way that sport, the provenance of men, is not, which is I think true, although as a point, it is overshadowed by the fact that what happens to women who fail to meet standards imposed by the fashion industry is not analogous to what happens to men who don't like sport. Anyway, it was fun to see the novelist-as-model and she was honest about why she did it. "I thought it might be fun, and then they will give me free makeup. And I'm always up for free things." Stains: massive I'm sensitive on the subject of fashion this week. Looking up from the TV, I glanced in a mirror and saw I was actually listing to one side. This is what happens when the babysitter goes on holiday: hair unwashed for three days, unspecified stains – probably yoghurt from this morning, but it could be macaroni cheese from three days ago – on my jogging bottoms, and my heart sinking at the thought of a meeting next week, for which I will at the very least have to get in the shower. As it carried on raining, I pushed the double buggy up and down the lobby of my building until the mail woman looked at me and said: "It must be hard." "Is it the stains?" I said. She looked horrified. "No, no, you look great," she said, and backed away slowly as if retreating from a grizzly bear.

School drop-out, conscientious objector, young communist, tramp, jailbird, hospital orderly, allotment keeper, painter and decorator – it hardly looks like a promising CV for a literary agent, but Jonathan Clowes, who has died aged 86 after suffering from Alzheimer's, was all of the above, and the writers he nurtured go all the way up to a Nobel prize winner. Brought up in south London, Clowes came from a middle-class family; his father ran a picture-framing business. After leaving his grammar school at 15 "for failing every exam", as he put it, he took a variety of jobs, predominantly manual and unskilled, before running into a spot of bother when called up for military service. Averse to fighting in the Korean war, he went on the run, but was caught and sent to jail. In all he served three short prison terms, in Wormwood Scrubs, Wandsworth and Brixton, where his work in the prison libraries fed the voracious appetite for reading he had developed after leaving school. He managed to shorten his third prison term by feigning a religious conversion, whereupon he was freed and given a job as a hospital orderly. His introduction into the world of literary agents came almost by accident when he was working as a painter and decorator and was shown a manuscript for a play written by a member of his crew, Henry Chapman. Placing great faith in his own judgment, Clowes took the manuscript to Joan Littlewood, thanks to an introduction from a mutual friend, and she was sufficiently impressed to put the play on. Soon after, he arranged for another friend's novel, A Breath of Fresh Air, by Fred Ball, to be published by Faber and Faber. He later confessed it was the only publisher he had ever heard of. His third assignment came through another friend who was working as a graphic artist. Knowing the man well, Clowes suggested that he might do better writing fiction and the result was the first great success for both of them. The friend was Len Deighton and the book that resulted was The Ipcress File, for which Clowes negotiated both book and film deals. Taking on publishers and film producers from a position of sheer ignorance may seem an intimidating task, but Clowes quickly developed an effective negotiating style. At the start this may have consisted mainly of pure bluff and a silence suggesting deep thought, but from a position of having never even seen a contract, he quickly learned the trade, mainly by letting others do the talking and rejecting anything he did not understand. The reputation he gained for inscrutability, wisdom and quiet contemplation always stayed with him. Taking on only authors he truly believed in, and sometimes even lending them money to pursue their writing ambitions, Clowes built up a client list that included many of the top names in the world of novelists, poets, playwrights and TV script writers. In 1960 he founded the Jonathan Clowes Ltd agency, which attracted, among others, Kingsley Amis, Elizabeth Jane Howard, Christine Keeler, Maureen Duffy, David Nobbs, Carla Lane, Peter Tinniswood, David Bellamy and the Nobel laureate Doris Lessing. When asked what sort of writers he represented, he would simply reply: "The best ones." In a rare interview for the Guardian in 1970, he described the qualities that make a good agent as "a good business sense combined with an ability to help a writer aesthetically", going on to say: "A lot of agents have one without the other." Having both in abundance was what gained Clowes great respect from publishers and trust and loyalty from his writers, many of whom became close personal friends. On the other side of the literary fence, the publishers quickly learned to appreciate Clowes's lack of pushiness in favour of delicate understatement. When Clowes said that something seemed to him "rather good", they knew it was liable to be sensational. Equally, when a troubled author was having doubts about a book and Clowes told them "I think it works", they took it as the highest praise and breathed easy again. His successful ventures on the fringe of the world of book publishing included a long-term involvement in handling and advising on the Arthur Conan Doyle copyrights in the face of disputes among the author's family, and working as assistant producer with Michael Deeley on the 1967 film Robbery. This almost led to an involvement with Deeley's hugely successful film The Italian Job, but Clowes turned it down. In appearance, Clowes had the bohemian appearance of a leftwing intellectual, bearded and with corduroy jacket and open-necked, a style he maintained even when he had clearly become one of the literary establishment. It is not quite true, as has sometimes been claimed, that he never wore a tie, and while he did indeed have shirts specially tailored for him that did not need a tie, he did, on rare occasions such as his daughter's wedding and Lessing's Nobel prize award dinner, sport the approved neckwear. He ran his agency highly successfully until 1990, when he was told by his doctors that he must work less and live in a better climate. With extreme reluctance, he reduced his client list from more than 60 to only 12 and moved to south-west France with his second wife, Ann Evans, whom he had married in 1981. Together they bought a derelict Cistercian abbey dating back to the 12th century, where Clowes could enjoy a more restful life, where he developed a new passion for taking in stray cats, and where he had time to indulge his passion for wine, particularly claret. His friend and fellow agent Andrew Nurnberg recalls sharing an excellent bottle of Pomerol there to celebrate Jonathan's 80th birthday. Restoring the wine cellar, its floor covered with stone chips to let the wine breathe, was apparently a priority in rebuilding the abbey. Perhaps his early experience as painter and decorator had at last come in useful again. He is survived by Ann and by his daughter, Victoria, from his first marriage, to Enyd Williams, which ended in divorce, and grandson, Cassius. Jonathan Clowes, literary agent, born 8 June 1930; died 18 November 2016

Vladimir Putin has softened his rhetoric about the United States in an annual speech, expressing a desire to mend ties and work together in Syria once Donald Trump takes office. "We are ready to cooperate with the new American administration," the Russian president said in his state of the nation address to an assembly of lawmakers and officials. "It's important to normalise and start to develop our bilateral relations on an equal and mutually beneficial basis." US-Russian ties have been frigid following sanctions against Russia over the Ukraine crisis and support for Syrian rebels fighting Russia's ally Bashar al-Assad. But Trump has praised Putin's leadership saying it would be "nice" to work with him to defeat the Islamic State, and in their first conversation after the election, Putin appeared to emphasise the potential for cooperation. Putin returned to the theme in his speech on Thursday: "Of course I am counting on joining forces with the United States in the fight with the real, not made-up, threat of international terrorism," he said. He added that thanks to the bombing campaign in Syria, where Russia and Assad's forces are engaged in a bloody push to take Aleppo, "terrorists have been dealt a palpable blow". A Russian diplomat said on Wednesday that Moscow has been in contact with Trump's transition team about Syria. Putin made a few jibes at his opponents in the west, saying that "unlike some foreign colleagues", Russia was looking for friends rather than enemies. But he was less strident in his criticism than in past addresses. In 2014, he accused the west of trying to contain and weaken Russia for decades. In 2015, he lashed out at western meddling and regime change in the Middle East. In this year's speech, Putin said the United States and Russia had a "shared responsibility" to ensure international security and nuclear nonproliferation, noting that "attempts to break strategic parity are extremely dangerous". During his campaign, Trump suggested Japan and South Korea should develop nuclear weapons, although he later appeared to backtrack on that statement. Putin also stressed Russia's growing ties with China, holding them up as a model for a "world order built not on the idea of domination by one country, no matter how strong, but on harmonious consideration of all states' interests". Ahead of the hundredth anniversary of the October Revolution next year, Putin warned against similar actions to create "schisms, animosity, resentments" in the national unity. He said Russia cannot grow with a "weak government and a pliant regime directed from outside". The lion's share of the speech was dedicated to domestic issues, with Putin arguing that the economy was gradually emerging from recession and sectors like agriculture and IT were growing. He touched on the traditional topic of corruption and said the ruling United Russia party had a "special responsibility" to represent constituents after winning a constitutional majority in parliament in September. Discussing healthcare, Putin did not mention Russia's growing HIV epidemic though Thursday was World Aids Day. According to popular blogger Ilya Varlamov, the audience burst into applause 15 times during the 69-minute speech, the lowest amount of clapping at the state of the nation address since 2005.

A little before nine o'clock on Tuesday night, Antonio Gutiérrez found himself facing a welcome dilemma. Might he, a waitress asked, have room for a second helping of pudding? Gutiérrez, who had already seen off a plate of pasta, a fish stew and a slice of cake, gave it some thought. The option would have been unremarkable for most diners, but for him, it was entirely novel – as was the cafe in which he was eating. By day, the Robin Hood restaurant, which sits on a side street near the centre of Madrid, is a typical Spanish bar: coffee and croquetas, a fruit machine, cigarette machine, and a leg of ham dozing under a tea towel on the counter. But at night, it transforms itself into a pioneering place where homeless people such as Gutiérrez, 40, from Extremadura, can dine, free of charge, at tables set with flowers, metal cutlery and proper glasses. The restaurant is the latest initiative from the charity Mensajeros de la Paz – meaning messengers of peace – which was founded 54 years ago by Father Ángel García Rodríguez. Its business model – using breakfast and lunch takings from paying customers to fund free evening meals for the homeless – is simple enough. Its aim, however, is a little more ambitious. "The inspiration came from Pope Francis, who's spoken again and again about the importance of giving people dignity, whether it's through bread or through work," said Father Ángel. "So we thought, why not open a restaurant with tablecloths and proper cutlery and waiters? People with nothing can come and eat here in the restaurant and get the same treatment as everyone else. It's just common sense." Like many Spanish charities, Mensajeros de la Paz is still dealing with the human consequences of the country's financial crisis, which has left the overall unemployment rate close to 20% and youth unemployment among Europe's highest at 42%. Each day, Father Ángel's nearby church-cum-social centre provides 200 homeless people with breakfast and lunch. In the evening, the new restaurant will feed 100 homeless people in two sittings. If the initiative proves successful, the NGO plans to extend the scheme and hopes it will attract famous chefs who will give up the odd evening to come to cook in the kitchen. "'Man does not live on bread alone,' but the Bible forgot that some people don't even have bread," said Father Ángel, 79. "So we're trying to give them bread." The priest acknowledges that there may be something a little provocative in naming the restaurant after a figure who redistributed wealth at the tip of an arrow and the point of a sword. But the idea is less to rob the rich than to encourage them to share their good fortune. "The name is just to spice it up a bit and to get people to notice. We could have called it 'The Brothel' and I'm sure that would have got people's attention, too." Around the packed tables of the restaurant on Tuesday for its opening night, the talk was less of legendary outlaws and more about the excellent fish course. "The food here is great and very elegant," said Ramón Luis. "I'd give it loads of stars and I'll be back tomorrow." For Carmen Junquito, the tablecloths and crockery made a welcome change to the soup kitchen sandwiches she normally had for dinner. "This restaurant is life and happiness to me," she said. "It's the best thing there is; the best thing in the world." Gutiérrez, who has been homeless for a decade, had not eaten in such a restaurant for four or five years – except when Father Ángel had taken him out. "If you don't have anything, this means a lot," he said. After a few seconds' deliberation, he ordered another piece of cake.

Whitehall's spending watchdog could investigate the deal to keep Nissan making cars in north-east England, following a demand from the chair of an influential parliamentary committee. Andrew Tyrie, chair of the Treasury select committee, has written to the National Audit Office (NAO) asking for an inquiry into any assurances offered by the government to the Japanese car giant. If follows a refusal by the chancellor, Philip Hammond, to say how much the commitments made to Nissan would add to the public finances and will increase pressure on the government to give the details of any deal. Tyrie said on Thursday he had written to Sir Amyas Morse, the head of the NAO, asking for auditors to get to the bottom of whether it might cost the taxpayer money. "The chancellor has not answered the crucial question: whether an assurance was given to Nissan which could constitute a contingent liability, or support consistent with the provisions of the Industrial Development Act 1982. "So I have written to Sir Amyas, asking him to examine whether contingent liabilities have arisen as a result of government commitments, and/or assurances made to Nissan," he said. In October, Nissan said it was extending the production of two new vehicles in Sunderland amid rising speculation that it could leave the UK following the country's decision to quit the European Union. The move secured 7,000 jobs in the Brexit-backing city, but prompted questions over whether a so-called "sweetheart deal" had been struck between the carmaker and the government. The chancellor said promises made to the Japanese firm avoided weighing down the Treasury with significant extra subsidies in the wake of the Brexit vote. But in a letter to Tyrie, he refused to elaborate, saying only that any subsidies were "entirely within state aid and WTO rules". The government has refused to disclose to the Office for Budget Responsibility whether it made any financial promises to Nissan ahead of the autumn statement. The OBR's economic outlook report, released alongside the mini-budget, revealed that the fiscal watchdog "asked specifically whether any contingent liabilities had been created in respect of assurances provided to Nissan" and that the Treasury declined to say. A spokesman for the NAO said a response would be released in due course.

Arsenal have confirmed Santi Cazorla will have surgery on his injured achilles, with the Spain international expected to miss at least three more months of the season in a bitter blow for Arsène Wenger's side. Cazorla has been absent since picking up the injury in his right ankle in the 6-0 Champions League victory against Ludogorets in October, with Arsenal initially hopeful that the 31-year-old would only be out for a short spell. However, Wenger admitted after the EFL Cup tie defeat against Southampton on Wednesday that he was unsure when the playmaker would be fit enough to return to action because of inflammation around the affected area. Cazorla visited a specialist this week, who recommended that he requires surgery to rectify the issue. "Santi Cazorla is travelling to Sweden early next week to undergo surgery to his right ankle," read an Arsenal statement on Thursday. "The club's medical team and specialists have decided that surgery is required to the plantaris tendon in the Spain international's right foot. "The problem has not progressed during a rehabilitation programme following the injury during the home match with Ludogorets on October 19. We expect Santi's full recovery to take approximately three months. Everyone at the club will be working hard with Santi to make sure he's back on the pitch as soon as possible." The loss of Cazorla for so long will be a blow for Wenger, who was without the player he signed from Málaga in 2012 for almost six months last season because of a knee injury. In the five Premier League matches Arsenal have played since his absence, they have drawn three and won just twice. It will also raise questions about the club's medical staff given that it is now almost six weeks since he originally sustained the injury. There was better news for Wenger with the return of Danny Welbeck to training after he sustained a knee injury in May. The England striker was expected to be sidelined for up to nine months but he could now be in contention to play over the Christmas period.

Boris Johnson has denied privately telling a group of ambassadors that he supported the principle of free movement, and said he had always made it clear that the UK needed to "take back control" of immigration. The British foreign secretary was cornered by journalists in a hotel lobby in Rome, where he was speaking on a panel about migration, and was forced to respond to allegations that he personally supported free movement, a view contrary to the official position of Theresa May's government. "I'm afraid I said absolutely no such thing," Johnson said. "What I said very clearly to that group of ambassadors – I think it was at a breakfast – was that immigration had been a good thing for the UK in many respects but it had got out of control and that we needed to take back control." He was responding to allegations by four unnamed EU ambassadors that he had made such claims in private and that they were shocked by the government's apparently "shambolic" approach to the issue. The controversy has prompted the Liberal Democrat MP Nick Clegg to suggest – if the reports were to be believed – that Johnson, the most ardent supporter of Brexit before the 23 June vote, was "treating voters like fools". In his public remarks on migration in Rome, Johnson reiterated the UK's commitment to European security, saying Britain was still "a part of Europe even if we are leaving the EU". The foreign secretary made several references, much to the surprise of Italian journalists, to a colourful former Italian "disco dancing socialist" named Gianni De Michelis, who served as Italy's foreign minister in 1989. "Twenty years ago he came up with a wonderful idea, which is that all the countries of Europe should pay [a portion] of their GDP to the north Africa area ... to promote economic growth," Johnson said. "All I can ask now is what state would we be in now [if that had happened]," he asked, saying it might be time to reconsider the strategy. Later he said there was probably no political will to take such a step and that the UK "spends what we can". When the floor was handed over to another panelist, Frans Timmermans, first vice-president of the European commission, Johnson was commended on his statement that the UK would remain part of Europe. "Whether in the EU or out of the EU, Britain belongs to Europe in many, many ways. And by the way, if on second thought, you might reconsider, I can assure you, you will be welcomed back by 500 million Europeans to stay or come back." Johnson replied: "We are not leaving Europe."

Israel's best known investigative reporter, Raviv Drucker, has become used to the attacks from the Israeli prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu. They have come in the form of personal and regular Facebook posts denouncing him, as well as telephone calls to Drucker's colleagues. This week, Drucker – who works for Channel 10 television – was in Netanyahu's sights again as the prime minister used Facebook to accuse Drucker of waging a personal war against him and his family in attempt at "brainwashing" Israel's voters. The reason for the animus at least is clear. Amid all the allegations against Netanyahu during his present period in office, Drucker's reports have landed the most effective and repeated blows. The journalist has been behind a run of high-profile stories in the last few weeks that have embarrassed Netanyahu, his family and friends – and dominated Israel's headlines. He has raised concerns over the role of Netanyahu's personal lawyer and relative, David Shimron, in a deal to buy German submarines. (Netanyahu and Shimron insist they never spoke about the deal so there could be no conflict of interest.) In recent days, Drucker has raised questions over the relationship between Netanyahu's son, Yair, and the billionaire Australian businessman James Packer. Drucker's report alleged Packer paid for lavish holidays and flights, and gave other gifts to Netanyahu's family. The prime minister's office insisted that Netanyahu's son is a private citizen who does not need to answer to journalists and has the right to be hosted by friends. But the latest stories have prompted Netanyahu to lash out again in public, singling out Drucker in a post on Wednesday evening. "It is amusing to see these same journalists explain their smear campaign against me and my family with the explanation that the 'media needs to criticise the government'," Netanyahu wrote on Facebook. "By means of daily brainwashing of the public and character assassination against me and my family they hope to distract the public's attention away from the core issues of the political debate in Israel. "That isn't going to do them any good. The hot air escapes from every balloon that is inflated by Noni Mozes [the owner of the Yedioth Ahronoth newspaper], Raviv Drucker, and company." A Facebook attack just a few days earlier saw Netanyahu launch a lengthy attack on Drucker, mocking him for joining a well-known TV gossip show. "It's sad to see," Netanyahu wrote, "how Drucker always manages to reach new lows of malicious and shameful journalism, even by the standards of the already biased Israeli media." Netanyahu's complaints have become familiar to Israeli media since his 2015 re-election. A piece earlier this month in the newspaper Haaretz detailed Netanyahu's habit of calling journalists, their publishers and television executives, often in the most aggrieved tone, to complain about coverage and the treatment of his wife, Sara – a habit confirmed to the Guardian by other Israeli journalists. Drucker is not the only one who has been targeted by Netanyahu in recent weeks. Ilana Dayan – like Drucker one of the country's most prominent broadcast reporters – read out on-air a 680-word response from Netanyahu's office to an investigative piece. The response accused her of being an "extreme leftist" responsible for "political propaganda against the prime minister and his wife, made up entirely of recycled slanted gossip and vicious lies." Drucker seemed to shrug off the attacks. "I'm used to it," he told the Guardian in a cafe below his Tel Aviv studio a few hours before the latest Facebook rant from Netanyahu. "I believe he's now published five or six posts against me, as far as I know. You know, I don't go looking for them, but sometimes I bump up against them." He mentions, the calls – sometimes to multiple people, one after the other. "He's called everyone. Shareholders [in the television company], managers editors, even correspondents. I can't believe how much time he spends on this. He texts people as well." Drucker says the change came after the 2015 election, when Netanyahu won a far larger share of seats than expected. He said: "After that election, when he won against all odds, from his perspective it was: 'Shut the fuck up. You, the outside world, told me [I] needed to go along [with what they thought] and yet I won by a landslide.'" The irony is not lost on Drucker that he once enjoyed a good relationship with Netanyahu, and his political rivals accused him of being too close to him. "It got to point that when I published stories about [former prime ministers] Ariel Sharon and Ehud Olmert they would say I'm the was the most friendly reporter to Netanyahu," Drucker said. Netanyahu's critics say his claim that the media is "against him" is somewhat disingenuous in a country where the biggest circulation newspaper – the freesheet Israel Hayom – is owned by Netanyahu's biggest supporter, the US casino magnate Sheldon Adelson. But in a country whose press freedom rating has been downgraded by the US NGO Freedom House to only "partly free", Netanyahu's interventions – on top of his recent stated desire to shut down the country's public broadcasting authority – has led to mounting concern in the media. Drucker, however, believes some claims that Netanyahu wants media controls echoing those of Russia's Vladimir Putin or Turkey's Recep Tayipp Erdoğan are exaggerated. "Yes, democracy is fragile here," he said. "But I don't think were are on the slippery slope towards Erdoğan and Putin. In Russia and Turkey people like me were already behind bars years ago. But it is not like Britain or the US [in terms of press freedom]. "Sure Netanyahu wants an obedient media. And he is smart. You can't take that away from him. So long as he is prime minister of Israel he knows he won't get the totally obedient media he wants. He pressures the media so that people will think before broadcasting anything." Netanyahu's latest attack suggests that his interventions are calculated as much as angry, and he seeks, like Donald Trump in the US, to bypass traditional outlets to speak to his supporters via social media. "The media is the new Arabs," Israeli journalist Udi Segal told Haaretz. "The bloody steak that Netanyahu serves his electorate. He's in a win-win situation because he manages to have a chilling effect on the media outlets while portraying himself as a victim." His actions have not gone without comment by Netanyahu's political rivals. Responding to the attack on Dayan, Tzipi Livni, the joint leader of the Zionist Union party, said: "We must not remain silent to this targeting, incitement and persecution – but to act together to replace Netanyahu and save Israeli democracy." Barak, the former prime minister, was more succinct, tweeting that Netanyahu had "gone off the rails". Netanyahu, however, appears to have an answer ready for his critics, writing: "It is also amusing to hear the media's cries of dismay and its double standards when I respond to their smears. They hold freedom of speech to be a preeminent value – as long as it is reserved only for them."

Do you pine for the days of your Nokia 3210? When phones were simple and the Finish company was cutting edge? That's the kind of nostalgia that the Nokia brand will be banking on when it returns to the smartphone market next year, after selling out to Microsoft in 2013. A company set up by former Nokia employees called HMD Global has licensed the Nokia brand name from Microsoft, struck partnerships with device manufacturer Foxconn and intends to launch an Android smartphone in the early part of 2017. The head of HMD Global, Arto Nummela, said: "Consumers may be carrying different smartphones now, but are they really in love and loyal to those brands?" HMD Global will be looking to stir nostalgia in an effort to challenge the big and small players of the highly competitive smartphone market, dominated by Samsung and Apple, as well as Chinese brands such as Huawei. Nummela said: "We want to be one of the key competitive players in the smartphone business." Brand power That road will be tough from a standing start, but brand power might be an edge against lesser-known rivals. "For a new entrant, having an established brand provides it with an instant on-ramp," said Ben Wood from analysts CCS Insight. "The barriers to entry for the Android phone space are low. "What HMD has is the Nokia brand and management experience. The key to its success will be driving scale." After the sale of the Nokia phone business to Microsoft in 2014 and the cull of the Nokia brand from Microsoft's Lumia range of smartphones, the consumer brand lived on as a maker of feature or so-called dumb phones, mainly for Asia, India and eastern Europe. HMD took over the Nokia feature phone business from Microsoft on Thursday following the sale of the business in May. It has a licensing deal with Nokia giving it sole use of the brand on mobile phones and tablets for the next decade. It will pay Nokia royalties for the brand and patents, but Nokia has no direct investment in HMD. Instead, filled with ex-Nokia personnel, and executives from Siemens, Rovio and others, HMD is owned by Smart Connect LP, a private equity fund run by Jean-Francois Baril, who was once in charge of Nokia's world-leading supply chain management system. Other HMD managers have put in money of their own. Shipments of Nokia feature phones plunged 40% in 2015 and HMD must reverse that decline while trying to break back into the smartphone market, where hundreds of vendors compete by selling phones that can be hard to distinguish. Nummela says his team's enduring relationships with phone service providers and retailers could help HMD quickly convince owners of Nokia feature phones to upgrade in markets like India, Indonesia and Russia. In the UK and other smartphone-dominated markets, Nokia smartphones will have to overcome the various contenders for the world number three spot, currently held by the rising Huawei. What does the future of Android look like in a world with the Pixel?

The new chief executive of the Daily Mail &amp; General Trust, the parent of the Daily Mail and Mail Online, has refused to rule out a potential sale of the newspaper, saying there are "no sacred cows" in his strategic review of the business. Paul Zwillenberg, the Boston Consulting Group senior executive who took over at DMGT in June, said that if the right price was offered he would have to consider a sale. "There are no sacred cows," he told a City analyst who asked at DMGT's full-year results presentation if the titles could be sold off. "We are, have been, and continue to be an active portfolio manager. If someone values our business significantly greater than we value it ourselves, we will listen." However, analysts believe that DMGT will never sell the print titles, although the digital future of Mail Online could be less certain. DMGT can trace its roots to the launch of the Daily Mail in 1896, and Lord Rothermere, the current chairman, whose family is the controlling shareholder, is the great-grandson of one of the newspaper's co-founders. "A sale of the Daily Mail is a very low-probability outcome of the strategic review," said Alex DeGroote, analyst at Peel Hunt. "It is part of the DNA of the group and it is not performing that badly." He added that DMGT's move earlier this year to enter talks with private equity companies interested in bidding for Yahoo pointed to the potential for a strategic deal to boost Mail Online in the US. "The Yahoo move tells you where their thinking is at," he said. "It means they could be open to partnering with a US internet property to create more scale. It is the only way they are going to crack it. They have a foothold, but need to scale up." DMGT profits fell by a quarter at its newspaper operation following a double-digit fall in print advertising revenues and investment in Mail Online in the year to the end of September. The company reported a 23% fall in operating profits, to £77m, at its consumer division, DMG Media, which takes in the Daily Mail, Mail on Sunday, Mail Online and freesheet Metro. The group also took a £25m writedown on US millennials site Elite Daily. Total revenues for the Mail businesses fell by 2% to £577m in the financial year to September, offsetting a 12% fall in print advertising income. Mail Online increased its revenues 19% year on year, to £93m, up on the 16% growth rate in 2015. Revenues at Mail Online's US operation, a huge focus for the media group, grew by 28% to £24m, as the company said it began to gain real traction as a brand among advertising buyers. "We have been increasing our digital investments to build the critical scale required internationally and I expect Mail Online to continue on its path to profitability," said the DMGT chief executive, Paul Zwillenberg. Operating profits at the Mail businesses fell by 17% to £69m. Metro saw revenues fall 9% to £65m and profits drop 12% to £15m. About 200 jobs were cut at DMG Media over the year. The company said that losses at Elite Daily, the "voice of generation Y", which it acquired in January last year, had "exceeded expectations". It has completely written down the value of the business, incurring a £25m impairment charge. Revenues at Elite Daily grew 44% to £10m. DMGT said the performance of its consumer division, together with declines at Euromoney, dragged the businesses' total adjusted operating profits down 11% to £277m. Its business-to-business portfolio, which includes events, information and the RMS division, helped keep total revenues stable at £1.9bn. Total revenues, profits and earnings per share beat analysts' expectations, leading to a 7% jump in DMGT's share price in early trading. "Overall, we expect the earnings per share and solid guidance to drive a positive share price reaction, in the context of cheap valuation and perceived kitchen-sinking risk with the new chief executive," said William Packer, the executive director of media equity research at Exane BNP Paribas. On Thursday morning, Zwillenberg outlined the details of a new strategy to analysts and investors that "focuses on improving operational execution, increasing the portfolio's focus and enhancing financial flexibility". Zwillenberg has been conducting a review of the DMGT business since his arrival in June. The company indicatedthat it may sell off or exit some areas of its business. "When we look at our businesses, we recognise that fundamentally some have more potential than others," he said. "There are some businesses where we are the best owner and others that we may not be. We are not a forced seller of any assets. We will sell when the time is right, when [specific] businesses are worth more to other people than to us." Some analysts have argued that DMGT should be split into media and business-to-business operations. In September, DMGT said it had cut more than 400 jobs in the past year, with "just less than half" coming from DMG Media, which employs 2,700 staff, while the company employs 10,000 globally. It has taken £55m in exceptional charges, £37m of which relates to organisational and headcount reduction costs. In May, DMGT issued a profit warning driven by a double-digit decline in its print advertising business in the first half.

A company that is implicated in an international bribery scandal has launched legal action against the Serious Fraud Office, alleging that the anti-corruption agency has unlawfully misused its powers. The SFO is investigating Unaoil, a Monaco-based oil and gas firm, over allegations that it paid bribes to win contracts in several countries for dozens of multinationals, including the British engineering firm Rolls-Royce. According to the SFO, the alleged corruption is "very extensive". On Thursday, Unaoil opened its legal challenge in the high court in London, claiming that investigators working for the SFO unlawfully raided its headquarters in Monaco and seized a large cache of its documents, phones and computer equipment in a "cavalier" fashion. The firm alleges that the raid amounted to an "excessively wide fishing expedition rather than a proper exercise of" its legal powers. Unaoil has denied all wrongdoing. In its submission to Lord Justice Gross and Mr Justice Nicol, Unaoil described how the SFO asked the police in Monaco to raid its HQ in March and used a truck to transport the seized material to the UK. The raid was initiated after the SFO started investigating corruption allegations involving Unaoil, Rolls-Royce and an Australian multinational, according to Unaoil's submission. The allegations related to transactions in Iraq dating back to 2005, the submission said. Hugo Keith, a QC acting for Unaoil, alleged that the SFO's request to the Monaco police to carry out the raid "lacked candour" and had misled them over the seriousness and urgency of the reasons for the raid. Ata Ahsani, chairman of Unaoil, and his two sons, Cyrus and Saman, are seeking a court order quashing the legality of the raid, compelling the SFO to return the seized material and destroy any copies it holds. A day after the raid in March, reporters at Australia's Fairfax Media alleged – based on a leak of thousands of Unaoil's documents – that the firm had systematically corrupted the global oil industry, distributing millions of dollars of bribes on behalf of Rolls-Royce and other multinationals which were seeking to secure contracts. Rolls-Royce said it was fully co-operating with investigations into the allegations and could not comment in detail. The SFO is opposing Unaoil's legal challenge, maintaining that its actions were legal. In its defence, the SFO said it had "significant grounds to suspect" that Unaoil had "paid bribes and/or conspired together to pay bribes to high-ranking Iraqi and other public officials on behalf of" its clients. The agency, which said its investigation was not limited to alleged bribery to Iraqi officials, added that Unaoil was "under investigation for the payment of a series of large bribes to government officials and officers of state in a number of countries in relation to the oil and gas sector". Jonathan Hall, the SFO's QC, told the court that the agency "had reasonable grounds to suspect that Unaoil's main activity is the paying of bribes on behalf of western oil infrastructure companies and the corrupting of tendering exercises to favour its clients". The SFO said it was concerned "that the effect of this flawed claim [by Unaoil] – whether that is its purpose or otherwise – will be to delay and disrupt an ongoing criminal investigation into serious fraud and corruption". Judgment will be given at a later date.

It seems only yesterday that painting was "dead". Now it's everywhere. In London, galleries east of Spitalfields are full of the stuff. Recently, visiting an exhibition by a painter friend, I was chatting to the young artist who runs the gallery – which doubles up as his painting studio. Opening a hidden cupboard, he took out some of his big, sprawling canvases, great stuff full of political imagery and existential angst. And that's just inside galleries. Never mind the paintings in the streets that are so much a part of 21st-century life. Painting dead? If so we must be suffering the attack of the zombie painters, because this old art is invading every corner of the modern world from the coolest corners of the art world to underneath your local railway bridge. One place you won't find it is the Turner prize. This year's Turner is one of the most paint-free ever. Get with it, daddio – don't you know the gooey stuff is where it's at? As if to show up the out-of-touch Tate – which also pretty much excluded painting from the opening displays in its otherwise excellent Switch House at Tate Modern – the Saatchi Gallery has just opened a show as full of paintings as the Turner prize is free of them. Its show Painters' Painters is also brimming with visitors. Maybe, after years of being told by po-faced curators that we "should" revere video art and various live interactive post-artistic phenomena, we just wanna have fun. Because the paintings in the Saatchi really are a lot of fun. Even the artists I don't much rate here look as if they are enjoying themselves, and the good mood is infectious. One thing that strikes me is that new painting in galleries now looks very like street art. The big, playful paintings in this exhibition, from Dexter Dalwood's fantasy landscape mash-ups to David Salle's postmodern explosions of thought and colour, could just as easily be painted on a wall in London or Cairo as on canvas. That is the secret of painting's big comeback. In the 1990s, conceptual and new media art looked like the future, but such art has one huge drawback. It is inherently elitist. It depends on the framing device of the white cube gallery or museum. Show a video art masterpiece on telly and it's just another TV programme. When the lights go on and off in your front room, it means the electricity is on the blink. There is something very fragile about all this neo-conceptualism, which can only exist within a finely tuned curatorial apparatus. Painting, by contrast, works wherever you put it. From the National Gallery to an ice age cave to the wall of a chippy, it's simply paint that has been used by a human to make meaningful marks. That's why painting is everywhere – because it can go everywhere, and still be some kind of art. So painting, with its long history and high cultural status, its tradition that includes Titian and Rembandt and Rothko, has become the popular art of our time. At the Saatchi, it is the accessibility and lightheartedness of painting today that is so joyously impressive. These paintings make you want to pick up a brush and have a go. There are clearly no rules any more. Told by postmodern theorists that painting cannot be a serious art for our age, painters have taken these bores at their word and decided not to be heavyweight or anxious, just free. The results are hugely varied in quality but magnificently exuberant. Oh yes, and the Saatchi exhibition has one genius in it. Ryan Mosley shares the others' humorous abandon but adds a manic, mysterious imagination and brilliance of colour all his own. I wafted pleasantly through other rooms but was held in a different way by Mosley. His bizarre characters evoke a carnival world of surreal nightlife and macabre theatre – monsters that can only live in a painting, or maybe Francis Bacon's Soho. Their grotesque faces, tragicomic anatomies and enigmatic postures make for freakishly compelling images. What makes them live as painting is, however, Mosley's extraordinary, subtle, kaleidoscopic sense of colour. He was born in Chesterfield in 1980, so he's well within the age limit for next year's Turner prize. I'd like to see him in it, or a residency at the National Gallery, or decorating a car park wall. It doesn't matter. Painting as good as this is magic wherever it is. Painters' Painters is at the Saatchi Gallery, London, until 28 February.

He was no more than 30 seconds old, first placed on my wife's chest and then into my arms. Perhaps it was the combination of nervous anxiety and exhaustion but, as his limbs scratched furiously at the air, I began to sing him a song. And it was the first thing that popped into my head: "Blue is the colour, football is the game, we're all together, and winning is our aim ... " The anaesthetist laughed. He too was a Chelsea fan. My son was born at 4.04pm on Monday at St Thomas' hospital, Waterloo. It was half in jest, but even before he had a name he was claimed as a blue. And perhaps it was because of the comically out-of-place articulation of this imputed identity that I became alert to all the other identities that were about to be loaded on him. As he lay in my arms, as yet unnamed, I entertained the passing thought that this was the only moment in this new life's entire existence that he would be genuinely passport-less, religion-less, unaligned. Soon he would be given a wristband with a number. And then there would be the initiation ceremonies of religion. And later still he would be registered with the state authorities. Which passport will he take up? He is entitled to the British, Polish and Israeli nationalities. What language will he speak with his mum? Within days, his place in the order of things will be determined. And much of his perspective on life and his prospects will have been shaped. Yet as I sang him that silly song, I was overtaken by a powerful sense of the arbitrariness of the identities in which he was being clothed. Perhaps the song should have been John Lennon's call to imagine a "brotherhood of man" – imagine no religion, no possessions, and no country "to live or die for". Later in the night I woke up worrying that my beautiful new boy will one day be obliged to undertake military service and to sustain the occupation of Palestine. These were night worries, of course. But our imputed identity is precisely that from which most tribal division grows; be it national, religious, footballing (especially footballing). To be one thing is to not be another. Yet despite my night fears, I reject Lennon's fantasy of a life without allegiance. We are all born into a network of significance, children of particular people with particular stories. My new son is Louie Emmanuel, referencing various ancestors and both the Old and New Testaments (Emmanuel, or "God is with us", is taken from the books of Isaiah and Matthew). This is precisely why my initial and emotional instinct was mistaken: there is nothing arbitrary about the identities in which he was being clothed. Louie has an inheritance that exists irrespective of the choices that he will one day make for himself. Like the rest of us, the cultural grammar of his life is largely a given. It may not have come down the birth canal, but it is something into which he has been born and in which he will be loved and nurtured. It could not be otherwise. It would, for example, be patently absurd to decide not to teach him a language until he was 18 when he could then choose for himself. Yet, of course, whether he speaks English or Hebrew at home is a huge deal and will massively shape his adult worldview. Likewise, I believe it would be just as absurd to wait until he is an adult – when, as they say, he can choose for himself – before he is initiated into a whole range of other commitments, from faith to football. Now, please, God, don't ever let him become a Manchester United fan. OK, eventually he can decide for himself and, if he wants, change his allegiance. So too with religion and even (in his case) nationality. But all this notwithstanding, his inheritance is indelible. While we may talk a lot about the value of choice, much of what we stand for is given to us before we have ever thought about it. And it couldn't be otherwise.

All of the Democratic and Democratic-aligned members of the Senate intelligence committee have hinted that significant information about Russian interference in the US presidential election remains secret and ought to be declassified. The eight senators, including the incoming ranking member Mark Warner of Virginia, wrote to Barack Obama to request he declassify relevant intelligence on the election. They did not directly accuse the Russian government or President-elect Donald Trump, a Republican, of wrongdoing in the letter. "We believe there is additional information concerning the Russian government and the US election that should be declassified and released to the public. We are conveying specifics through classified channels," wrote Warner and his colleagues Ron Wyden of Oregon, Martin Heinrich of New Mexico, Mazie Hirono of Hawaii, Barbara Mikulski of Maryland and independent Angus King of Maine. Jack Reed of Rhode Island, an honorary and non-voting member of the committee due to his seat as ranking member of the Senate armed services committee, also signed the letter, which was dated Tuesday and publicly released on Wednesday. No Republican joined the declassification call. The outgoing ranking Democrat, Dianne Feinstein of California, signed the classified version of the letter sent to Obama. Neither the terse letter nor discussions with sources on Capitol Hill detailed the particular intelligence concerning the Russians, its strength or its impact on the outcome of the election. Thus far, no credible evidence of vote fraud or electoral malfeasance exists, despite an evidence-free claim from Trump himself. A spokesman for Wyden, Keith Chu, said the senator believed the intelligence needed to be declassified "immediately", as it was in the "national interest that the American public should see it". It is understood this is the first declassification request by eight senators in at least twelve years. On 7 October, the US director of national intelligence and the secretary of homeland security took the rare step of directly accusing Russia's "senior-most" officials of ordering the breach of the Democratic National Committee's digital networks. Director James Clapper and Secretary Jeh Johnson accused the Russians of attempting to "interfere" in the US election, something the Obama administration had previously suggested but did not allege publicly. The FBI has acknowledged investigating such interference, but has reportedly not established any link to Trump or his campaign. Two US officials have told the Guardian that the FBI was reluctant to sign off on Clapper and Johnson's public allegation. Yet Harry Reid, the outgoing Democratic Senate leader, asserted without evidence in October that the FBI director, James Comey, "possess[es] explosive information about close ties and coordination between Donald Trump, his top advisers, and the Russian government". Unusually for any presidential nominee, and particularly for a Republican, Trump has exhibited a warmth toward the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, that has prompted a widespread expectation Trump will tilt US foreign policy toward Russia. Trump and Putin spoke soon after Trump's electoral victory in a phone call heralded by the Kremlin. There was no immediate comment from the White House or Clapper's office as to whether Obama would order the declassification or whether the intelligence agencies even support such a move.

MPs will be asked to restrict the hours they dedicate to lucrative second jobs and drop any work involving lobbying lawmakers or civil servants, according to a proposed new code of conduct. Outside work will be scrutinised to ensure that MPs dedicate a majority of their working week to parliament in proposals which have been sent to the commissioner for standards and seen by the Guardian. Those who are are paid to lobby for outside interests – including those who work full-time for unions or charities – will be asked to drop their second jobs, according to the proposed code. The change in the rules, which are still to be approved by MPs, could cut the amount of time MPs will be allowed to spend away from their constituents. Until now, there have been no regulation of MPs doing other jobs apart from a general requirement to register income received from outside sources and to declare a conflict of interest. Tommy Sheppard, the SNP member of the standards committee, has written to Kathryn Hudson, the parliamentary commissioner for standards, suggesting major changes. He argued that there should be a ceiling on the amount of additional work an MP can take and this could be measured either by the year or by the week. "Would it be practicable, for example to say that on average members should not have external employment in excess of an average of 20 hours per week or 1,000 hours per year?" he wrote. He also drew up proposals, backed by his party, to stop MPs from becoming paid lobbyists, which could create a conflict of interest. "This would include working for organisations that seek to influence government policy such as trades unions and industry bodies; work for campaigning organisations and pressure groups who are seeking to influence government; and work for agencies working in the field of public affairs or government relations who try to influence government on behalf of their clients," he wrote. The letter also suggested that the commissioner and the standards committee should examine ways of regulating some external employment so that MPs might find it easier to return to the world of work outside Westminster, particularly in certain professions such as medicine. "In some cases this will require the maintenance of professional registration or a certain level of competence which can only be achieved by external employment whilst being an MP. This should be positively recognised," Sheppard wrote. He also proposed that MPs should be told that their job in parliament must be treated as full-time and that members should not sign outside work contracts that require them to be absent from parliament when it is sitting. The letter has emerged after a six-week consultation, which ended on Wednesday. Hudson will prepare a new draft code for consideration by the standards committee. It comes after a study last year from Transparency International found that scores of MPs were being paid millions of pounds a year for outside jobs. The research found that 73 MPs, who are paid £74,962 per annum, also received £3.4m in the previous 12 months for "external advisory roles", including in some cases board positions. The biggest earner in that period was former prime minister Gordon Brown, who made almost £300,000 while still serving as the MP for Kirkcaldy and Cowdenbeath. An undercover investigation last year by the Daily Telegraph alleged that Jack Straw and Sir Malcolm Rifkind had offered to use their positions as MPs to win contracts. However, they were cleared of wrongdoing by Hudson.

When I see the word "Muslim" in the press, the fear is always that the following word will be "terrorist" or "fundamentalist". After the Orlando shootings, where a Muslim man opened fire in a gay nightclub killing many LGBT patrons, I felt like two parts of my identity had been mixed together under very gruesome circumstances. I was speechless for a day, reflecting on the tragedy. As a gay man, I was sickened by the thought that people had been killed because of their sexuality. As a gay Muslim – where it often feels like I live in the world's smallest Venn diagram – I also feared that there would be increased Islamophobia on the LGBT scene. As Owen Jones highlighted last week, there is a worrying problem in the LGBT community. Anecdotes aside, according to FS magazine, approximately three quarters of BAME men have personally experienced racism on the scene. After Orlando, I decided to bring together the LGBT and Muslim communities in an evening meal during Ramadan called "A Big Gay Iftar". What started out as an event intended for eight friends at home turned into over 80 people showing up at a church to eat together, meet people they wouldn't usually encounter on a Saturday night, and break down the wall between Islam and LGBT communities. It was the first time it felt like I, as an LGBT person from an ethnic minority, could own and tell our story. It was life-changing to feel the acceptance in the room and also to hear the shocking comments that LGBT people of colour have faced in their coming-out journey. I have only ever faced outright discrimination once, and to this day I am still shocked it happened in a well-known gay bar in the middle of Soho, London. Mid-conversation with a friend, a man came up to me and asked where I was from. Thinking I was being chatted up, I replied "London". He wasn't convinced, pointing at his face and implying that my skin tone did not match that of a native Londoner. "Well my parents are Indian," I replied. "Oh right. So you're Hindu?". When I told him I was Muslim, he said, "So you must support Isis, right?" It could have been playful flirting, but I felt downright offended. I have never, not even at an airport, been asked outright if I support a terrorist organisation. I still want to give him the benefit of the doubt, but it's really not OK to ask someone that – especially somewhere both of us should consider a safe space. The scene is no less hostile online. Friends from LGBT ethnic minorities share screengrabs from apps such as Grindr, where they've been blocked, abused or insulted over their backgrounds or skin colour. When we try to call it out as racism, we all come up against a common response: "Yes, but it's just a sexual preference!" I'm all for differing preferences. Variety is the spice of life (actually, garam masala is the spice of life, but we'll let that slide), but to wrap up racism under the guise of "but Asians and black people are not my thing" does not mean you can block someone purely because their heritage doesn't match what arouses you. It goes beyond sexting. A close friend told me he was once called "my little Aladdin" during sex. Jokes about lantern-rubbing aside, that's not a sexual preference: it's racism. The fact is, there are very few high profile role models from LGBT ethnic minorities. Tradition pushes many of us towards careers like medicine and accountancy. Sometimes it feels as though you can compare coming out for someone from an ethnic background with a white British person who came out in the 1980s. Both experiences carry the possibility of social exclusion, violence and in extreme cases, suicide. It's important to remember that we as a group haven't benefitted from the acceptance that comes from a household personality like Tom Daley publically declaring his sexuality. If we are brave enough to come out, the scene needs to be a safe, welcoming place, otherwise staying in the closet will end up being a more comforting option. Movements like Pride in London and organisations such as Stonewall are making active efforts to expand their work within BAME communities, but progress will only happen when the LGBT community, young and old, black and white, remembers everything it took to fight for what we have today. We all have a responsibility to speak up and not let racism slam the closet door shut behind us.

It would, perhaps, be the defining irony of Arsène Wenger's uneasy relationship with Chelsea if it turns out that when he finally devised a way of beating them it provoked a tactical shift that won the Blues the title. Since Chelsea switched to a back three when 3-0 down at half-time at the Emirates, they have conceded only once, winning seven Premier League games in a row. They passed one major test by coming from behind to beat Tottenham last week but on Saturday represents an even more severe examination as they go to Manchester City. Pep Guardiola against Antonio Conte: the intense brooder against the manic extrovert, two men obsessed by tactics. Conte spends up to an hour a day working with his players on shape; Guardiola is a perpetual tinkerer, forever adjusting positions on the pitch looking for the best disposition to expose the opposition's weakness. And, implausible as it may have seemed in the first month of the season, it feels as though it is City who need to adjust, that Chelsea have a balanced formation, confidence and momentum and that it is up to Guardiola to disrupt it. Guardiola's instinct is always, as he often says, to be bold. He is not someone who naturally looks to contain or frustrate. He will take the game to Chelsea, not just because City are at home but because that is how he believes football should be played. Chelsea's two worst performances of the season, at home to Liverpool and away at Arsenal, came against opponents who pressed them early and attacked with pace. City naturally do that. It is true the Liverpool and Arsenal matches came before the shift to the back three but Tottenham showed in the first half last Saturday that Chelsea can be rattled, as most teams can, by a hard and high press. The advantage City have over Spurs, particularly when it comes to facing Chelsea, is they have natural attacking wide men. Raheem Sterling went off during the second half against Burnley but should be fit to take his place on one flank with either Nolito or Leroy Sané on the other. Whether it is Sterling on the right and Nolito on the left, or Sterling on the left and Sané on the right, City have pace and aggression that can attack any space behind the wing-backs. Marcos Alonso and, particularly, Victor Moses have excelled in those roles in recent weeks but neither has faced a defensive test of this magnitude. And if Chelsea's wing-backs are defending, or at least looking anxiously over their shoulders, then they will be less able to link up with Pedro and Eden Hazard in the inside-forward positions. City also use inside-forwards but how they deal with Chelsea's will perhaps govern the shape of their own midfield. Guardiola has used two basic systems for his five rearmost players this season: a back four protected by a deep-lying midfielder or a back three protected by two. Even with the back-four option, in possession, he likes to operate a 3-2 shape. Initially he achieved that by having the full-backs tuck in but in the absence of those as comfortable on the ball as Philipp Lahm and David Alaba, Guardiola had John Stones step up. The classic Cruyffian theory is to have one more defender than the opposition have forwards, which would mean using two centre-backs – that is, a back four – and giving the full-backs the licence to push on, increasing the pressure on Chelsea's wing-backs. The danger in this instance, though, is that leaves Fernandinho, as the holding midfielder, caught between Pedro and Hazard. It may make more sense to use two deep-lying midfielders in Fernandinho and Ilkay Gündogan. Guardiola in recent weeks has taken to fielding more of a 4-2-3-1 and he has the option of bringing in Fernando, who played at Tottenham in October, or Yaya Touré. The question is what advantage the full-backs confer against this Chelsea system; it seems to make more sense to use two deep-lying midfielders with a back three behind them. Nicolás Otamendi can pick up Diego Costa, with either Aleksandar Kolarov or Stones pushing up to help deal with Pedro and Hazard as required and the other acting as a spare man. That has the additional advantage of getting an extra passer into the team. With Gündogan and Fernandinho together at the back of midfield City should be able to control possession. Fernando's comparative lack of quality on the ball was shown up at Spurs, while there must still be a doubt as to whether Touré has the energy for a game of this intensity. That then leaves Kevin De Bruyne and David Silva to operate as free No8s, posing just the same problem to N'Golo Kanté and Nemanja Matic that Pedro and Hazard will be causing Gündogan and Fernandinho. The significant difference is City should have the bulk of the possession and will have more attacking wide men. That suggests City have an edge but so long as Moses and Alonso can stand up to the defensive challenge, it really means nothing more than they will have more of the ball. The question then is whether a defence who have proved susceptible to counterattacks all season can deal with Chelsea on the break.

Life has not been easy for Paradise Sorouri. In the past seven years, the 27-year-old has been forced to flee her country twice, received more death threats than she can count, and was brutally beaten by 10 men on the street and left to die. Her crime? She covers her head with a baseball cap instead of a hijab, raises her voice for women's rights, and is Afghanistan's first female rapper. In a country where, according to the UN, 87% of women have endured physical or sexual violence, Paradise's scathing lyrics about gender inequality in post-Taliban Afghanistan have served as a spark for change and a lightning rod for controversy. She raps defiantly in Dari about how women can get acid poured on their faces for resisting rape, be married off as children to older men, and belong to husbands who can set them on fire. "It doesn't matter if you are a singer, an artist, or a teacher," says Paradise. "If you are a woman in Afghanistan, you are a problem. I am speaking out and fighting for women who don't have a voice." Speaking out has come at a price, but it has also garnered support. Paradise was recognised by the UN in 2013 for promoting human rights, while she and her fiance Diverse – together they are known as 143Band – won the Afghan ATN network's award for best rap act in 2015. The duo are nominated again this year. But as her popularity soared, so did the number of violent threats she received. Fearing for their safety, last year she and Diverse fled Afghanistan and joined the more than one million migrants who arrived in Germany from the Middle East. In the process, the pair have begun to reach an entirely new audience, writing and producing songs in their Berlin flat and touring throughout Germany. They release their first music video in two years next month for the song Bosaye Eshgh, they've just headlined at the international FeminEast festival in Stockholm, and Rebel Beats, a documentary about Paradise's struggle as Afghanistan's first female rapper, will appear in European film festivals early next year. Born in Iran to Afghan parents who escaped the country's civil war, Paradise moved back to Herat, Afghanistan's third largest city, with her family following the fall of the Taliban. She grew up idolising Tupac, Eminem and Beyoncé though didn't know anyone who shared her love of hip-hop until she met Diverse – another former refugee just back from Iran. The two decided to start making music together in 2008, but the odds were against them. "Herat is a very religious city," says Diverse. "Sharia law forbids women to sing. The fact that we are not married was also a problem. Every time we'd try to go to a studio together, strangers would start following us." One night, Paradise was walking home with her younger brother when 10 men on six motorcycles surrounded her and started beating her with wooden rods. "They were shouting at me and saying I was a bad influence on other women by trying to make music," Paradise says. "All I could do was to try to defend my brother. They passed me from one man to the next. I begged people nearby to help, but they just urged the men to beat me to death." When Diverse found her, Paradise's clothes were torn and she was covered in blood. He immediately took her to the police. "They told me I should stop singing," says Paradise. "That's when I knew that if I stayed silent, nothing would change." Fearful of what might happen if they stayed in Herat, the couple moved to neighbouring Tajikistan in late 2010, where Paradise began writing songs about women's rights over Diverse's beats. The following year, they released Faryad-e Zan (Woman's Shout), the first song ever to feature a female Afghan rapper. In the years since, Paradise says she feels "proud and honoured" to have ushered in a handful of other female rappers, even if several have claimed to be the country's first while simultaneously asking her for guidance. During the next two years, the duo recorded nine more songs and shot five videos in the relative safety of Tajikistan. Then, in the summer of 2012, Paradise received horrific news: back in Herat, to avoid being married off to men in their 60s, her two young cousins – aged nine and 12 – had burned themselves alive. Devastated, Paradise returned to Afghanistan and recorded a song in their memory called Nalestan. "I wanted to think and they hit me in the head," she sang. "They burned my face in the name of Islam / And sold me because I'm only a woman." The song won international attention, with 143Band named Afghanistan's best rap artist at the 2014 Rumi world music awards. "The success of Nalestan was both good and bad," Paradise says. "We were interviewed by journalists from all over the world, but I started to get death threats every day. It got so bad I had to stay inside my sister's house in Herat for a month like a prisoner." Still, Paradise and Diverse were convinced their message of female empowerment would be more effective if they stayed in Afghanistan, so they relocated once more, this time to Kabul. When Rebel Beats began filming in early 2015, a woman named Farkhunda – who was falsely accused of burning the Qur'an – had just been beaten to death and set alight by an angry mob in the street. The daily barrage of threats directed at Paradise had also reached a fever pitch and, throughout the film, she anxiously looks over her shoulder to see if she's being watched. At one point, the camera holds on a stony-faced Paradise as she reads message after message directed at her on 143Band's Facebook page. Several men describe wanting to rape and behead her in front of Diverse. Another says he'll throw acid on her if he ever sees her in person. The only time she breaks is when she's asked about Farkhunda. "She has made me stronger," Paradise says, fighting back the tears. "I will fight – not only for Farkhunda, but for all the Farkhundas." A month after the cameras stopped rolling, Paradise and Diverse left Afghanistan for good and began the arduous process of resettling in Berlin. Paradise is still fighting and is scheduled to speak at Talking Taboo, an international conference for women's rights in London on 2 December. "The people of Afghanistan still need our voice," she says. "From here, we can make it louder."

"In an ideal world," says Gavin Bryars, "I would choose to write vocal music." And though the Yorkshire minimalist only came to voices relatively late, his house style is an easy fit: those spacious progressions unfolding at what he describes as "a human rate"; that formula for evoking meaningful timelessness out of scrunchy new harmonies and tropes of old spirituality. The Fifth Century (2014) is a big piece for saxophone quartet and choir with words taken from the 17th-century English mystic Thomas Traherne. It's sullen, cloying and a bit aimless; the saxes weave around like extra voices – think Garbarek and the Hilliards but with bigger forces – and the blended sound of The Crossing and Prism is creamy and pliable. This all-Bryars release also includes his Two Love Songs (2010), airy settings of Petrarch sonnets for a cappella female choir, sung with a grace so chilly it might freeze at any moment.

The real protagonist of Herbert Fritsch's play Pfusch, a dada cabaret revue in repertoire at Berlin's Volksbühne theatre, is a seven-metre-long wooden tube. At the start of the play, the tube funnels the cast of 13 men and women in Minnie Mouse dresses on to the stage, then gets pushed back and forth like the cylinder of a monstrous steamroller, and eventually triples up as the drum of a human hamster wheel. During last Thursday's premiere, a collective gasp rippled through the audience as the tube came careering towards the orchestra pit, threatening to flatten not just a couple of actors but the entire front row. It was the kind of smash-the-fourth-wall-with-a-sledgehammer moment that has helped build the theatre on Rosa Luxemburg Square a loyal fanbase in the German capital, and a reputation for artistic anarchy across the globe. Pfusch means "botch" in German, and some critics have read the play's title as a nod to the off-stage farce that has distracted from real stagecraft at the prestigious theatre over the last 20 months. Since the Belgian ex-director of London's Tate Modern, Chris Dercon, was announced as the successor of the Volksbühne's veteran director Frank Castorf in spring 2015, staff have been in open revolt. In the months after the announcement, several of the theatre's star directors and performers announced their departure, and in an open letter the remaining staff decried Dercon's appointment as "an irreversible turning point" that represented a "historical razing of identity" in favour of a "globalised consensus culture". A counter-letter in defence of Dercon, signed by architect Jacques Herzog, photographer Wolfgang Tillmans and artist Olafur Eliasson, among others, dismissed the theatre's protest as "alarmist sensationalism". Why, it asked, was a city as proud of its openness as Berlin so afraid of change? Now that a Left party politician, who campaigned for Dercon's deposition during September's Berlin election, has been installed as the new culture senator, the Volksbühne's future looks more of a botch-job than ever. But anyone who wants to understand how a theatre can arouse such strong emotions need only take a closer look through that gigantic wooden tube. Founded in 1890, the Volksbühne or "people's stage" was born out of an eponymous movement with the express mission to bring art to the working classes, an ideal that continued to be held aloft during the theatre's 40 years on the eastern side of the Berlin Wall. Manual workers and intellectuals were to have an equal stake in the institution and its artistic output; the star performer and the cleaner would be considered equally important members of the ensemble. The central pillar of this philosophy was arguably not the stage itself, but a workshop where craftsmen and artists collaborated on sets and props. Initially located in the theatre, it has since 1939 been based on a purpose-built site in Berlin's Pankow district and is now the only set-building factory of its kind (all of the city's other theatres have in recent years outsourced their stage sets to a centralised agency). A tour around the premises reveals a curiosity shop of props from productions past: Australian phone boxes, a replica of an 18th-century machine that creates the sound of thunder, wind and rain, a giant pterodactyl. It brings to mind Wolfgang Becker's 2003 comedy Good Bye, Lenin!, in which a family try to keep alive the illusion of a triumphant socialist republic in rapidly westernising post-Wall Berlin. By the entrance, a sign bearing the GDR-era motto "We work for peace" has been freshly repainted. In the carpentry workshop where the wooden tube was put together, there are portraits of Wilhelm Pieck and Walter Ulbricht, the first two leaders of East Germany's ruling party, both carpenters by training (things were bound to go awry, one old east German joke goes, when Ulbricht was replaced by Erich Honecker, a roofer). The workshop also doesn't strictly live up to what a management consultant might call "operational efficiency". The Volksbühne is a repertoire theatre, which means plays can stay part of the programme for years at a time and sets have to be built, disassembled and ferried back and forth between the workshop and the stage on a daily basis. Partly as a result, it receives one of the highest state subsidies of Berlin's spoken-word theatres. The workshop's manager, Frank Mittmann, who has worked for the Volksbühne since 1974, recalls how since the fall of the Berlin Wall, there has been talk of privatisation, "but then people changed their minds again". "The market economy has a logic that escapes me," he says. Wouldn't it make things much easier for him and his workers if they had to build for a non-repertory theatre where one play at a time gets a clean run? "You can answer that question yourself, can't you?" Mittmann retorts. "Of course you wouldn't need 26 employees ... And once those jobs are gone, they are gone." "If we had to switch, that wouldn't be without risk for us. Repertory theatre is our thing: the Volksbühne has done it this way for over 100 years, and all our structures are adjusted to that way of working. It's like clockwork." But to describe the Volksbühne as pure ostalgie, a nostalgia for the east's good old ways, would be to do it a disservice. When Castorf, an east German who had started directing on west German stages before the fall of the Wall, took over in 1992, he and his set designer Bert Neumann started to wed Soviet-era aesthetics with a Hollywood-sized appetite for showmanship. The old rules of ensemble theatre, whereby actors were strictly tied to one theatre, were abandoned and many of the Volksbühne's star performers were allowed to pursue parallel careers in film, TV and at other stages. A fear frequently voiced by Dercon's critics is that he could turn the prestigious theatre into a "commercial events shed", but arguably Castorf had already done that: by the end of his 25-year reign only a minority of productions were traditional spoken-word theatre, with the theatre also hosting concerts, dance works and readings. Prop-maker Mittmann describes the early years of working with Castorf as "exhausting". "It was madness at first. There was a premiere practically every month!" He was ordered to build a replica of London's Globe theatre, a giant orca whale, an old-fashioned hot-air balloon, and a tank made entirely out of wood that had to be able to drive and fire rounds. For Castorf's production of The Idiot, the audience was placed on a rotating platform on the stage and a fake city was built around them, including fully furnished apartment blocks, a supermarket, a brothel and a bar. For a take on Georg Büchner's Danton's Death, Mittmann had to get a blacksmith to build medieval armour costumes. When he noticed during rehearsals that the actors were struggling to control their movements in their heavy outfits, he told the director: "Isn't that a bit dangerous? What if they slide down into the orchestra pit?" Castorf replied that that was precisely what he liked about it. "He thought the risk of an accident made it more interesting. Things spinning out of control – that fascinates him." The Volksbühne workshop has been at the heart of the row between the senate and the theatre's staff, who explicitly called for safeguarding its future in their open letter – yet it appears Dercon himself had already made its continued existence a condition of a signing a contract with the theatre in the first place. When Mittmann showed Dercon around the theatre, he described the workshop as "a factory that builds things you cannot buy". "I think Dercon understood that. And I think he liked it." So did the old guard big up the threat, a last great melodrama to make life harder for their successors? Or did the politicians who hired the Tate boss simply botch their lines of communication? In mid-September, Left party politician Klaus Lederer was appointed as Berlin's new culture senator. During the election campaign he had put his name to a leaflet that declared Dercon part of a "neoliberal art world with a global jet-set attitude" and called for a U-turn on the appointment. But the Belgian director is tied into a five-year contract, cancelling which would cost five to eight million euros. One proposal floated in the German press recently is that Dercon could be asked instead to focus on a new Volksbühne offshoot at Tempelhof, Berlin's abandoned inner-city airport. A design for a "mobile amphitheatre" has already been proposed by Burkinabé architect Francis Kéré. The solution has at least one clear advantage. It could be built at the workshop in Pankow.

A new national strategy to help England's hard-pressed libraries is to include a £4m innovation fund for projects that help disadvantaged communities. The Department for Culture, Media and Sport has published a five-year strategy for libraries, which it said would help them improve and thrive in the 21st century. Rob Wilson, the junior minister responsible for libraries, said libraries were "hugely popular" and among the most valuable community assets, but they had to change. "This strategy provides a blueprint for how libraries can be better utilised, to make them more resilient while still delivering vital public services to the communities that need them," he said. It comes amid bleak and troubling times for libraries, often seen as an easy target when local authorities need to save money. Earlier this month protesters gathered in London for the first national demonstration to protect library services. The strategy calls for more innovative thinking on how libraries are used, better promotion and more partnerships. It says libraries should be about far more than books and should provide access to a range of public services such as employment, health and learning opportunities. The £4m fund will be administered by Arts Council England and is for "pilot library service projects that provide people with opportunities that they might not have otherwise". The Chartered Institute of Library and Information Professionals (Cilip) said the strategy went "part way" to securing a positive future for libraries. Cilip's chief executive, Nick Poole, said: "We face a stark choice. We can either continue with severe cuts and closures or secure a positive future for people, communities and businesses that benefit from England's network of public libraries." He called for a "properly funded" national strategy for developing and improving libraries and a more robust approach from the government when local authorities fail to provide "comprehensive and efficient" library services. Local authorities have a statutory duty under the Public Libraries and Museums Act 1964 "to provide a comprehensive and efficient library service for all persons". Many observers believe the government has had cause to intervene but failed do so after six years of repeated local authority library closures. According to research by the House of Commons library service and the BBC, about one in eight council-run libraries has closed or been transferred out of the public sector since 2010. This week Cilip raised concern over Swindon council's proposals to close 10 out of 15 libraries unless community groups come forward to run them. It has urged the secretary of state to intervene. The report has been written by a libraries taskforce chaired by Paul Blantern, the chief executive of Northamptonshire county council. It acknowledges that "these are challenging times for councils and the library services they run", but says there is a need for strong local leadership "focused on meeting community needs". The report calls for libraries to get better at demonstrating their value, "promoting themselves as an asset not a cost". Nearly 60% of the population has a library card, and in 2014-15, more people went to a library than there were visits to a Premier League football game, the cinema and the top 10 tourist attractions. In England, local authorities spent £762m on libraries – just over 27p a person, and under 1% of the total spend. The strategy promises more nationally coordinated action to "encourage and help the library sector to work together more effectively". Libraries need to diversify their funding and generate their own additional income, the report says. The government has promised to help, giving as an example "commuter hubs" set up by the Ministry of Justice in some London libraries which allow civil servants to work remotely. The report talks about the need to "significantly refresh the image" of libraries and raise awareness of the services they provide. Blantern said libraries were vital community hubs. "We already have some of the best libraries in the world; if we learn from them and deliver the shared ambitions we set out, then we will have a vibrant, thriving and world-class public library network in England."

UK aid will be more closely allied with trade policy after the British government signalled a new approach to development assistance that may risk sidelining poorer countries. Two long-awaited reviews published on Thursday promised to change the focus of British aid, with the government pledging to do more in fragile and conflict-riven states and to expand work across the "arc of instability" that bends from north Africa to the Middle East. MPs on the parliamentary watchdog tasked with scrutinising the use of British aid noted "a more overt link between the UK's aid and trade policies" through a £1.3bn "prosperity fund". They said this could lead to more development assistance being directed to middle-income countries, such as Mexico, India and China. The reviews published by the Department for International Development (DfID) offered a twofold evaluation, the first focusing on funding for multilateral organisations such as the World Bank as well as smaller organisations, while the second examined bilateral aid to individual countries. The development secretary, Priti Patel, who has in the past been highly critical of British aid, wrote in a bullish foreword to the bilateral review: "To those who doubt the ability of our aid to make a difference: tell that to the millions of children protected from paralysing polio by the British taxpayer, or the millions of Kenyans whose lives have been transformed by mobile money invented with British assistance, or the people of Sierra Leone who are getting back to their daily lives, free from Ebola after UK intervention." Patel pledged to continue the work of her predecessor, Justine Greening, on supporting women and girls. But the new minister, who earlier this year promised to overhaul foreign aid based on "core Tory values", also unveiled plans to "turbo charge" her department's work on trade, welcoming what she called "an opportunity to forge a new role for ourselves in the world, embedding development within UK trade policy". The bilateral review announced that the CDC, the controversial private sector arm of the UK's aid programme, will be at the heart of a push to accelerate the role of private investment. On Monday, the state spending watchdog accused CDC of failing to demonstrate adequately how its investments improve the lives of the world's poorest. The review of multilateral agencies, which account for more than 40% of DfID's funding over the past five years, said the system as a whole was "falling short" of its potential, because agencies and the "wider UN family" are not working together. The review said the UN Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation was in need of "dramatic improvement", while the Commonwealth Secretariat also required "urgent organisational reform". Irina Bokova, the director general of Unesco, said she was "deeply disappointed" by the DfID review. "This report is based on a flawed methodology, which misunderstands – if not ignores – Unesco's policy support role, and its normative and standard setting mandate as a specialised agency of the UN, and which misrepresents and underestimates its achievements," Bokova said. "I am concerned that the feedback given by Unesco on a number of occasions has not been taken into account in the assessment." The bilateral aid review emphasised efforts by DfID to address conflict. It noted that the department is "scaling up investment" in north-east Nigeria, and supporting attempts to strengthen the national police force in Somalia as well as the Somali National Army with a view to providing security against militant groups including al-Shabaab, and reducing poverty. Concerns have been raised in parliament over the transparency and accountability of the £1.3bn conflict, stability and security fund, overseen by the National Security Council. Sir Mark Lyall Grant, the prime minister's national security adviser, was this week asked by MPs to disclose details of the fund's spending, at a hearing of the joint committee of the National Security Strategy inquiry into the fund. Labour MP Stephen Doughty, a member of the international development committee, accused Patel of seeking to exercise a sleight of hand that would shift aid away from some of the poorest recipients of UK assistance. "There are stealthy efforts revealed by Priti Patel to divert our aid to richer countries like China, Mexico and India to sweeten relationships and to wrongly divert billions to a private equity arm that invests in tax havens, private schools and private hospitals," said Doughty. The World Bank, the Global Fund and Gavi, the global alliance for vaccines and immunisation, were ranked "very good" by DfID's multilateral aid review. This was reflected in increased UK support for the Global Fund, which the review said had helped save 20 million lives, from £800m to £1.1bn. Future UK funding to the World Bank will be announced shortly. The review assessed 38 agencies, all of which receive more than £1m annual core DfID funding.

Returning veterans and hot-potato politics will mix at next year's Sundance film festival, the mountain-top celebration of independent cinema founded by Robert Redford in 1978. Elizabeth Olsen, Michael Cera and Aubrey Plaza will be among the actors in Park City, Utah, in January, for the festival's 39th outing. Plaza and Olsen star in Ingrid Goes West, about a young woman who becomes obsessed with an Instagram lifestyle blogger, while Cera has two movies playing: Person to Person, a New York-set ensemble comedy, and Lemon, in which he co-stars with Judy Greer as a man left depressed after being dumped by his blind girlfriend. The festival also boasts repeat collaborations from David Lowery, Casey Affleck and Rooney Mara, who follow Ain't Them Bodies Saints with A Ghost Story, and from Obvious Child's lead Jenny Slate and director Gillian Robespierre. They respectively star in and direct Landline, a 90s-set drama about two sisters uncovering the infidelity of their father (John Turturro). Another Sundance favourite, Alex Ross Perry, presents Golden Exits, starring Emily Browning, Adam Horovitz, Mary-Louise Parker, Jason Schwartzman and Chloë Sevigny, while Melanie Lynskey and Elijah Wood feature in revenge burglary comedy I Don't Feel at Home in This World Anymore. Lily Collins and Keanu Reeves play a psychiatric patient and her doctor in To the Bone and Tye Sheridan, Jack Huston, Alden Ehrenreich, Jason Patric, Toni Collette and Jennifer Aniston star in Gulf war drama The Yellow Birds. In the documentary sidebars, key premieres include City of Ghosts, the latest from Cartel Land director Matthew Heineman, about anonymous citizen journalists fighting back against Isis, and Last Men in Aleppo, about the humanitarian work of The White Helmets. There are also explorations of the people who led the Ferguson protests, as well as films about the Oakland police department and migrant workers constructing buildings for the Qatar World Cup. New for 2017 is the New Climate Programme to showcase non-fiction films about eco-change. Titles include Chasing Coral, about destruction of deep-sea reefs, and portrait of a recycling facility in China and textile factory in India. Here are more details of the full festival lineup. US dramatic competition Band Aid (Dir: Zoe Lister-Jones) A couple who can't stop arguing try to save their marriage by turning their rows into songs. Beach Rats (Dir: Eliza Hittman) A Brooklyn teenager juggles a difficult home life, a possible girlfriend and an older man he encounters online. Brigsby Bear (Dir: Dave McCary) Claire Danes, Mark Hamill and Greg Kinnear star in the story of a man left adrift when a favourite children's TV show ends. Burning Sands (Dir: Gerard McMurray) Should a new student respect the code of silence during a fraternity's Hell Week or blow the whistle on spiralling violence? Crown Heights (Dir: Matt Ruskin) Adapted from This American Life, the story of a man who devotes his life to proving the innocence of his best friend, wrongly convicted of murder. Golden Exits (Dir: Alex Ross Perry) Emily Browning, Adam Horovitz, Mary-Louise Parker, Jason Schwartzman and Chloë Sevigny star in the story of how two Brooklyn families are changed after the arrival of a young foreign girl. The Hero (Dir: Brett Haley) Sam Elliott plays a washed up western icon who reevaluates his lot after winning a lifetime achievement award. I Don't Feel at Home in This World Anymore (Dir: Macon Blair) Melanie Lynskey and Elijah Wood star in the story of a depressed woman and her irritating neighbour who club together to track down the men who recently burgled her house. Ingrid Goes West (Dir: Matt Spicer) Aubrey Plaza moves to LA to try to befriend the Instagram lifestyle blogger (Elizabeth Olsen) with whom she has become obsessed. Landline (Dir: Gillian Robespierre) Obvious Child star Jenny Slate reunites with her director in this 90s-set story about two sisters who discover their dad's infidelity. Also stars John Turturro, Edie Falco and Jay Duplass. Novitiate (Dir: Maggie Betts) A young trainee nun struggles with issues of sexuality, faith and the changing church. Margaret Qualley, Melissa Leo and Julianne Nicholson star. Patti Cake$ (Dir: Geremy Jasper) The story of an unlikely aspiring rapper from New Jersey. Roxanne, Roxanne (Dir: Michael Larnell) Early 80s-set hip-hop battles for a young female New York emcee. To the Bone (Dir: Marti Noxon) Lily Collins enters a recovery home in an attempt to recover from anorexia. Keanu Reeves is among her doctors. Walking Out (Dirs: Alex Smith, Andrew Smith) An injured father and son bond in the wilderness after being attacked. Features Matt Bomer and Bill Pullman. The Yellow Birds (Dir: Alexandre Moors) Starry Gulf war drama with Tye Sheridan, Jack Huston, Alden Ehrenreich, Jason Patric, Toni Collette and Jennifer Aniston. US documentary competition Casting JonBenét (Dir: Kitty Green) Revisiting the unsolved death of six-year-old American beauty queen JonBenét Ramsey. Chasing Coral (Dir: Jeff Orlowski) Charting the decline of coral reefs around the world. City of Ghosts (Dir: Matthew Heineman) The Cartel Land director charts the journey of a group of anonymous citizen journalists who club together after their homeland is overrun by Isis. Dina (Dirs: Dan Sickles, Antonio Santini) Unconventional romance between a quirky suburbanite and a door-greeter at Walmart. Dolores (Dir: Peter Bratt) A mother of 11 founds the US's first farmworkers' union before being nearly killed by aggressive San Francisco cops. The Force (Dir: Pete Nicks) A look inside the much-troubled Oakland police department in California. Icarus (Dir: Bryan Fogel) A sports doping expose. The New Radical (Dir: Adam Bhala Lough) A look at the world of millennial radicals undermining the system through tech. Nobody Speak: Hulk Hogan, Gawker and Trials of a Free Press (Dir: Brian Knappenberger) Examining the issues of privacy behind the legal case that brought down the online media company. Quest (Dir: Jonathan Olshefski) Ten years in the life of a north Philadelphia family who run a home music studio. Step (Dir: Amanda Lipitz) Pupils in the senior year of a Baltimore high school apply to college and practise dancing. Strong Island (Dir: Yance Ford) The fallout from the murder of the director's brother. Trophy (Dirs: Shaul Schwarz, Christina Clusiau) A look at big-game hunting, breeding, and wildlife conservation in the US and Africa. Unrest (Dir: Jennifer Brea) The director documents her story after being left bedridden by a mystery illness. Water &amp; Power: A California Heist (Dir: Marina Zenovich) How water barons in California exploit the state's water crisis. Whose Streets? (Dirs: Sabaah Folayan, Damon Davis) The people behind the Ferguson uprising speak out. World cinema dramatic competition Axolotl Overkill (Germany. Dir: Helene Hegemann) A bereaved 16-year-old becomes obsessed with a criminal. Berlin Syndrome (Australia. Dir: Cate Shortland) An Australian photographer (Teresa Palmer) finds herself trapped in a flat in Berlin following a holiday romance. Carpinteros (Woodpeckers) (Dominican Republic. Dir: José María Cabral) Two prisoners in a tough prison learn to communicate through sign language. Don't Swallow My Heart, Alligator Girl! (Brazil-Netherlands-France-Paraguay. Dir: Felipe Bragança) A 13-year-old Brazlian courts an indigenous Paraguayan girl. Family Life (Chile. Dirs: Alicia Scherson, Cristián Jiménez) A man pretends to have a vicious ex-wife and long-lost daughter to try to win the favour of a prospective girlfriend. Free and Easy (Hong Kong. Dir: Jun Geng) A travelling soap salesman finds himself caught up in a small-town crime. God's Own Country (UK. Dir: Francis Lee) A Yorkshire sheep farmer begins a relationship with a Romanian migrant worker. My Happy Family (Georgia. Dirs: Nana &amp; Simon) A 52-year-old woman decides to move out of the family home in Tbilisi. The Nile Hilton Incident (Sweden. Dir: Tarik Saleh) Just before the 2011 revolution, a Cairo cop takes on the thorny case of a murdered singer. Pop Aye (Singapore-Thailand. Dir: Kirsten Tan) An unhappy architect takes his long-lost elephant across Thailand. Sueño en otro idioma (I Dream in Another Language) (Mexico. Dir: Ernesto Contreras) A linguist tries to reunite the last two speakers of a millennia-old language who haven't spoken in the half century since they quarrelled. The Wound (South Africa. Dir: John Trengove) The story of a factory worker who takes part in a mysterious, all-male, mountain-top initiation ceremony. World cinema documentary competition The Good Postman (Finland-Bulgaria. Dir: Tonislav Hristov) A postman runs for mayor in a Bulgarian village split by the refugee crisis. In Loco Parentis (Ireland-Spain. Dirs: Neasa Ní Chianáin, David Rane) The imminent retirement of a couple who teach Latin, English and guitar at a stately home that has been turned into a school. It's Not Yet Dark (Ireland. Dir: Frankie Fenton) How Simon Fitzmaurice directed an award-winning film using just his eyes after being diagnosed with motor neurone disease. Joshua: Teenager vs Superpower (US. Dir: Joe Piscatella) A Hong Kong teen heads up a gang of children who decide to play truant in protest at the Chinese Communist party backtracking on a promise of autonomy to Hong Kong. Last Men in Aleppo (Denmark. Dirs: Feras Fayyad, Steen Johannessen) The work of the White Helmets in Aleppo, struggling to help their fellow besieged citizens. Machines (India-Germany-Finland. Dir: Rahul Jain) Work in a huge textile factory in Gujarat, India. Motherland (US-Philippines. Dir: Ramona Diaz) A look inside the world's busiest maternity hospital. Plastic China (China. Dir: Jiu-liang Wang) |The story of an 11-year-old girl who works in a recycling factory and dreams of attending school. Rumble: The Indians Who Rocked the World (Canada. Dir: Catherine Bainbridge) How Native Americans influenced contemporary music. Tokyo Idols (UK-Canada. Dir: Kyoko Miyake Exploring the appeal of girl bands for Japanese audiences. Winnie (France. Dir: Pascale Lamche) A look at the life of Winnie Mandela. The Workers Cup (UK. Dir: Adam Sobel) Inside the labour camps constructing facilities for the 2022 World Cup. Next Columbus (Dir: Kogonada) John Cho, Haley Lu Richardson, Parker Posey and Rory Culkin in the story of a midwestern girl and an overseas visitor caring for his dying father. Dayveon (Dir: Amman Abbasi) A bereaved 13-year-old becomes part of a dangerous gang in rural Arkansas. Deidra &amp; Laney Rob a Train (Dir: Sydney Freeland) After their mother goes into prison, two young sisters start robbing trains. A Ghost Story (Dir: David Lowery) Ain't Them Bodies Saints director Lowery reunites with stars Casey Affleck and Rooney Mara for ghost story. Gook (Dir: Justin Chon) Set during the LA riots of 1992, Korean-American shoe-store-owning brothers befriend an 11-year-old. LA Times (Dir: Michelle Morgan) Urbanite LA thirtysomethings discuss whether couples can ever be really happy. Lemon (Dir: Janicza Bravo) Judy Greer and Michael Cera feature in the story of a man depressed after the exit of his blind girlfriend. Menashe (Dir: Joshua Z Weinstein) Yiddish-language drama about a custody battle in Brooklyn's Orthodox Jewish community. Person to Person (Dir: Dustin Guy Defa) Michael Cera stars in an ensemble drama about troubled New Yorkers. Thoroughbred (Dir: Cory Finley) Connecticut teens rekindle their friendship and contemplate a murder.

Making peace is about changing the narrative, they say, and Spike Lee just found a new narrative for the #blacklivesmatter debate. Or actually an extremely old one. With screenwriter Kevin Willmott, he has adapted Aristophanes's comedy Lysistrata from 411BC, about one woman's mission to end the Peloponnesian war with a sex strike. The scene is present-day Chicago, whose tough neighbourhoods are nicknamed Chi-Raq (pronounced "shy-rack") in honour of their bullet-ridden similarity to Iraq, and the fact that the US government spends more on reconstructing Middle East war zones than it would ever dream of spending on its own inner cities. There is in fact a generational debate in this film about whether the term "Chi-Raq" is empowering satire or cynical despair. Like all the dialogue, that debate is in rhyming verse, but it's not really like rap. The effect is more conventional and theatrical. Nick Cannon plays a rapper and gangbanger, also called Chi-Raq: he is macho, arrogant and up to his neck in the revenge cycle of local gang violence. When the small child of a local woman, Irene (Jennifer Hudson), is senselessly killed in gang crossfire, Chi-Raq's beautiful girlfriend Lysistrata (Teyonah Parris) is enraged and with the help of Helen (Angela Bassett) reaches out to the opposing gang members' wives and girlfriends to begin a non-partisan sex strike to end the violence – "No peace, no pussy!" – inspired by the 2002 sex strike organised by Liberian peace activist Leymah Gbowee. They protectively barricade themselves in the local national guard compound (the equivalent of the Acropolis in the original) having Carry On-ishly used their sexy wiles to trick the racist military therein, tie them up and deprive them of their weapons. White Catholic priest Fr Mike Corridan, based on Chicago's real-life Michael Pfegler, has a grandiloquent sermon at the child's funeral – a big set piece for John Cusack – in which he becomes hoarse with passion, denouncing state racism and privatised imprisonment as the new Jim Crow. Samuel L Jackson is Dolmedes, the narrator speaking directly to the camera, with his own brand of choric impishness. Spike Lee really hits just a single note in this movie, but he hits it harder and longer and to more effect than many other directors could have done: the movie's rough edges and angularities make it snag in your mind. It's conceived in the same bare-knuckle satirical mode as his Bamboozled (2000) or Kevin Willmott's CSA: The Confederate States of America (2004). The one-dimensional cartooniness sometimes threatens to undermine the seriousness of what the film's about, yet it's part of what gives it the blunt force. Chi-Raq is a tactless, haranguing, original piece of work, a movie-musical rant about something important. It interestingly looks like a filmed stage play in the Aristophanic or maybe Brechtian style. It could be further adapted as an opera, but perhaps not exactly rap or hip-hop, although it taps into these styles and other African-American performance traditions. Maybe John Adams would compose the music. It's fuelled by anger – real, passionate anger about racism, black-on-black violence, identity and respect. And what makes it different isn't actually style. It's the fact that it shows women of different ages banding together, organising, taking action. It's a development that takes Chi-Raq further than the cautious romcom modifications of the Bechdel test. The whole idea of withholding sex isn't taken seriously in any literal sense, although the connection with male violence is plausible enough. But it's a narrative mechanism that removes the women, albeit fleetingly, from the context in which they are objectified; it makes them proactive, and interestingly insists on the men's context as domestic partners. And it is, after all, about that most unfashionable of things, a strike, and a strike that isn't simply heading for the tragic poignancy of disillusionment and defeat. I'm not being entirely facetious when I say that Chi-Raq could be put in a double bill with Made in Dagenham. Chi-Raq doesn't work all the time: the scene with the horny Confederate-style general, who refuses to put Democratic presidents' pictures up on his wall, and certainly not Barack Obama, is pretty unfunny, although its very awkwardness feels like the baffling wrong note of a classical comedy that doesn't approach the modern funny bone, and it's part of the strident weirdness. Spike Lee is a veteran of American cinema; he's a seasoned warrior and there's a lot of fight – and rage – in this film.

A rival emerges to the annual Kardashian drama about what the Kardashian Christmas card will look like. It is a drama about whether there has simply been too much drama for the Kardashians to bring themselves to do a Christmas card. Time was that America's first family would gather without exception for a festive tableau, whose production values grew higher in accordance with whatever DUI arrests/72-day marriages they were required to gloss over that year. The high-water mark of this era was undoubtedly 2013's effort, shot on a gazillion-dollar budget by one-note photographer David LaChappelle, which showed the various Kardashian women disporting themselves in a sort of post-apocalyptic gameshow set, with then-paterfamilias Bruce Jenner trapped in some kind of glass chrysalis. It was an absolute masterklass, and its meanings are still unfurling themselves to me like so many golden lotus flowers. Last year, however, the annual ritual seemed in grave peril. Speculation was rife that no card would appear, particularly given that Khloé Kardashian's estranged husband, Lamar Odom, had spent a period in a coma after overdosing four days into a stay at a brothel. Frankly, I would have popped a Santa hat on him and styled it out, but in the end, the Kardashians went with a card simply featuring a group shot of all their children. This year, the family once again approaches the festive season involved in dramas not immediately suggestive of interpretation via the medium of synthetic snow and eveningwear. Not only has Kim withdrawn from the limelight after being the victim of a violent burglary in Paris, but her husband, Kanye West, was last week admitted to a psychiatric ward suffering from what was described as exhaustion. He has now returned home, but the prospect of him participating in a card seems slim. Then again, perhaps we once again underestimate the clan. After all, when Kanye was first admitted, many reports declared that E! had indefinitely suspended production on Keeping Up With the Kardashians. This seems to have been an assumption too far for the network, which will tolerate a lot of suggestions about itself, but not that one. It promptly moved to issue a statement correcting this falsehood, declaring: "Keeping Up With the Kardashians is currently in production and has not been halted." Well, how disgraceful of anyone to have assumed otherwise. Let no one have the temerity to accuse the network of seemliness again – and let us hope the famous Christmas card is just as "in production", too.

Opening up and novelty have been the themes of an autumn awards season rich in firsts: first US author (Paul Beatty) winning the Man Booker prize; first title about a non-mainstream sport (surfing in William Finnegan's Barbarian Days) chosen as William Hill sports book of the year; and, this week, the first time a translated novel – The Day Before Happiness by Italy's Erri De Luca, translated by Jill Foulston – has provided the risible romp selected for the annual Bad Sex award. Like the Booker, the Literary Review's prize for "poorly written, perfunctory or redundant passages of sexual description" has steadily widened its international scope. Launched by the monthly's then editor Auberon Waugh in 1993, it too began with British novelists, mock-honouring the erotic swagger of the likes of Melvyn Bragg, Philip Kerr, Sebastian Faulks and AA Gill in the decade of resurgent laddism. But it subsequently introduced Americans earlier and Commonwealth authors later, alternating ageing but still rampant transatlantic grandees (Tom Wolfe, Norman Mailer, John Updike) with some more cocksure Brits in the noughties, before picking recent winners from India, Canada and Nigeria as well as the US – Morrissey, crowned last year, is the UK's only Bad Sex laureate in a poor run of form since 2008. Now it has gone beyond the Booker (which bars translated fiction, leaving it to its sister award, the Man Booker international prize) by welcoming in continental Europe and potentially non-Anglophone countries further afield. At the ceremony beneath the chandeliers of the ("In and Out") Naval and Military club in St James's, the two very English shortlisted home entries, by Tom Connolly ("he watched her passport rise gradually out of the back pocket of her jeans as she sucked him") and Janet Ellis, right, ("I am pinned like wet washing with his peg"), won ironic cheers when read out. De Luca's effort ("My body was her gearstick"), also well received but less warmly, nevertheless triumphed. Drawing, like Elena Ferrante, on a 50s childhood in Naples, De Luca, 66, has already been unfairly slated here as a Ferrante copycat ("jumping on the Neapolitan bandwagon" thundered the Spectator) although The Day Before Happiness appeared in Italy in 2009, two years before her quartet began with My Brilliant Friend. And picking his passage ("una scena molto hard" – very graphic or porny – as La Repubblica put it, reporting the Italian victory) also seems harsh, since, like other Bad Sex winners, it could be defended as first-person, not authorial, narration: the images and ideas are comically crude and exaggerated because they reflect the orphaned urchin hero's first wide-eyed experience of sex. This was a non-vintage year for Bad Sex, in which the shortlist tellingly consisted of only six passages (rather than the usual eight or more), and Auberon Waugh's son Alexander didn't perform his customary continuity-preserving role as compere. De Luca was the sixth consecutive winner not to receive the prize in person, but in his case there was no witty message in place of attendance and no one from his UK publisher Allen Lane – perhaps they were stunned, as the cerebral Penguin imprint is not known for fiction, let alone erotic fiction – appeared on the podium to collect the trophy from Lucius Malfoy, aka Jason Isaacs. As with the Booker, becoming more international could either be seen as a positive initiative or as a tacit admission of dissatisfaction with what's available without it. On Wednesday evening, the Bad Sex prize had the disoriented air of a project whose original purpose – ridiculing high-profile literary novelists for their filthy bits, and so deterring others – was achieved long ago, leaving it lacking a raison d'etre. For better or worse, its work is done: classy potential contenders now either cut out sex scenes entirely, or – as with Eimear McBride's The Lesser Bohemians, which apparently was deemed to be good, or at least non-objectionable, sex – carefully avoid the kind of details and metaphors that sound ludicrous when removed from context and drily read out by actors to a champagne-swilling crowd in a gentlemen's club.

Conor McGregor would not stay quiet for long after the UFC stripped him of one of the two title belts he hoped to defend simultaneously. Just days after the organization said it was taking away his featherweight title belt, McGregor replied in the most typical way: by obtaining a boxing licence. On Wednesday, the California state athletic commission confirmed that McGregor has obtained a boxing licence in the state. This presumably paves the way for the fight with Floyd Mayweather that McGregor has talked about for months. However, the chances of a McGregor-Mayweather bout taking place are remote. Talk of that fight first surfaced last spring when McGregor was pulled from the UFC 200 card for not doing the pre-fight promotions demanded by the UFC. Once his rematch for Nate Diaz was rescheduled for August's UFC 202, the Mayweather discussions went away. On, Wednesday, Mayweather Promotions CEO Leonard Ellerbe scoffed at the idea of a McGregor-Mayweather fight, telling ESPN: "It's all a game. It's all calculated to get more fans." Ellerbe said: "It's another creative way to create more interest. Nobody is mad, but it's a con job trying to make people think this is real – and even mentioning him and [Mayweather] in the same breath is disrespectful, completely disrespectful." Still, McGregor does have the licence, and it is ballast he can use against the UFC as he plots a fight for next year. Although UFC president Dana White had repeatedly said McGregor would not be able to defend the featherweight belt he won last December and the lightweight title he won from Eddie Alvarez earlier this month, McGregor carried on as if he was going to keep both. He even went as far as to have UFC officials grab another fighter's belt to replicate the featherweight title as he paraded around the ring. Ironically, that belt belonged to welterweight champion Tyron Woodley, who happened to be standing closest to the frantic official looking for an extra belt that night. After defeating Alvarez, McGregor hinted at wanting to go after Woodley next, and be able to to say he is the champion in three weight classes. He has also talked about a third fight with Diaz after the two split their first two bouts. After the Alvarez fight, White said: "I've never dealt with anyone like this kid." He added that McGregor is the only fighter who will step out of the cage following one of his bouts and tell White exactly who he wants to fight next. McGregor seemed to have little interest in defending the featherweight title against Jose Aldo, the man he knocked out in 13 seconds to win the title back in December. That the UFC vacated the championship, giving it back to Aldo, who had been the interim belt-holder, was not a surprise. But the act wasn't going to go without some kind of response. McGregor isn't expected to fight until May at the soonest, with his longtime girlfriend expecting a baby early next year. While he could set up a boxing match in California with either Mayweather or someone else, his name and fame remains the biggest in MMA fighting. And after every threat to leave in the past has ended with him signing on for another UFC bout, it will be hard to see this latest move as anything but a maneuver to wrestle more leverage from that organization. Ellerbe said: "He got a boxing licence. Congratulations to him. Conor McGregor can say anything he wants to, but he has a boss, and his name is (UFC president) Dana White. He is under contract to the UFC, and if he wanted to fight Floyd Mayweather in a boxing match he can't because his bosses wouldn't allow that to happen. "The brass [from WME-IMG] who recently purchased the UFC are very smart people, and they would never – and put this in bold caps – let him step into a boxing ring with Floyd Mayweather, because everyone knows what the outcome would be. He would get his ass beat from pillar to post."

The UK government wants the inquests into the deaths of 30 British tourists killed by a gunman on a Tunisian beach to be held partly in secret over fears certain material could be used by terrorists to plot further atrocities. Security measures at hotels and resorts and details of how the UK and Tunisian governments work together to protect travellers are among the evidence that the government deems too sensitive to be discussed in public. Families of the victims of the massacre, which was claimed by Islamic State, will be able to see all information shared with the court and it is understood they have agreed it would be inappropriate for some material to be aired publicly. Clive Garner, a lawyer at Irwin Mitchell, which is representing 20 of the families who lost loved ones, said: "The government is applying to have some evidence heard behind closed doors and while we recognise the need to safeguard information critical to national security, this needs to be balanced with the families' right to a transparent and open hearing." The inquests into the deaths of 30 British victims shot dead by Seifeddine Rezgui in the popular resort of Port El Kantaoui, near Sousse, in June 2015 will resume next month. A total of 38 people were killed in the attack and a similar number were injured. The government made the application to hold part of the hearings behind closed doors at a pre-inquest review hearing at the royal courts ofjustice on Thursday. Judge Nicholas Loraine-Smith will make a ruling on the application later. Loraine-Smith told the hearing nothing would be kept from the families of victims, adding: "As far as possible everything will be in public." He said "the last thing in the world" that families would want to do is to assist anyone planning a future attack. Andrew O'Connor QC, for the government, told the judge it was "in the interests of national security" to keep some material out of the public domain, adding: "This risk is assessed by security experts to be a very real one." Andrew Ritchie QC, representing 20 families, said it iwas their view that a "full and fearless" investigation was required to remain in keeping with the principle of open justice. He said that was particularly important in the context of the case, adding: "UK citizens travelling abroad face this sort of risk not only in Tunisia but around the world." Ritchie said that "at the heart of the open justice principle", it was the coroner's role to bring the full facts to light. At a hearing in September, Ritchie said many families feared the Foreign Office may have failed in its responsibilities to thousands of British tourists. He said the families were also potentially concerned about the FCO "having cosy chats" with travel companies interested in running profitable businesses "in light of FCO then-current advice that there was a high risk of terrorist activity, including in tourist areas".

In 2015 the Elias String Quartet (sisters Sara and Marie Bitlloch plus violinist Donald Grant and violist Martin Saving) ended several years of intense Beethoven immersion by recording the complete quartet cycle live at the Wigmore Hall in London. This third instalment groups Opus 18 No 3, Op 95 and Op 130. The Elias always strike me with their diligence, candour and unguarded, searching commitment, but this performance adds new daring and flair. Opus 130's first movement is spiced with suggestive slides; the second movement skits and scurries; the fourth is playfully elastic. Even the sacred fifth-movement Cavatina is milked for slow melodrama and big swoops, possibly too much in music of such profoundly simple beauty, but in general I enjoyed the personality and elan tremendously. Given the technical composure and focus of the playing it's doubly impressive that this was recorded live. Applause is left in, and it surprised me on every listen.

My friend and colleague Edward Murphy, who has died aged 64 of cancer of the oesophagus, dedicated his life to the voluntary sector. From 1986 to 2001 he was the chief executive of Liverpool Council of Social Service (LCSS), the umbrella body for voluntary organisations in the city, after which, with Mandy Maloney, he founded and directed the Merseyside Network for Change, a community empowerment charity with a commitment "to stand by the poor". His administration and activism were steeped in practical wisdom. Within the voluntary sector, with trustees of charities often appointed for their expertise, Edward observed that "experts should be kept on tap and not on top". Of charity trustees themselves, he observed that they should be "the keepers of the vision". Edward valued both informality and formality. He could be found each evening in his chosen watering hole for good advice, good company and good beer. He could also be found chairing the EU's £500m Pathways to Integration programme on Merseyside, drafting the constitution for a small learning disabled drama group, or giving his personal support to a refugee in distress. Edward was born in Speke, Liverpool, the first child of Daniel Murphy, a dock and woodyard worker, and his wife, Marion (nee Savage). After reading history at Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge, Edward returned to Liverpool. His first full-time post was at LCSS. He then worked as a lecturer in adult education at University of Liverpool and for the Workers' Educational Association. In 1978 he became combined arts officer, managing grants programmes for arts organisations, with Merseyside Arts Association. He also spent three years undertaking project management for new-build housing developments and training for housing co-operatives. From the 1970s onwards, he was closely involved with The Black-E in Liverpool, Britain's first community arts project, and was its chair for more than a decade. At the time of his death he was still working for Merseyside Network for Change. Edward possessed neither a passport nor a driving licence. Once, when struggling to confirm his identity for a medical assessment for his increasing disability, he shuffled through his papers and brought out a picture of himself with the Queen, receiving his OBE for services to regeneration, in 2000. This was deemed proof of identity. Edward is survived by two sisters, two nephews and a niece.

We keep our kids safe from stranger danger, and the dangers of alcohol and drug abuse. We understand, in part from our own experience, the inherent risks. Who has not felt relief that the kids were indoors in front of the computer screen, or plugged into their smartphone instead of out there doing who knows what, with whom? We did not know that the real, hidden danger within our homes and their school bags was that computer screen, that smart phone. How do we warn our children of the dangers they face as digital natives in this unfamiliar, uncharted territory? Suddenly, and scarily, the threats are revealed. The rise in digital addiction is stark: 23% of teenage boys gamble online; indeed, teenagers are more likely to gamble than they are to smoke or do drugs. Most parents would not know how to spot the symptoms or understand what makes online gambling or digital activity addictive, making it difficult to have meaningful conversations with their children. You can tell your child to "just say no" to drugs; but how can they say no to online interaction? Without going off-grid, they cannot do it. And anyway, in my professional experience as a therapist specialising in gambling addiction, restricting the ability to gamble or use digital devices is not enough to eradicate the risk. To reduce the risk of addiction in children, we need to pay heed to how much time they spend online, doing what. But it is essential we pay attention to what is going on in their world of thoughts and feelings. A high level of online gaming in boys is related to bullying, according to the survey by the European school survey project on alcohol and other drugs. Online gambling and gaming is addictive because it provides distraction from stress, depression and anxiety. More young people now suffer these mental health problems for a variety of reasons – whether it's the stress of school, worries about separating parents, or anxieties around their physical appearance. My clients describe their addiction as calming, as a trance, in which concentration on gambling, gaming or their smartphone means that they can block out distressing thoughts and feelings. It is the self-soothing effect they are buying when they gamble. It only becomes about winning money when they have lost everything. Teenage years are a confusing time of intense emotions, when we are vulnerable to anything that numbs emotional pain. Inadvertently, we teach children an association with self-soothing and digital devices when we offer a smartphone to ease toddler tantrums. And gambling is normalised for our teenagers through a plethora of advertisements, and the likelihood that at least one adult in the family will now engage in some type of gambling. Escaping the misery of being bullied through gambling can mean falling behind with homework and falling out with parents – making the craving for yet more escapism even stronger. Withdrawal is as distressing as from any substance, and having their escape route cut off results in anger, agitation, lies and manipulation, in desperation for another "fix". In digital life you can create your character; you can become someone stronger. In pay-to-play games, you buy virtual ammunition; living life online as a warrior feels better than being a classroom victim. Gambling online and winning makes you feel like a winner. The winnings buy more gambling – and with it, more of that empowering feeling. All the while, the virtual world feels like the safest place to stay. Spending on pay-to-play games is a short step away from spending money on gambling, although now that same desire to escape will mean losing track of the amount of money spent. Using a parent's credit card to "borrow a couple of quid" results, for many, in maxing it out when money does not feel any more real than the virtual variety used in games. In a panicked attempt to win it back, a destructive cycle of loss-chasing can start. Can we reduce the risk to children? I consistently see that what helps prevent the development of addiction is a strong identity, healthy relationships, and mental and emotional resilience. In childhood we are practising these skills essential to a healthy and happy life, but it takes time. Unfortunately, our lifestyles do not allow for this time. I asked a young client of mine how he spent his unscheduled time. The exhausted 14-year-old said he had none; what was not demanded by school was divided between private tuition and after-school clubs. Well-meaning parents often don't realise the impact of leaving no time for children to relax, reflect and relate one-to-one. The boy concerned was medicating his stress in secret, gambling online rather than risk displeasing his parents by not meeting their schedule. A scary thing about online gambling is that if the screen is hidden, then so is the addiction. Children are being deprived of the time and opportunity to develop social skills by overuse of social media. Real-world conflict resolution skills are not developed by blocking someone as a friend on Facebook or avoiding an awkward face-to-face conversation by texting. We cannot learn to tolerate natural separation anxieties if we constantly message and track those we love with our smartphones. We do not develop a strong sense of self if, instead of time for self-reflection, we feed ourselves an endless diet of bite-sized information and others' opinions. We must be realistic. The virtual world is here to stay. Removing all access to online gambling and the digital world is impossible. Teaching the poor odds of a gambling win is of little value in stopping a gambling addiction that is about more than money. What is possible is teaching children emotional intelligence: how to normalise uncomfortable feelings and manage them. We need to practise what we preach and provide good examples for them. Rushing in, stressed from work, we can choose not to pick up our tablet to self-sooth. Rather, why not take a walk in the park with our children and talk about how our stress reduces as a result? Online addiction in our children may be new territory, but the pathway to it is familiar – an attempt to manage seemingly unmanageable emotions. We reduce the risk of addiction when we teach our children the best way to deal with them.

Drake is Spotify's most streamed artist of 2016. In a year in which the Canadian rapper and singer broke records with his track One Dance, the artist has topped many of the music streaming service's end of year lists. Thanks to the success of his album Views, Drake accrued more than 4.7bn streams this year, more than doubling his record of 1.8bn streams in 2015. "With the top album and the top song this year, as well as his successful Summer Sixteen tour, Drake continues to engage his fans in a way that only Drake can; it's no surprise he is dominating the music industry," said Spotify's chief content and chief strategy officer Stefan Blom. With 2.5bn streams, Rihanna was the most streamed female artist both in the UK and globally for second year in a row following the release of her eighth album, Anti. Justin Bieber, Kanye West, Coldplay and Twenty One Pilots were the next most streamed male artists after Drake, while Sia, Adele, Ariana Grande and Beyoncé featured in the female top five. David Bowie was named the most popular artist in the alternative category, with Glenn Gould the most streamed classical artist, the Beatles – who made their catalogue available for the first time to the service at the end of 2015 – ruling the classic rock category, and Bring Me the Horizon topping the metal genre. Most streamed artists worldwide 1. Drake 2. Justin Bieber 3. Rihanna 4. Twenty One Pilots 5. Kanye West Most streamed female artists worldwide 1. Rihanna 2. Ariana Grande 3. Sia 4. Adele 5. Fifth Harmony Most streamed male artists worldwide 1. Drake 2. Justin Bieber 3. Twenty One Pilots 4. Kanye West 5. Coldplay Most streamed tracks worldwide 1. One Dance (feat. WizKid and Kyla) – Drake 2. I Took A Pill in Ibiza (Seeb Remix) – Mike Posner 3. Don't Let Me Down (feat. Daya) – The Chainsmokers 4. Work (feat. Drake) – Rihanna 5. Cheap Thrills – Sia Most streamed albums worldwide 1. Views – Drake 2. Purpose – Justin Bieber 3. Anti – Rihanna 4. Blurryface – Twenty One Pilots 5. Beauty Behind The Madness – The Weeknd

In Patrick Süskind's 1985 novel, Perfume, an 18th-century French orphan is born with an extraordinary sense of smell and Süskind describes every scent and odor experienced by our protagonist. "Odors have a power of persuasion stronger than that of words, appearances, emotions, or will," says the writer. "The persuasive power of an odor cannot be fended off, it enters into us like breath into our lungs, it fills us up, imbues us totally. There is no remedy for it." In the same way Perfume takes the reader on a journey of fragrances without actually smelling anything, Top Chef does the same with food. From the kitchen to the final dish, we experience every bite with the chef and the judges. From Bryan Voltaggio's goat cheese ravioli with delicata squash puree and bronze fennel in season six to last year's winner, Jeremy Ford, and his ricotta and mozzarella cheese cylinder with spiced fig jam, pumpernickel toast, and a honey ball, every dish is served up on TV. Created in 2006, Top Chef premieres its 14th season on Bravo on Thursday night, where professional chefs will compete against each other. Every contestant comes with an impressive résumé and the judges include Eric Ripert, Wolfgang Puck and Graham Elliot, the latter being the newest addition to the judges' table. This is by far the most grueling of competitions and I am always amazed at the way these chefs handle themselves – personally I would have cried myself to sleep every night if Tom Colicchio ever criticized my scrambled eggs. Every year, the show's format slightly changes – whether that's number of contestants, elimination rounds or guest judges – and for this season eight new contestants will face off against eight returning from previous seasons. Some episodes never change because they are just too damn entertaining, Restaurant Wars being the perfect example – the contestants split in two teams and have to create, manage and serve in a pop-up restaurant. The contestants are always as eclectic as you can get and Top Chef is always at its best when the people are as interesting as their food. I'm ecstatic that Katsuji Tanabe, the talented Mexican-Japanese chef from LA is back for this one – he is a charismatic train almost always veering off track. Another ingredient for Top Chef's appeal comes down to the main judges. I love everything that Gail Simmons says and I am always in agreement with her palate, she could judge Nathan's Hot Dog Eating Contest and still make it sound classy. Season 8 winner Richard Blais is most definitely enjoying his role as the "been-there-done-that" judge and nothing escapes the wrath of Tom Colicchio, James Beard award-winner and founder of New York's renowned Gramercy Tavern. The veteran chef and judge is Top Chef's Captain Ahab, searching for the perfect dish and ready to destroy its creator with venomous criticism. He did, however, take it surprisingly easy on Marge Simpson when he guest-starred on The Simpsons. Meanwhile, Indian-American presenter Padma Lakshmi is a smart food critic and one of the most valuable and critical voices on the show. Top Chef now has multiple local versions across the world, including Top Chef Middle East and Top Chef Panama – both of which premiered this year. It has been nominated for an Emmy every year since 2007 and won in 2010 for outstanding reality-competition. After all these years it's clear to me that the show succeeds because it celebrates the art of cooking without asking its audience to know anything about it in the first place. The chefs, judges and challenges are all there to entice your appetite, without ever asking for your expertise. Top Chef wins our attention because ultimately, it's a program about people and their undying love for their craft. Bravo to Bravo for that.

Sol Gabetta's first recording of the Elgar Cello Concerto, with the Danish National Symphony, was much admired when it appeared six years ago. This one, taken from a concert in the Baden-Baden Festspielhaus in 2014, is a far glossier affair orchestrally. Simon Rattle's tendency to overmould the phrasing is sometimes too obvious, but Gabetta's playing is intense and searching, less introspective than some performances in the Adagio, perhaps, but epic in scale in the outer movements, and always keenly responsive. Those who possess her earlier disc might not think they need to invest in this one, but would then miss Gabetta's vivid, pulsating account of the Martinů concerto, which went through a quarter of a century of revisions before the definitive 1955 version she plays here, with Krysztof Urbański conducting. She finds real depth and intensity in it, both in the slow movement and in the introspective episode that interrupts the finale's headlong rush.

John Legend's sixth studio album opens with a burst of impassioned singing that sounds remarkably like a statement of intent. "They say sing what you know, but I've sung what they want," he offers on a track called I Know Better, over a sparse piano backdrop. "Some folks do what they're told, but this time, baby, I won't." You do find yourself wondering if this isn't a reference to Darkness and Light's predecessor, 2013's Love in the Future, the album that spawned Legend's biggest hit to date, All of Me. The latter sold 12m copies and is clearly destined to soundtrack newlyweds' first dances for the rest of eternity: in the event of a post-apocalyptic societal breakdown, when weddings take place in caves and involve eating the flesh of your mutual enemies in lieu of a cake, you suspect there'll still be somebody in the corner banging two rocks together and wailing about loving your curves and your edges and your perfect imperfections. That kind of universal songwriting isn't to be sniffed at, but elsewhere on Love in the Future, there was the distinct sense that Legend was steering his career rather too directly down the middle of the road. In fairness, Legend has never been one of R&amp;B's edgier artists: in the world of American radio, they classify his style of music as urban adult contemporary, which sums things up quite neatly. Still, the excess of syrup felt a bit disappointing, particularly after 2010's Wake Up!, on which Legend, energised by campaigning for Barack Obama, reworked a selection of 70s soul protest songs in the company of the Roots. Perhaps Legend thought so too. Certainly, he seems energised once more by current events, as evidenced by his Twitter feed in the run-up to the US election and his angry, eloquent appearance on Bill Maher's Real Time TV show three days after it. Even the credits of Darkness and Light seem to suggest a fresh sense of focus. It took a team of 24 producers and 44 writers to bring Love in the Future to fruition, whereas Darkness and Light was almost entirely produced by one man, Blake Mills, best known for his work on Alabama Shakes' Grammy-nominated Sound and Color – the sparse, spaced-out southern soul sound of which gets rebooted to considerable effect on the album's title track, complete with a guest appearance from the Shakes' lead singer Brittany Howard, her voice weaving around Legend's. Meanwhile, the supporting cast of writers behind Legend and Mills has been slimmed to a mere 12, which by the standards of modern mainstream R&amp;B albums counts as very much a skeleton staff. Among the credits lurk some fairly intriguing sounding combinations: Will Oldham working in tandem with the author of One Direction's Best Song Ever; Oldham sideman Matt Sweeney – a man who has played guitar with Current 93 and fronted math-rockers Chavez – alongside Julia Michaels and Justin Tranter, who co-wrote Justin Beiber's Sorry and Selena Gomez's Good for You. Moreover, Darkness and Light is an album bookended by striking political statements. I Know Better is followed by Penthouse Floor, arguably the best thing here. It starts out like a proud, hip-hop-styled assertion of black financial muscle, but something about the music feels uneasy: the scratchy guitar jars against the liquid bassline, the strings sound oddly tense. Then there's Chance the Rapper's guest verse: no sooner has he gained access to the titular penthouse than another guest racially abuses him and pushes him to his death. By the album's conclusion, a sense of wracked disenchantment seems to have taken over entirely. Same Old Story sets it to a backing of mangled vocoder and strings, like an urban adult contemporary take on the sound of Bon Iver's recent 22, A Million. Marching into the Dark opts for a sparse scattering of vocal samples, clicks and guitar, the ebullience of the chorus's melody at odds with the song's lyrical bleakness ("What good is a dream when the dreamer dies?") and the coda of queasy strings that brings the album to its conclusion. But in between, Darkness and Light is slightly uneven. You're occasionally struck by the idea that Legend and Mills are engaged in the act of throwing interesting arrangements at some pretty straightforward pop music, with varying degrees of success. Love Me Now has distorted backing vocals, a riff played on an out of tune piano and a propulsive rhythm track (not to mention a video featuring footage shot in Standing Rock, Orlando's Pulse nightclub and an Iraqi refugee camp), but it can't quite hide how identikit the song at its centre is. The production on What You Do to Me, however, really lifts the song out of the ordinary: it slips from a noisy, lurching bassline to a weird mass of multitracked guitars – they rise out of the mix about a minute in, then vanish, never to return – to something that sounds like booming stadium rock overlaid with echoing noise. You can understand the desire to occasionally alter the album's emphasis from the political to the personal – it's the kind of thing Legend's 70s idols did all the time – but even the most devoted fan might find their empathy running on empty when they reach Overload, a duet with Miguel which turns its attention to another of 2016's burning issues: the daily struggle faced by John Legend in maintaining his relationship with a supermodel while in the media spotlight. Elsewhere, though, he pulls the shift off with aplomb. Surefire and Temporarily Painless both pit a romantic relationship against the "nightmare" of the world outside. "Can we just forget about Trump for a bit and have it off?" seems to be the basic message, of which it's hard not to feel Legend's great hero Marvin Gaye would have wholeheartedly approved. If your spirits sink slightly when you note that he's written a song about his baby daughter, Right By You scrupulously avoids gloopy sentiment. Instead, it prickles with unease about the future – "Just take care," it pleads, gloomily, while the music follows suit: a mournful, insistent piano figure, topped off with Kamasi Washington's flickering sax. Behind the melody, there's a jazz influenced chord sequence. It never quite lands where you think it's going to, and for all its occasional missteps, Darkness and Light pleasingly suggests that, six albums in, John Legend's musical career might have started doing the same thing.

Detectives investigating the death of an autistic teenager shortly after he came into contact with police are seeking witnesses of events leading up to the moment officers pinned him down and handcuffed him in Liverpool. Lancashire constabulary have released a gallery of CCTV stills showing the faces of people they believe may be able to describe the circumstances leading up to Mzee Mohammed's encounter with 18 police officers, eight security guards, a police dog and an ambulance crew. The 18-year-old was pronounced dead an hour and a half after officers were filmed cuffing him face down on the ground in the Liverpool One shopping centre on 13 July. Police said at the time that they were responding to unconfirmed reports of a black male acting in an "aggressive and erratic manner" with a knife. Footage of the incident shows him apparently unconscious. A postmortem examination was inconclusive and further tests are said to be required to establish a cause of death. An inquest has been opened and adjourned by the Liverpool coroner while detectives investigate Mohammed's movements before his death. Police said the review would look into the circumstances under which Mohammed left his home in the city; his movements between leaving the address and arrival at the Chips a GoGo kiosk at the shopping centre; and the activity at the kiosk before the arrival of police officers. Detectives will not consider the actions of police officers, including whether they are responsible for killing Mohammed. This aspect of the investigation is being led by the Independent Police Complaints Commission. DCI Gary Brooks, of the force's major investigation team, said: "We know of course that Mr [Mohammed's] family must be distraught by what has happened and we recognise the tension this incident has caused within the wider community. "What we are trying to do is find out what happened to Mzee on the afternoon of 13 July and we need the community's help to be able to do that so that we can try to provide his family with the answers they desperately seek. "I would appeal directly to those people pictured in the CCTV to come forward as they may be able to help us piece together what happened to Mzee. I would also ask anyone who recognises them to contact us." Protests were held in Liverpool following Mohammed's death, at which his mother, Karla, disputed the police version of events. Anyone who witnessed anything that could help the investigation, or who knows any of the people in the images, is asked to contact Lancashire police on 101, quoting log number LC-20161111-0339. They can also contact the independent charity Crimestoppers on 0800 555 111 or online at crimestoppers-uk.org. Alternatively, call the IPCC on 0800 096 9071. The specific email address for the inquiry is liverpoolone@ipcc.gsi.gov.uk.

Just after Magnus Carlsen had defeated Sergey Karjakin to retain his world chess championship, at 1am UK time on Thursday morning, I looked at the Guardian home page and was astonished and delighted to see that the liveblog on the world championship was the third-most read item on its website. For a moment chess – ignored, marginalised, even derided by some – finally had its place in the sun. The four rapidplay tie-breakers which decided the match, after 12 classical games had finished all-square, were one of those rare moments when all the stars aligned, creating a truly memorable event. It was Carlsen's 26th birthday; rapidplay – where each player has about half an hour for all his moves – is fast enough to be exciting but provides sufficient time for "proper" chess to be played; Karjakin defended doughtily in a terrible position in game two and the Norwegian missed a win; and then, best of all, Carlsen found the most beautiful checkmate in the final game to secure the title. That coup de grâce contained something that is akin to the holy grail in chess – a queen sacrifice. Except it wasn't quite a sacrifice because the Russian, realising the game was up, didn't take it. He resigned instead, shook Carlsen's hand, and in the press conference that followed said that at 26, he was far from done in his pursuit of the world title. I tweeted immediately after the game that Carlsen's beautiful move would be to chess what Ian Botham's heroics at Headingley in 1981 were to cricket: an indelible memory, something that makes you continue to believe in the sport even in the bad times. Carlsen was already winning the game and only needed to draw to keep his title, having already won game three of the tie-breakers. He could have played safe and ground out a draw. But he looked deeper and found this lovely move, calculating – despite having just two minutes left on his clock – that mate was inevitable. It was bold, brave, brilliant. This world championship has offered some hopeful signs for chess. The fact that it was played in New York rather than Siberia – often the default position for major tournaments if no sponsors can be found – helped to increase media interest. The digital revolution has also aided the sport: moves are played out in real time online, both on the official Fide site and on a host of others, giving immediacy to the coverage. Fide, the world governing body, is still trying to restrict the rights of rival sites to cover moves in real time, but it will have to find a compromise on this. Chess 24's surreal coverage, with the grandmaster commentators Peter Svidler and the intellectually freewheeling Jan Gustafsson (give that man a TV show), was curiously addictive. Every website brings something different. The Carlsen-Karjakin match also established rapid chess – and even the ever-shorter tie-break variants that would have followed if the rapidplay games had been drawn – as a legitimate part of deciding the world title. It would have horrified the purists of old – world champions such as the great Soviet player Mikhail Botvinnik derided blitz as chess for chancers. But times change; grandmasters – now aided, of course, by computers – are steeped in ever more opening theory; and fast chess introduces an element of randomness that helps counteract home preparation. Short time controls may to some extent compromise the great player's perpetual search for the "truth" of a position, but they are a supreme test of rapid calculation and sheer nerve. There may even be a case for combining classical, rapid and blitz, and coming up with a winner based on an aggregate score. What is unquestionably the case is that fast chess is great for spectators, both at the venue and following online. Where chess goes from here is, despite the green shoots visible in New York, far from clear. On the plus side, Carlsen is a great champion with the ability to reach beyond the chess fraternity. He does not have the magnetism (or the madness) of a Bobby Fischer, but he will do to be going on with. There are plenty of players ready to challenge him from his own generation, and also a new generation of players emerging, many of them from India and China, the new hotbeds of chess. They include Praggnanandhaa Rameshbabu, an 11-year-old who is an international master and may soon eclipse Karjakin as the youngest ever grandmaster. But mention of Praggnanandhaa (a headline writer's nightmare if he ever does become world champion) brings us on to the downside for chess. He will be in London next week for the London Chess Classic, the biggest and best annual tournament in the UK, bringing together many of the world's elite players and a host of us British amateurs. The tournament might get a bit of extra attention in the afterglow of the world championship, but it is unlikely to amount to much. The sport – and it really is a sport, whatever the detractors say – faces a perpetual struggle for attention. Chess used to command a lot of column inches. The world championship matches in the 1970s and 80s between Anatoly Karpov and Viktor Korchnoi and, later, Karpov and his bitter rival Garry Kasparov produced acres of coverage, both the subplots involving alleged underhand tactics by the Soviet authorities and the games themselves. Chess was part of the mainstream, a topic of conversation, a subject of general interest. At some point it became a niche pursuit. It happens to sports. Showjumping and horse racing have suffered a similar fate, and Formula One could go the same way if it doesn't remould itself to increase the degree of competition. Even cricket, by taking the Sky shilling, has allowed its role in national life to be significantly reduced. Sports can die. Who now recalls that speedway used to get crowds of more than 60,000 at Wembley? Can chess flourish again? As an eager, though pretty hopeless, player, I would like to believe so. Martin Amis's short story Career Move imagines a world in which the status of screenwriters and poets is inverted. Poets are given vast fees by international conglomerates for their latest eclogues, while screenwriters live in poverty, paid a pittance for their largely ignored outpourings. I like to imagine the same happening to footballers and chess players, with Carlsen and Karjakin playing in stadiums filled to overflowing, while Rooney and Co play in local parks in front of a handful of ageing spectators clutching plastic bags. It is a pleasing fantasy. Chess still has many problems: it is short of money and sponsors; mainstream media coverage is limited (oh for a TV programme along the lines of The Master Game, which ran on the BBC for seven years in the late 70s and early 80s); Fide's operations remain opaque; its Russian president, Kirsan Ilyumzhinov, has been in post for far too long; computers have demystified the all-seeing grandmaster and, who knows, may eventually "solve" chess as they have with draughts, demonstrating how perfect play makes victory inevitable. At that point chess would have to add more squares, more pieces or more dimensions, and start all over again. But for the moment we celebrate what we have: a great champion; a resilient challenger whose pro-Putin views were not used against him too much in a faux attempt to recreate chess's Cold War narrative; a contented – if exhausted – set of aficionados who revelled in the three-week battle; and a flicker of interest in the wider world, which at last recognises that beyond the eccentricities of many of the game's practitioners lies the most fantastically exciting and demanding of sports. Career move, anyone? The Rookie by Stephen Moss is published by Bloomsbury. To order a copy for £14.00 (RRP £18.99) go to bookshop.theguardian.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&amp;p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min p&amp;p of £1.99.

It may sound like the winner of a Feeblest Possible Title for a Hollywood Comedy competition, but there is a film coming out next week called Office Christmas Party. According to the press notes, it features Jennifer Aniston, Jason Bateman and others throwing an "epic" bash "to impress a potential client and close a sale that will save their jobs". But can an office party, even an epic one, ever be hilarious? Are there 100 minutes of laughs to be had from secret santas, bowls of crisps, plastic cups of warm white wine and furtive snogs in the stationery cupboard? The sad thing is that Office Christmas Party is just one of many recent Hollywood comedies to be built on the concept of middle-aged, middle-class, white Americans doing something slightly naughty, before returning gratefully to the status quo. Never mind romantic comedies, gross-out comedies or ghostbusting comedies: over the past five years, they have been outnumbered by comedies concerning respectable thirty and fortysomething professionals loosening their ties, letting their hair down and behaving almost badly. In the past 12 months, we have had Bad Moms, in which Mila Kunis and Kristen Bell dare to drink wine, and Sisters, in which Tina Fey and Amy Poehler dare to invite their old schoolmates to a party at their parents' house. Those, I'm afraid, are the wildest comic fantasies that Hollywood currently has to offer. The first glimmers of this trend were visible in 2009's sloppily punctuated Couples Retreat, which had a group of married men and women, including Vince Vaughn, Jason Bateman (again) and Kristen Bell (again), going on a tropical holiday together to revive their ailing relationships. Next came 2010's Date Night, with Steve Carell and Tina Fey (again) as suburbanites who go out in Manhattan to revive their own ailing relationship. But the film that crystallised the grownups-letting-off-steam subgenre was the Farrelly brothers' Hall Pass in 2011. Owen Wilson and Jason Sudeikis star as two husbands with, yes, ailing relationships. In a last-ditch effort to save their marriages, their wives grant them a hiatus from their vows: for a week, they can do whatever, and whomever, they want. Of course, these born-again bachelors don't do anything more excessive than drinking shots and eating hash brownies, and while Sudeikis has a fling, Wilson decides that his wife is the only woman for him. It's a pretty tame conclusion for a film that was marketed as a raucous sex comedy, but it's one that has been echoed ever since. In 2012's Wanderlust, Paul Rudd and Jennifer Aniston (again) can no longer afford to live in their cupboard-sized New York "micro-loft" and they blunder into a hippy commune called Elysium. Could they be about to embark on a life of free love and al fresco nudity? Well, no – they scurry back to civilisation in time for the closing credits. In 2014's Sex Tape, Cameron Diaz and Jason Segel revive yet another ailing relationship by filming themselves in – and out of – bed. But, rather than getting a taste for homemade porn, they end up destroying all evidence of their vileness. Watch the trailers of any of these films and you'll see glimpses of hedonism: pounding dance music, booze, property damage, babes in bikinis. Watch the films themselves and you'll be struck by how timid they are. All of these films are fixated on the primacy of marriage, even if the measures required to sustain that marriage – Couples Retreat, Date Night, Hall Pass, Sex Tape – raise the question of whether it's worth the bother. They're also adamant that you should hold on to your white-collar career as tightly as you hold on to your partner. In Wanderlust, the wanderers parlay their Elysium experience into a successful publishing company, while, in Office Christmas Party and 2015's Unfinished Business, the purpose of partying is not to have a good time, but to butter up a client and close a deal. Bizarrely, even the short cartoon that's shown before Disney's latest animated epic, Moana, argues that it's fine to spend your days as a corporate drone in a company called Boring, Boring &amp; Glum, as long as you eat pancakes and go swimming at lunchtime. The moral of the cartoon, its director, Leo Matsuda, has said, "is that even though we have to follow our hearts, we also need to be realistic of our reality". Inspirational stuff. To be highfalutin' about it, you could say that comedy has always been a conservative genre – that these films adhere to the saturnalian tradition, framed by such critics as CL Barber and Mikhail Bakhtin, whereby social norms are inverted for a brief, pre-ordained period, only to snap back into place. But I can't remember any other time when Hollywood has so insistently promoted the message that, if you aren't satisfied with your mundane marriage or your nine-to-five job, you should have a night or two of self-indulgence before knuckling down to your commitments again. None of these supposedly rowdy comedies is about smashing the system. They're all about getting something out of your system. The other thread running through them is that the characters misbehave in ways that were, until recently, the preserve of characters 20 years younger. Prior to Sex Tape, the last Hollywood comedy about amateur pornography falling into the wrong hands was 2000's Road Trip – and the participants in that were students, not married parents. In American Pie and Superbad, it was school kids who threw a house party, not the grown women of Sisters. And in 2004's Eurotrip, it was a gang of American teenagers who learned that there were sex and drugs and rock'n'roll waiting for them across the Atlantic. When Vince Vaughn (again) learns the same thing in Unfinished Business, while he is in Berlin on a business trip, it can't help but seem pathetic. Mainstream Hollywood comedy has become one long wedding reception at which countless aunts and uncles drink champagne and dance badly while the youngsters look on and cringe. The most salient example is 2014's Bad Neighbours. Hollywood's biggest campus comedy in aeons, the film made $270m (£216m) on a budget of $18m and immediately prompted a cash-in sequel, this year's Bad Neighbours 2: Sorority Rising. But unlike every previous frat-boy comedy, this one sees the generation gap from the perspective of the older generation. It isn't the wayward students who are the protagonists, as they were in National Lampoon's Animal House. Instead, the shirtless antics of Zac Efron, Dave Franco and their buddies are observed by the married parents who live next door, Seth Rogen and Rose Byrne. At first, they're quite excited to have the opportunity to go to parties again, but soon all they care about are property prices and their baby's sleep patterns. Compare that with Old School, which came out in 2003. In some ways, it's a similar film, in that its heroes are thirtysomethings who enjoy some belated frat-house fun. (Inevitably, one of those heroes is played by Vince Vaughn.) The difference is that the characters in Old School have the chance to change their lives: two of them find new partners and one of them, played by Will Ferrell, becomes a fraternity's leader. The characters in Bad Neighbours, on the other hand, allow themselves just one evening of debauchery. After that, they persuade the university to shut down the fraternity, then they embrace the responsibilities of parenthood. Screw you, millennials! So, what has changed in the decade between Old School and Bad Neighbours? My theory is that Generation X-ers – and I'm one of them – are so self-obsessed that we can't stop telling the world how exhausting it is to be spouses and parents, hence all the ironic blogs and parodic Ladybird books on the subject. But the trend is also a result of the financial crash of 2008. Now that steady jobs are so hard to come by, Hollywood is wary of encouraging us to follow our dreams. A safer, more sensible option is to drink and dance sometimes – and then to settle back into the old work routine on Monday morning. All we have to look forward to, it seems, is the office Christmas party. Office Christmas Party is released in the UK on 7 December and in the US on 9 December

The natural abundance of Canada is showcased in this hamper of delicacies, which will be sent direct to one lucky reader. Complement your cooking with Smak Dab Canadian Maple Gourmet Mustard or Metropolitan Chef Steak &amp; Rib Rub; feast on roasted barbecue chickpeas or wine-marinated smoked keta salmon; then satisfy your sweet tooth with almond butter crunch candy, or with Canadian maple white chocolate from Alberta. The full list of gourmet goodies is: Cranberry and Oat Crisp Crackers (Richmond, BC) Solera Pinot Noir Balsamic Vinegar (Summerland, BC) Wine Marinated Smoked Keta Salmon (Westbank, BC) Salted Caramel Pecan Popcorn (Vancouver, BC) Almond Butter Crunch Candy (Langley, BC) Amola Black Truffle Salt (Vancouver, BC) Chinook Aromatic Bitters (Vernon, BC) Any Port in a Storm Fruit &amp; Nut Bar (Coquitlam, BC) Birch Syrup (Quesnel, BC) Kabuli Chickpeas (Elbow, SK) Roasted Garlic &amp; Chili Camelina Oil (Saskatoon, SK) Metropolitan Chef Steak &amp; Rib Rub (Port Alberni, BC) Smak Dab Canadian Maple Gourmet Mustard (Winnipeg, MB) Roasted Barbecue Chickpeas (Saskatoon, SK) Canadian Maple White Chocolate (Canmore, AB) Terms and conditions The Destination Canada Alberta Hamper prize draw (the "Prize Draw") is open to residents of the UK aged 18 and over. The Prize Draw is not open to employees or agencies of Guardian News &amp; Media Limited ("GNM" or the "Promoter"), their group companies or family members, freelance contributors to GNM, or anyone else connected to the Prize Draw. Entrants into the Prize Draw shall be deemed to have accepted these Terms and Conditions. To enter the Prize Draw you must enter your details as above. If you have any questions about how to enter or otherwise in connection with the Prize Draw, please email competitions.glabs@theguardian.com with "Destination Canada Alberta Hamper" in the subject line. Only one entry per person. Entries on behalf of another person will not be accepted and joint submissions are not allowed. You are responsible for the cost (if any) of sending your Prize Draw entry to us. The winner shall be the owner of the email address from which the selected winning entry is sent. GNM accepts no responsibility for entries that are lost, delayed, misdirected or incomplete or cannot be delivered or entered for any technical or other reason. Proof of delivery of the entry is not proof of receipt by GNM. The Prize Draw closes at 23:59 on 31 December, 2016. Entries received outside this time period will not be considered. The winner will receive a hamper of Canadian foods. Only one winner per household. GNM accepts no responsibility for any costs associated with the prize that are not expressly included in the prize. The winners will be selected by way of a random draw from all entries received in accordance with these Terms and Conditions. The winner will be notified by phone or email on or after 15 January, 2016 and given details of how to claim their prize. If a winner does not respond to GNM within 14 days of being notified of their win, the winner's prize will be forfeited and GNM shall be entitled to select another winner in accordance with the process described above (and that winner will have to respond to notification of their win within 14 days or else they will also forfeit their prize). If a winner rejects their prize or the entry is invalid or in breach of these terms, the winner's prize will be forfeited and GNM shall be entitled to select another winner. The prize will be sent to the winner by 28 February, 2017. The name and county of the winner can be obtained by sending a stamped addressed envelope to the following address: Guardian Labs, Guardian News &amp; Media Limited, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. The prize is non-exchangeable, non-transferable and not redeemable for cash or any other prize. GNM reserves the right to substitute the prize with an alternative prize of similar value in the event that the original prize offered is not available. The winner may be required to take part in promotional activity related to the Prize Draw and the winner shall participate in such activity on the Promoter's reasonable request. The winner consents to the use by the Promoter and its related companies, both before and after the closing date of the Prize Draw for an unlimited time, of the winner's voice, image, photograph and name for publicity purposes (in any medium, including still photographs and films, and on the internet, including any websites hosted by the Promoter and its related companies) and in advertising, marketing or promotional material without additional compensation or prior notice and, in entering the Prize Draw, all entrants consent to the same. The Promoter shall use and take care of any personal information you supply to it as described in its privacy policy, a copy of which can be seen at http://www.theguardian.com/help/privacy-policy, and in accordance with data protection legislation. By entering the Prize Draw, you agree to the collection, retention, usage and distribution of your personal information in order to process and contact you about your Prize Draw entry, and for the purposes outlined in paragraph 12 above. GNM accepts no responsibility for any damage, loss, liabilities, injury or disappointment incurred or suffered by you as a result of entering the Prize Draw or accepting the prize. GNM further disclaims liability for any injury or damage to your or any other person's computer relating to or resulting from participation in or downloading any materials in connection with the Prize Draw. Nothing in these Terms and Conditions shall exclude the liability of GNM under law for fraud or fraudulent misrepresentation, or for death or personal injury resulting from its negligence. GNM reserves the right at any time and from time to time to modify or discontinue, temporarily or permanently, this Prize Draw with or without prior notice due to reasons outside its reasonable control (including, without limitation, in the case of anticipated, suspected or actual fraud). The decision of GNM in all matters relating to the Prize Draw is final and no correspondence will be entered into. GNM shall not be liable for any failure to comply with its obligations relating to this Prize Draw where the failure is caused by something outside its reasonable control. Such circumstances shall include, but not be limited to, weather conditions, fire, flood, hurricane, strike, industrial dispute, war, hostilities, political unrest, riots, civil commotion, inevitable accidents, supervening legislation or any other circumstances amounting to force majeure. The Prize Draw and these Terms and Conditions will be governed by English law and entrants to the Prize Draw submit to the exclusive jurisdiction of the English courts. Promoter: Guardian News &amp; Media Limited, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London, N1 9GU.

This is a time of seismic global shifts. I am as anxious as any parent about her child's future. I'm worried about the sudden shakiness of the systems that we trust to resolve disputes peaceably and to uphold universal human rights. But I believe fiercely that nothing good is ever beyond us if we work together as citizens. I think we're now at a point on the road where we must actively try to shape events in order to fortify our relationships together, not rip them apart. Inequality, climate change and conflict are evicting millions from their homes. But these perils are being met with "anti-answers" such as nationalism, closed borders, lies and hatred. Within this toxic discourse we hear calls to cut spending towards the world's most vulnerable people. Development cooperation between nations is very important because it is one of the building blocks of shared peace, prosperity and human rights for all. It is one of the antidotes to the poison of xenophobia. Over the past 20 years, the world has seen a dramatic reduction in poverty, primarily driven by Chinese growth, but thanks also to collective efforts like the UN's millennium development goals. However, recent rhetoric and events threaten to halt this progress. Instead of boosting financial assistance to developing countries – at the time of the worst global refugee crisis since the Second World War, burgeoning levels of inequality, and the hottest year on record – we're seeing foreign aid stagnate as a whole, and serious cuts in a number of traditional donors. Aid is being diluted both in quantity and quality. Donors are increasingly using their funding to promote their own private sectors and, even worse, block people escaping war and injustice from reaching their shores. This flies in the face of what aid should be [pdf]: a tool to lift people sustainably out of poverty and strengthen countries' ability to lead their own development. Donor and recipient countries have committed themselves in summits such as Paris, Accra and Busan to uphold various principles in development cooperation and aid effectiveness. But the reality is, they're failing. Diverted, degraded: the dark side of aid The latest report by the Global Partnership for Effective Development Cooperation (GPEDC) shows that only 51% of aid is being channelled into a recipient country's own state systems. This means that donors are still heavily bypassing the very institutions that they promised "by default" to strengthen. In addition, progress in untying aid has stalled since 2009. Donors are still formally providing around 20% of their aid with strings attached, and many donors are now making troubling signals that this trend could deepen. Donors have made some progress. They've improved their reporting to bodies like the International Aid Transparency Initiative. In making information publicly available and doing so in a more timely and comprehensive manner, donors will increase the legitimacy of development cooperation. However, they still need to do more to help countries to effectively use this new information and improve the predictability of their budgets. It is very difficult for a country to strengthen its development programmes if it's not sure how many resources they're getting or when they'll get it. Societies are stronger together That a country has a strong civil society is, I believe, particularly necessary for good development. My own life values were shaped in great part by my mother, who instigated women's clubs in my village. Women were able to organise and stand together. What inspired me most about their work was the power it gave them to assert their rights, and the rights of their daughters, be it education or property inheritance. The likes of local NGOs, rights groups, women's movements and unions are important both in helping local people organise for their own community and in holding governments and donors to account for their promises. However, since 2012, 75 countries have passed as many as 156 laws and regulations specifically to constrain these freedoms, for instance to associate or assemble. This throttling of civic space is diminishing the social contract between citizens and states. Unless we actively change course in these areas, we risk leaving millions of families behind as economic security becomes harder to reach and democracy and rights deteriorate. This week, leaders from all over the world will gather in Nairobi to discuss the future of development cooperation at the second High-Level Meeting of the GPEDC. It's a big chance to reject the degradation of aid. What is decided there could affect the lives of millions of people, for better or worse. The meeting will chart a course for how the world can uphold the rights of countries to have a say in their own development and defend themselves against the backlash of laws that would limit their freedoms – especially those of women and girls. It will colour how development cooperation can help fight against tax evasion and ensure that private sector investments meet the needs of the poor. There's a lot at stake. Oxfam and our allies will be working hard at the meeting to make sure we get back on the right track to ensure all people – and especially the poorest – have a shot at prosperity. The need to stand up for justice and to protect the vulnerable has never been more important than now. This blog post was originally published on the World Economic Forum. Join our community of development professionals and humanitarians. Follow @GuardianGDP on Twitter.

The 44th president of the United States of America respectfully sent his condolences in an official statement to the family of Fidel Castro, Cuba's revolutionary leader. Some foreign countries did more. At the Spanish embassy in Havana, for example, the flag was hoisted at half-mast last Monday. As I passed the US embassy in a cab, I noticed the flag was flying high. The soon-to-be 45th US president tweeted "Fidel Castro is dead", and that he would look for "a better deal for the Cuban people [and] the Cuban-American people". Since December 2014, when Barack Obama and Raúl Castro brokered a historic breakthrough in relations between Cuba and the US, I have been trying to imagine how we could have got a better deal. When I say "we", I include myself in the more than 11 million Cubans born and raised on the island who are struggling to survive economically; who have family on both sides of the Florida straits as a result of economic or political reasons; who saw the 43rd president, George W Bush strictly limit travel and money transfers from one country to the other; who pay $2 for an hour of internet use, and almost the same for a bottle of cooking oil. That day in December, we did not get a perfect deal. We got a realistic one. We got the kind of bittersweet deal that makes you hope for more. Now the president-elect is making a Twitter promise. My expectations are high. So what would a better deal look like for the Cuban people? Two points get general agreement among the vast majority of Cubans: the US should return Guantánamo to Cuba and the embargo must be lifted. This generation of Cubans and Cuban-Americans should definitely put the Guantánamo and the embargo. There is no way of fully normalising relations between Cuba and the US without doing these things. We do not deserve to have a torture camp in our backyard. Cubans do not deserve to suffer economically just so the US can make our government look bad. By doing so for more than five decades, the US government has transformed our political system into a lighthouse of resistance and dignity. There are also red flags: human rights, freedom of the press, freedom of speech, freedom of association. Cuba has more than five independent media outlets, created in 2015 and 2016, among them Periodismo de Barrio (where I am editor-in-chief), El Estornudo, Postdata, Cachivache Media and El Toque. All are directed by young women and men who did not want to work for state news media outlets. They are diverse in content and opinion, but have something in common: none is financed by the US government. When we say "independent", we mean independent from the Cuban government, but also from the US. It has not been easy. Lonely is the word most used to describe these young journalists who do not have the support of Cuban state institutions. Some have been arrested and detained, but they still believe in the power of their stories. Cubans have proved that we can take care of our humans rights, defend them, fight for them. Even if it is a long and hard process, I'm confident that fully restoring civil liberties in Cuba is going to be my generation's legacy for the future. I'm not naive. Of course, I'm perfectly aware this is not the sort of agreement the soon-to-be president was thinking of. And it makes perfect sense. After almost 60 years, it is hard to expect "a partner and an ally" from the political elite in the US, no matter how hard Obama tried to work for it. But the least Cubans can expect from another country is respect. President-elect Trump can make a deal on behalf of his interests. It will never be on behalf of the Cuban people. And certainly not in my name.

"It's déjà vu all over again". Yogi Berra's famous words came to me when I heard that the government planned to split the quango that funds and oversees social housing providers into separate investment and regulatory arms. Investment and regulation have very different objectives, so it is important that those functions should be independent of one other, but this will be the third reorganisation in eight years – a period of political meddling that will have wasted millions of pounds. For 44 years, between 1964 and 2008, housing associations were funded and regulated by the Housing Corporation, whose role became increasingly important during the 1980s, when council house-building was supposedly replaced by housing association development. In 2008 the Labour government decided to scrap the Housing Corporation and create a new regulatory body, the Tenant Services Authority (TSA), and a new investment quango called the Homes and Communities Agency. The TSA was responsible for monitoring the activities of housing associations, ensuring they maintained set standards of viability, probity, governance and tenant involvement. In 2010, the TSA's remit was expanded to include local authorities, Arms Length Management Organisations (semi-independent bodies managing council housing) and co-ops. The Home and Communities Agency (HCA) was responsible for funding new homes. When the coalition government was formed in 2010, the then housing minister Grant Shapps took a severe dislike to the TSA. Its decision to tour the country in a pink camper van talking to tenants and its lively merchandising seemed to rile him beyond words. He told journalists that it was a "quango too far" and announced that "the TSA is toast". In April 2012 the TSA was merged back into a revamped HCA and a "chinese wall" was established between its investment and regulatory arms. Then in March this year the government undertook a review of the HCA. This month it was announced that the agency would be split into two new bodies, a quango dealing with investment and another dealing with regulation. Sound familiar? The government has also decided that Registered Housing Providers, which includes councils that still own housing will be required to pay an annual fee to the regulator. Providers with fewer than 1,000 homes will pay a flat annual fee of £300 and larger providers will pay a fee of £5 per property per year. This means that the new Clarion Group with 125,000 homes, formed from the merger of Circle and Affinity Sutton, will pay £625,000 a year for the pleasure of being regulated by the new body. So at the end of eight years we are back at square one. Heaven knows what the cost of this ping-pong has been. The costs of re-structuring government quangos, with new chief executives and management structures, office moves, redundancies etc are huge. At a time when many tenants are struggling to make ends meet the government has effectively wasted millions of pounds splitting up the Housing Corporation to make two new bodies, merging them, and now splitting them up again. You couldn't make it up. Sign up for your free Guardian Housing network newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to you on the last Friday of the month. Follow us:@GuardianHousing

A college student in the 1980s may have been content living off instant noodles for dinner. Nowadays, a twentysomething is as likely to pick up a piece of wild salmon with quinoa and a fresh rocket salad from their local grocery store on any given night. It's a shift that's having ripple effects throughout the food industry as manufacturers and retailers scramble to adapt to a younger generation's appetite for fresher, healthier foods. But their efforts aren't creating a more sustainable industry as healthy convenience meals are often just as heavily packaged as processed products. Sales of fruit and vegetables, meat and seafood, and prepared deli foods have risen from $257bn (£206bn) in 2009 to a forecasted $315bn in 2016, according to a report from London-based market research firm Mintel. The shift is taking place because consumers are changing so much, and fast, says John Stanton, professor of food marketing at Saint Joseph's University in Philadelphia. And it's not just any consumer – millennials, those born roughly between 1982 and 2004, are driving the growth. They favour fresh, minimally processed food that is easy to prepare, says Stanton. The power of the internet "There used to be a slow change in how consumers behaved, but there's a disruptive change among millennials," according to Stanton. "Digital natives are nothing like their grandparents and not much like their own parents." A big factor is their unlimited access to huge amounts of information by way of the internet, he says. Millennials are exposed online to issues such as sustainable sourcing and the health effects of certain foods, and they are influenced by what their friends and public figures say on social media. "They demand much more information about products, the cost and the materials involved," says Stanton. According to a survey from food and beverage market research firm Hartman Group, 30% of millennials said organic ingredients were "extremely important" compared with 22% of the older, baby boomer generation. They also favour healthy convenience foods, such as prepared grocery store meals and meal kit services, which send customers pre-cut and measured ingredients to make dishes at home. According to the same survey, 39% of millennials said they had tried a meal kit service at least once, compared with just 8% of baby boomers. Sales for prepared deli foods, such as grilled chicken breast or wild rice salad, are also up, from $8bn in 2009 to $11bn in 2014, according to the Mintel report. Retailers are responding by expanding their fresh food and prepared meals sections, and cutting down on store size to better suit millennial consumers, many of whom live and work in cities. In the US, both Target and Wal-Mart have recently opened hundreds of stores that measure around 40,000 sq ft, a significant downsize from the typical 100,000 sq ft store. Changing shopping habits Cutting down on store size makes sense, since modern consumers are no longer buying their groceries at just one shop, says Laurie Demeritt, CEO of Hartman Group. At least 70% of US consumers are shopping at five or more stores a month, and 50% visit two shops per shopping trip, she says. Some retailers are even changing features that seem integral to the grocery store experience. UK retailer Tesco stopped selling sweets and chocolates at its checkout counters after a survey found that two-thirds of its customers said removing candy from checkouts would help them make healthier choices. The growth of healthy convenience foods such as meal kits and freshly prepared meals, both from grocery stores and delivery services, is mostly a positive thing for health and sustainability, says Hans Taparia, an assistant professor at the New York University Stern School of Business and co-founder of an organic food business. Meal kits in particular tend to be more nutritionally balanced than TV dinners of the past, and they often use more sustainably grown produce and meat, says Taparia. US-based Purple Carrot, for example, offers only plant-based meals, while Sun Basket, an organic meal delivery service, uses meat free of antibiotics and artificial hormones. "The carbon footprint is also likely to be lower," adds Taparia, "since a delivery truck offers the equivalent of a 'shared ride' versus everyone driving to the grocery store individually to make purchases." Some even have a social message. Munchery gives customers the option to donate 1% of every order to a non-profit of their choosing. Packaging and fad foods A downside to convenience foods is the packaging – each ingredient, down to just a teaspoon of cumin, typically comes in a disposable container. Taparia says meal kit companies recognise the problem and are taking steps to develop more sustainable packaging. SunBasket is now using compostable or recyclable plastic for its containers, compostable produce bags and ice packs made from water and compostable cotton. Big brands are also trying to cater to millennials' appetite for healthier food. But instead of making fundamental shifts in their behaviour, they are giving into short-term fads, such as offering gluten-free items or removing ingredients deemed to be unhealthy. Global foods giant General Mills has committed to removing all artificial colours and flavours from its cereals, while introducing products such as Pillsbury gluten-free chocolate chip cookies and Cheerios Protein. The problem with fad-driven products is that consumers may perceive them as being healthier when they are not, says Taparia. Cheerios Protein, for instance, still has about four teaspoons (16 grams) of sugar per serving. "Most of these products that are attempting to cater to the latest trends by playing around the edges are not any healthier and unlikely to make a difference in health outcomes," says Taparia. Mars has committed to dropping artificial colours from all its products, but not sugar, which is "the biggest problem from a health perspective", says Taparia. As a result, perhaps, millennials are turning to smaller companies that they feel are more in line with their values of sustainability and "real" food, says Taparia. According to another recent study [pdf] from Hartman Group, small and medium-sized companies have grown by 11%-15% since 2012, compared with the top 25 food manufacturers, which saw just 1.8% growth. What big brands should be doing, says Taparia, is taking the long view and launching fresh food under new brand names. "It would take a lot of investment and work," he says, "but they have to think big, otherwise they'll face annihilation in 10 years."

A prosecutor's decision to clear a Charlotte police officer in the killing of a black man left some African American community leaders saying that while the shooting may have been legal, it wasn't right. Many of them called on Charlotte police to change their policies to encourage officers to use non-deadly force, improve their negotiating skills and train them to work on de-escalating confrontations before they turn deadly. "People of color are being shot in situations, many times, where persons who are non-black, doing some of the same things, or worse, are not shot. That is deeply concerning. Criminal activity does not automatically legitimize assassination or death on the spot," said the Rev William Barber, president of the North Carolina chapter of the NAACP. Barber and others called for a full federal investigation into the shooting of Keith Scott by Charlotte-Mecklenburg police officer Brentley Vinson in the parking lot of his apartment complex in September. And Scott's family said they would conduct their own investigation now that the state bureau of investigation's evidence in the case has been released. Scott family attorney Justin Bamberg said he understood why the district attorney decided not to file charges. "That does not mean that this officer's killing of Keith Scott was right. All that means is that under the view of the DA's office, it wasn't criminal. And those are two completely different things," Bamberg said. Charlotte police released a statement saying they had invited the independent, Washington-based Police Foundation to review the department's policies, would ask a judge to release body camera footage on any incident where someone is seriously hurt or killed by an officer as soon as prosecutors allow it and were asking for expanded power for its citizen review panel. Charlotte-Mecklenburg district attorney Andrew Murray welcomed a long, hard look at the evidence. He gave reporters a 40-minute presentation on Wednesday, then released his report online. Several dozen protesters gathered on Wednesday night at Charlotte police headquarters, saying Murray's report was a cover-up to protect white officers who actually shot Scott. They remained calm, unlike the two days of protests in North Carolina's largest city after the shooting. Protests over Scott's death led to more than 100 arrests, two dozen injuries and one death. Murray said at a press conference on Wednesday that Officer Vinson's shooting of Scott in September was justified because Scott refused to drop a gun held at his side. "It is my opinion that officer Vinson acted lawfully when he shot Mr Scott," Murray said. "He acted lawfully." Scott, 43, never raised or pointed the gun, according to the prosecutor, but Vinson felt he posed an imminent threat because he ignored orders to drop it and stared at them in a "trance-like state". Scott's wife Rakeyia, who filmed some of his confrontation with police and the aftermath, insisted that he was not armed when he was killed. Authorities said police were waiting to serve an arrest warrant on someone else and noticed Scott had a marijuana "blunt" as he sat in his SUV in the parking lot outside his home. The officers were prepared to ignore the drugs until Vinson saw that Scott was also holding a gun, Murray said. The officers, who were in plainclothes and tactical police vests, advanced on his vehicle and ordered Scott to get out. Video evidence released after the shooting showed Scott stepping out into the parking lot, but did not make clear whether he was holding a gun, which he had been carrying earlier in a holster around one of his ankles. But all of the police officers at the scene said that Scott was indeed holding the weapon, according to Murray, who said the gun was recovered and found to be loaded and bearing Scott's DNA. The Associated Press contributed to this report

More than 20 squatters who have been occupying the former headquarters of a property management company that works to keep squatters out of empty buildings, have been evicted. The group who moved into the former head office of Camelot Europe in Shoreditch, east London two months ago to highlight housing inequality, were evicted by bailiffs just after 11am on Thursday. Camelot provides property guardians who look after empty buildings, generally at lower rents. But the squatters say property guardians do not get a good deal from companies such as Camelot and do not have full tenancy rights. The activists say they also want to highlight Britain's homelessness crisis. "We received a lot of support for this occupation. We offered yoga workshops, tea and coffee, exhibitions about homelessness and we had a recording studio facilitating young musicians to make music," said one of the squatters, Rich. "It's ridiculous that there are so many homeless people on the streets while at the same time there are so many empty buildings like this one." The squatters say that as a result of the surprise eviction they will all be homeless on Thursday night in sub-zero temperatures. Police had cordoned off the street while high court bailiffs moved the occupiers out of the building, and the eviction passed off peacefully. Notices were pinned to windows of the building saying that a writ of possession was obtained from the high court on 24 November giving Camelot permission to remove the "unlawful occupants" on 1 December. The squatters were dismayed about being removed from their temporary home and said they had no knowledge that the writ had been granted until enforcement officers forced one of the doors and asked them to leave. When the squatters first occupied the property, Frank Freeman, another of the activists, had said: "We are doing this on behalf of dispossessed, homeless people and guardians who are being exploited. London is built on culture, but artists and creative people can no longer afford to live here. It is becoming a sterile and unaffordable place." Camelot's chief operating officer, Mike Goldsmith, previously offered the squatters a deal: leave the occupied building in return for permission to use it as an arts and culture space. But the squatters rejected his offer and continued their occupation. "What Camelot didn't make clear when the deal was first offered was that we had to agree to a number of restrictions. The first would have been to remove any displays about the issues of homelessness and property guardianship – the reasons for occupying this office in the first place," said Freeman. Goldsmith said Camelot would continue to help promote the arts and culture across London, irrespective of the squatters' decision. He added: "Guardian companies are often portrayed as being exploitative, but Camelot has a dedicated team who want to continue to provide a cost-effective solution as an alternative to rocketing housing costs. Camelot abide by all legal requirements for notice periods and endeavour to keep the cost of guardian living well below the market rental rate." Camelot was contacted for comment about today's eviction but has not yet responded. Despite losing their temporary home the squatters said they would continue to occupy empty buildings. "We want to find a big place for Christmas so that we can provide shelter for lots of homeless people who will be on the streets during the festive season. We particularly like Victorian architecture and will try to find that kind of empty property."

Extra legal powers may be needed to prosecute hate preachers who encourage violent radicalisation in private conversations, according to the independent reviewer of terrorism legislation. In his final report after six years in the influential post, David Anderson QC says the requirement in the 2006 Terrorism Act that such persuasion needs to be "published" or delivered at a meeting should be re-examined. "That change might make it possible to use undercover officers for the purposes of gathering evidence against those who are inspiring terrorists," he suggests. It may also be necessary to specify more clearly "examples of ways in which support for a proscribed organisation could be invited", he explains. "Prosecutors with experience of such cases have told me that this could assist juries in matching the alleged conduct to the offence." Anderson, who stands down in February, was not formally recommending such changes but believed there should be a more detailed inquiry. "I offer them for discussion as a possible partial solution to the problems of prosecuting hate preachers," he writes, "and in the spirit that our freedoms are better protected by a well-functioning criminal law than they are by a system based on coercive civil orders of broad and uncertain scope." Anderson says: "It is entirely fair to ask why the law did not catch up with Anjem Choudary [who was convicted of inviting support for Daesh earlier this year] sooner." He said the Crown Prosecution Service considered Choudary's activities on 10 occasions between 2002 and 2015. In general conclusions, Anderson observes: "Laws against terrorism need to bear down hard on all kinds of extremists who espouse violence: but it is important also that they do not alienate the rest of the population." He welcomes the steady decline in the number of so-called port stops, used to question and detain travellers to determine whether they are involved in terrorism. They have fallen from 87,218 in 2009-10 to 28,083 last year. "My overall impression is that though port controls remain a frequently mentioned irritant, the terrorism acts are no longer the focus for grievance that they once were," Anderson notes. "Indeed they have been overtaken as a source of grievance by aspects of the Prevent strategy to counter extremism." The terrorism acts, he says, "are a broadly proportionate reaction to the current threat". He states: "I reject the false narrative of power-hungry security services, police insensitivity to community concerns, and laws constantly being ratcheted up to new levels of oppression." However, Brexit could damage the UK's ability to lead European policy and promote European laws in the counter-terrorism field, Anderson says. He adds: "There are strong operational reasons for maintaining access to EU mechanisms that others may devise. Brexit will not alter the fact that as crime [including terrorist crime] crosses borders with increasing ease, the same must be true of the information and resources that are needed by those who fight it." In the report, written after the murder of the Labour MP Jo Cox by the Nazi sympathiser Thomas Mair, Anderson says: "The organised extreme rightwing threat in the UK is ... perceived by the authorities to be fragmented, with no unifying ideology or set of principles. "In a document provided to me by the national counter-terrorism policing operations centre in July 2016, the threat of organised XRW groups was described as ... 'limited to low-level protest and heated online debate'." There were no deaths or injuries from terrorism in Britain during 2015, the report says, "unless one counts the injuries sustained by Lyle Zimmerman at Leytonstone tube station in London in December". In Northern Ireland, there were three security-related deaths in the year to 31 March 2016. The report adds: "Outside Northern Ireland, there have been only two deaths in the UK from terrorist incidents since 56 people [including four British suicide bombers] were killed in the 7/7 London attacks of 2005. The continuation of that record is impressive." The threat remains, however: "Some attackers or would-be attackers leave only a very limited intelligence trace, particularly if their radicalisation has been swift. "Others come to the attention of the authorities but are not given the priority that their subsequent actions show them to have merited, often for understandable reasons. And as was demonstrated recently in Nice, even such an everyday object as a large motor vehicle can exact a horrible toll on the innocent when used by a person heedless of the consequences for his own life." In his parting comments, Anderson observes: "Human rights do not hamper the fight against terrorism and extremism: they underline its legitimacy."

Tony Blair has announced that he is to launch a new institute for centre-ground politics in response to what he said were growing concerns about the global forces of right and leftwing populism. The institute will be launched in the new year, the former prime minister said in a statement, but added it should not be interpreted as a desire to return to party politics. "This is not about my returning to the front line of politics," Blair said. "I have made it abundantly clear that this is not possible. However, I care about my country and the world my children and grandchildren will grow up in; and want to play at least a small part in contributing to the debate about the future of both." Three of Blair's current programmes, the Africa Governance Initiative, the Tony Blair Faith Foundation and the Initiative for the Middle East will now come under the banner of the new organisation, which does not yet have a name. The new institute will also examine a fourth pillar, the global forces of left and right that contributed to a major disruption in world politics, including the EU referendum and the election of Donald Trump. Blair said that although different ends of the political spectrum took different approaches to a groundswell of anti-globalisation feeling – the left anti-business, the right anti-immigrant – there were many similarities he said were "especially around isolationism and protectionism, in what is an essentially closed-minded approach to globalisation and its benefits and to international engagement.". The new organisation would not be a thinktank, but a policy unit and networking space, Blair's office said, calling it "a platform designed to build a new policy agenda for the centre ground" which would seek a return to "reasonable and evidence-based discussion of the future which avoids the plague of social media-led exchanges of abuse". Blair said in his statement that the organisation would be not-for-profit, with the business side of his work shut down and millions of pounds of assets gifted to the new institute. "It is what I know I would want were I still in the frontline of politics," he said. "Part of its focus will plainly be around the European debate; but this will not be its exclusive domain. It has to go far wider than that since in many ways the Europe debate is a lightning rod for the whole of politics." The former Labour prime minister accepted his work since stepping down had been chequered with criticism. "I have learnt a huge amount about the world and frankly what I can do and can't do to affect it positively," he said. He also described much of the scrutiny of his business dealings as inaccurate. "It was open to misrepresentation and to criticism either that we were conflating private and public roles or that we were working in countries which aroused controversy," he said. Focusing his not-for-profit work on one institution made sense because of the way in which extremism in the Middle East, populist politics and globalisation as a method of tackling poverty were all intertwined, he said. "Extremism is also today a barrier to development. The Middle East conflict impacts extremism. Changing and reforming government applies to Middle East nations as well," the statement said. "And since all of these approaches basically represent the open-minded response to global problems, the salience of these new approaches depends on us having an answer to the new populism of left and right which exploits the anger and drives the world apart." The Guardian previously reported that the institution will focus on practical policy answers to issues that have fed into the rise of populism, immigration, manufacturing and stagnating wages. The organisation is not set up to directly oppose Brexit or push for a second referendum. Blair is understood to have Jim Murphy, the former Scottish Labour leader and shadow defence secretary, as one of his advisers, alongside Patrick Loughran, a former special adviser to Peter Mandelson when he was business secretary. Alan Milburn, the former Labour health minister and government social mobility tsar, is also set to head a new group, funded in part by Sir Richard Branson, to bring together disparate pro-European groups to who wish to reverse the referendum decision to leave. The group is separate from Blair's organisation. Blair is understood stood to have met prominent politicians from across the spectrum in developing his new institute, including the former chancellor George Osborne; the former prime minister John Major; the Lib Dem leader, Tim Farron, and Farron's predecessor, Nick Clegg. Clegg, the former deputy prime minister, said he had met Blair since the referendum and said his point of view should not be delegitimised. "I've talked to him, I've talked to many people across parties about the choices we face as country," he said. "You can disagree with what someone did in the past, but if their actions are saying something that is valuable and insightful now, why do you seek to silence them? I disagreed with what Blair did on Iraq but the guy is a formidable politician." Bob Geldof was another name floated in reports to have been in conversation with Blair about his new organisation, but on Wednesday he denied knowledge of such a group, or of the group funded by Branson. "I didn't know about that until I read it. I know Richard, I know Tony, we are all old geezers, but I swear I haven't talked once to them about it," he told the Guardian while campaigning for the Lib Dems in the Richmond byelection.

The internet, international phone calls and demonstrations have been banned in the Gambia as voters go to the polls for an election that poses the first real threat to President Yahya Jammeh after more than two decades in power. Jammeh faces unprecedented opposition after a coalition of parties agreed to unite behind a single opposition candidate. Businessman Adama Barrow fired up voters in the past two weeks, the only period allowed for campaigning before the poll. But the controls on communications and pre-emptive ban on protests are fuelling fears of voting day fraud and worries that there could be violence in its aftermath. Gambia's unique election method involves voters placing a marble in a coloured drum representing their chosen candidate. Nearly 900,000 people are eligible to vote at 1,400 polling stations across the small west African country. The Gambian leader, who has vowed to rule for a billion years and won the previous election with nearly three-quarters of votes, says another victory is all but assured with divine intervention. He refused to answer questions about whether he would concede if he lost. "We will win the biggest landslide this country has ever seen. If I wasn't confident we would win, I wouldn't have voted," he told journalists as he headed back to an armoured vehicle after casting his vote at a cricket ground in the capital, Banjul. Local observers said they had been unable to track polling stations because of the internet outage, as they were planning to get results by WhatsApp. Activist Jeggan Grey-Johnson called the outages a "deliberate attempt by the incumbent to control any sort of information sharing". There are a few African Union observers at the election, but none from the European Union or the west African regional bloc, Ecowas. Connections may not be restored until Sunday, a security source told Reuters, although results are expected early on Friday morning. That could thwart any opposition attempts to contest the outcome or organise challenges. Governments in Chad, Congo-Brazzaville and Uganda have previously severed internet connections around election day in order to boost control. Through a nationwide shutdown of the internet and text messaging, the government slowed down the momentum that had built during the campaign, culminating in rallies on Tuesday night that attracted thousands of people. The military was out in full force in central Banjul on Thursday and the streets of tumbledown colonial-era buildings were empty. "This election comes at a very tense moment," said Momodou Bah, president of ProGambia, a team of local volunteer observers. "There's a strong atmosphere and demonstrations." The Gambia is dependent on tourism and mostly subsistence agriculture, with nearly half the population below the poverty line. Thousands of young people risk the dangerous journey across the Sahara and over the Mediterranean to Europe each year, with the goalkeeper of the national women's football team the most recent casualty. Barrow has promised to revive the economy, end human rights abuses and even step down three years into an official five-year term, to boost democracy. The country's youth, desperate for jobs, largely literate and armed with information from apps such as WhatsApp and Facebook, have been galvanised by his message and the possibility of change. Many voters were reluctant to speak out against the president in the same way they had during the campaigns and would only say that they hoped the elections would be peaceful. "Peace is the most important thing," Maimouna Jarrah said, her baby on her back and clutching her little girl's hand outside a polling station. "I'm voting for the president. May he rule for a long time. I genuinely like the president from the bottom of my heart; it's not that he's done anything for me." Ibrahim Garba Cham, the secretary general of the Gambian workers' union, said the president was "doing his best" and that any failures were just due to lack of funds. "We'd like to see the leader address socio-economic issues – increase employment and create better living conditions. I didn't hear any of them [the candidates] address those things." Jammeh came to power in a coup in 1994 and has won every election since after changing the constitution to remove term limits. He has skilfully exploited tribal and other divisions among multiple opposition parties in past elections and this is the first time he will face a single main challenger. He still has some real support and the green flags of his party flutter on many houses along the main road through the country, but it is hard to gauge how much of this is because of his autocratic rule. Journalists and political opponents are regularly detained, tortured and killed, most recently after protests n the spring calling for reforms. Two main opposition party members died in detention and 15 others have been jailed for three years, but opposition leader Omar Amadou Jallow, of the People's Progressive party, said this was the year for change despite that clampdown. "For 22 years, we have realised that Gambia has been turned into a prison," he told Associated Press. "We are going to give people their freedoms, their liberties. That is more important than anything else." Jammeh has made no secret of his desire to hold on to power, vowing to govern "for a billion years if Allah decrees it", declaring himself "proud to be a dictator" and threatening to bury the "evil vermins called opposition ... nine feet deep". He barred demonstrations before the vote "because those are the loopholes that are used to destabilise African governments", he said, but opposition supporters have already warned they will not accept a stolen election. "The government has been failing for 10 years, but this year, things are getting worse," opposition supporter Alagie Blajo, 27, said on the eve of the vote. "We'll send him out without violence but, if necessary, we will be ready to die. There's no way he can win." Human rights activists have also raised fears that a Jammeh victory would lead to later reprisals for the opposition when the world was not watching.

Paul Dacre, the editor-in-chief of the Daily Mail, is to stand down as chair of a committee that governs journalists' code of conduct before a government review of press regulation. His departure after eight "turbulent" years for the industry comes after an external review of the press regulator Ipso recommended that no member of the highly influential committee should serve more than two three-year terms. The committee is also to conduct a public consultation on how the code can be further improved. In announcing his decision to stand down, Dacre could not resist a swipe at "so-called liberals" who have backed state-enforced regulation, which has policed the code since the fallout from the Leveson inquiry into press misbehaviour, as well as the rival regulator Impress. Last month, the culture secretary, Karen Bradley, launched a 10-week consultation into press regulation, specifically whether to commence a controversial bill that would introduce legal costs protection for phone-hacking victims. Calling Impress a "joke body", Dacre criticised its financial backer, Max Mosley. "I still have to pinch myself that we live in a country in which the government's press regulator is financed by Max Mosley and that papers who refuse to sign up to it will not only face punitive damages in libel courts but could be forced to pay a claimant's costs even if the article concerned is entirely true and the paper wins its case. "Which is why my contempt for those so-called liberals who insidiously conspire to manacle press freedom is only matched by my admiration for those in our industry who strive to preserve it. "Those manacles apart, it's a bitter irony that while print media, which is declining, is more tightly policed than ever, rampant internet journalism is utterly unregulated – unless of course a website belongs to a newspaper group," continued Dacre. "Resolving this contradiction will be a considerable challenge for those who believe in a responsible, independently self-regulated, press." Heaping praise on the committee, he added: "I think it best that I now concentrate on the exciting but exacting challenges facing [the Daily Mail publishers'] print and digital journalism." During Dacre's tenure, the industry has been put under the scrutiny following the phone hacking revelations. Lay members were appointed to the committee and the code itself was amended to include a specific requirement that editors should not publish headlines not supported by the text of the article beneath. Other changes to the code included strengthening the clauses on the reporting of suicide, discrimination, complaints resolution and the public interest. Alan Moses, the chair of Ipso who has long faced questions over the independence of the regulator when the code committee is dominated by powerful editors, thanked Dacre. He added: "The code cannot stand still and needs to evolve. A trusted, thriving and free press is vital to our national discourse and I encourage anyone with a view on how the press is regulated to respond to the consultation."

On hearing about the health secretary Jeremy Hunt's suggestion that tech companies should prohibit young people from sexting, I couldn't help but roll my eyes. Even at the best of times younger people feel that politicians don't really understand them, and on the sticky subject of sexting, Hunt is way out of his depth. At school I, like many of my peers, felt that sex education missed any kind of practical information regarding the kind of activity that some had already started engaging in. I can remember them getting us to put a condom on a banana, but nothing about consent, sexting or pornography. I recently went to speak to a group of sixth-formers about relationships, how prepared they felt for leaving home and going to university, and whether there were still any unanswered questions they had about sex. On this last point the answer was a resounding yes. When I asked where they got most of their information about sex, unsurprisingly they told me Google was their go-to source, and after that, it was their peers. But there was an embarrassed silence when I asked if they felt they could talk to teachers or parents about it. When I mentioned this to some colleagues and friends who have teenagers, I saw a similar look of discomfort on their faces. It was surprising for me to hear many of them say that they didn't feel like their kids were at an age where they needed to have too much sex education thrust upon them. If you ask me, it's the parents and politicians who are naive on this subject. You just have to see what young people are posting on social media to have an idea about how teenagers are engaging with images and technology on more private platforms. A lot of teenagers don't even really talk about "sexting" as a phenomenon, let alone an issue – it's just an extension of what you might see on social media. If you take a moment to look at the accounts of people such as 19-year-old Kylie Jenner, who has 80 million followers on Instagram and has been the face of designers – including Topshop and Puma – targeting teenagers, you can get an idea of what influences young people every day. Sexting, like real sex, comes in many forms, and people can get pretty creative with it. A suggestive snap via Snapchat can be classed as sexting, even if it's not got anything in it that would go against Facebook's image guidelines. One headteacher I spoke to told me that it was difficult to cope with the levels of sexting going on at his school, where cases were reported to teachers on a weekly basis. He told me that on the spectrum they had been made aware of provocative pictures of young girls in underwear or boys in the changing room, all the way to much more sexually explicit images. For education institutions trying to police this, it can be difficult to draw a line, but an outright ban on young people engaging in sexting is just not an option – and technologically impossible, as Jonathan Haynes points out. Hunt's proposal brings to mind the abstinence-only sex education programmes taught in the US. There is no evidence to show that young people who are taught this are less likely to delay sexual activity or have fewer sexual partners than those taught in other ways. We know young people are going to experiment sexually – and that they will do so via mobile phones shouldn't come as a shock. Parents and teachers have a responsibility to understand how young people are engaging with technology if they're going to be able to keep them safe from abuse, exploitation and blackmail. Apps like Snapchat and Instagram have features that allow pictures to be sent that will be displayed on the recipient's phone for a certain number of seconds before disappearing. This creates a false sense of security for those who think that it protects them from having their images saved and shared. But there are several ways to get around this, including filming the image on the phone with another camera or simply screenshotting it. I've heard of incidents, especially but not exclusively involving boys, where images have been forwarded on to friends or used to blackmail people into doing things they don't want to. It was particularly worrying that one of the teenage girls I spoke to expressed her concerns about the onus being on the girls to take responsibility when it comes to everything related to sex. "They tell us, don't share pictures, don't have sex and don't be stupid, but they never say anything to the boys about respect, trust or anything like that." And it's not just girls who are suffering from an outdated, out-of-touch approach to the issue. There have been several incidents involving boys being cautioned by police or put on the sexual offenders' register for sending and saving explicit images with other underage peers. In all the discussions I've had on the subject, it was a comment made by an 18-year-old boy that really stuck in my mind. He told me he thought sending a racy image was like "a 21st-century love letter", adding that he thought it was nice to share something intimate with someone you want to be intimate with. His friends may have giggled at this but they also nodded in agreement. When you speak to young people directly, you can see that sexting doesn't necessarily have to be a dirty word.

The playwright James Graham, known for his political plays tackling surveillance, the general election and the inner workings of parliament, is to write a TV drama about Brexit. Graham, whose 2012 play This House has just transferred to the West End, said he wanted to tackle the divisive mood and political anger that the EU referendum has generated. He said the drama would "specifically tackle" the referendum campaign and the events that eventually led to the vote for Brexit. "I think [Brexit] is going to be the main occupying idea in all writers' heads for the next five or 10 years," Graham told BBC news. "That doesn't mean necessarily writing a dramatic re-enactment of referendum night, I think it just means the new mood we're living in, which is very different, a bit scary, very divisive, very angry, very confused." It will be the second work by Graham to address the UK's vote to leave the EU. He wrote a new play for the Guardian, titled A Strong Exit, which is set in a bunker below Whitehall as ministers prepare to trigger article 50. Graham's work regularly takes on topical issues of the day. Privacy, his 2014 play, was inspired by the Edward Snowden revelations and explored the digital age and surveillance state, while The Vote was set in a polling station in the final 90 minutes of a general election. The Vote was screened live on television during the actual final minutes of the 2015 general election, making it the firstplay broadcast during the exact time it was set. In March last year he also wrote the political TV drama Coalition, which charted the frenzied days that led to Nick Clegg's rise to power in 2010. As part of his research Graham interviewed many politicians, including George Osborne and Peter Mandelson. Brexit will also be the subject of a new work at the National Theatre next year. My Country: A Work in Progress will be compiled from verbatim interviews conducted across the country about the referendum and woven together by the poet laureate, Carol Ann Duffy.

From his claim that global warming was a gigantic hoax masterminded by China to his promise to pull the United States out of the landmark Paris agreement, Donald Trump's surprise election win was widely decried by those who feared that recent progress in tackling climate change was about to come undone. But a growing number of environmentally friendly American businesses – including major airlines and banks, as well as energy, tech and pharmaceutical companies – are pushing back against the president-elect's attempts to dismiss climate change concerns and are planning to take the lead in the drive to make the US a worldwide leader at slowing or reversing the damage. At the first Companies vs Climate Change conference in Fort Lauderdale on Wednesday, a succession of company executives, sustainable business experts and environmental activists spoke of the need for corporate America to step up efforts to help guide policy and fight what many see as the biggest threat facing the world today. "If they don't then the people who are hellbent on rescinding regulations and just allowing the market to function without any guardrails are likely to undo all the progress that the United States has made over the past 70 years," said Richard Eidlin, vice-president of policy and campaigns for the lobbying group American Sustainable Business Council. "Businesses that are in favour of addressing climate change, and maintaining environmental safeguards need to really express their views and express the business case for doing so. Not only is it good for them, and they're generating profit and mitigating their risk, but what is just as important is stepping into the policy process." The three-day summit, which brought together executives from companies including TD Bank, Citigroup, Nasdaq, Ingersoll Rand, Bright Power, United and Alaska Airlines, was arranged before Trump's presidential election victory on 8 November. But because of that, the event became more poignant and provided companies a greater sense of urgency, according to Jason Youner, chief executive of solveclimatechange.com. "Complaining about the election and the incoming administration doesn't help anybody. We're not here to debate whether there is climate change. We're here to try to save the world, because the government's not going to," he said. Joe Doolan, head of environmental affairs at TD Bank, said his company planned to press ahead with green initiatives that had won environmental awards and proved popular with customers, including a 15% reduction in its consumption of paper since 2010, partly through eliminating receipts and envelopes at ATMs. "We set ourselves up as an environmental leader back in 2007 and became the first carbon-neutral bank in the US in 2010," he said. "We've installed solar canopies over our drive-through lanes, which has helped us offset our energy costs, and 90% of our waste is diverted from landfills. For us it's about reduction, reduction, reduction." Jeffrey Perlman, founder and chief executive of New York-based Bright Power, an energy and water management company for mostly multi-family residential buildings, said he had "never been so happy for energy policies at a state level". He said: "We have an incoming administration not willing to even admit that climate change is a thing [but] they won't be able to dismantle a lot of the great energy policies in the states that are being more progressive. "If we're talking about how people interact and consume energy, from how they heat and cool their homes to how they do business in a more environmentally friendly way, the only way that happens is through business." Smaller businesses say they also have concerns. Forest Green, a nature technology company in Virginia, has launched a "carbon transaction platform" that allows business and individuals to offset their carbon footprint using a mobile phone app. "If compliance isn't going to come from the government it really is going to be the power of individual decision-making that's going to create the change," said company representative Sarah McDonough. The conference opened with a keynote address from David Fenton, a prominent climate change publicist, who said the politicisation of global warming had dissuaded many businesses from taking action. "Business is more important than ever if we're going to face a bunch of climate deniers," he said. "The way climate change has become a partisan issue in the US has become a big issue in the world, other countries look at the US Senate, where one can't get a simple, non-binding resolution passed that says humans are changing the planet, those countries say, 'These yahoos in the US aren't going to do anything, so why should we?'" Eidlin believes that businesses need to send a loud enough message that the Trump administration cannot ignore them. "Many companies have expressed support for US staying in the Paris agreement, more are working with municipalities across the US, so there is a lot of activity," he said. "On the positive side, it's great to see more companies stepping up. On the negative side, we need the policies put in place, which is why businesses, when they show up, really have an audience, because policymakers listen to what business people have to say."

Buzz Aldrin, the second man to walk on the moon, is "recovering well" in New Zealand following his evacuation from the south pole on Thursday after he fell ill during a tourist visit. The 86-year-old former astronaut is in the hospital in Christchurch, where he has fluid in his lungs but is "responding well to antibiotics", according to a statement on his website. "The evacuation flight for Buzz Aldrin has successfully landed at Christchurch, New Zealand and he has been transferred to hospital for examination," it reads. "He is currently has fluid in his lungs but is responding well to antibiotics and being kept in overnight for observation. His condition is stable and his manager, who is currently with him, described him being in good spirits." Aldrin's manager Christina Korp tweeted photos of Aldrin being transferred from Antartica and recovering in a hospital bed. On Thursday morning, tour guide company White Desert said Aldrin's health had "deteriorated" and the 86-year-old had been flown out of the south pole to McMurdo Station, a US Antarctic research center on Ross Island off Antarctica. The company said in a news release: As a precaution, following discussion between the White Desert doctor and the US Antarctic Program (USAP) doctor, Mr Aldrin, accompanied by a member of his team, was evacuated on the first available flight out of the South Pole to McMurdo with the USAP under the care of a USAP doctor. His condition was described as stable upon White Desert doctor's hand-over to the USAP medial team. The National Science Foundation said in a statement that it provided a medical evacuation flight to Aldrin, described as an "ailing visitor", after a medical request on Thursday, and were arranging the flight to New Zealand. Three days ago, Aldrin tweeted photos of himself in Cape Town, South Africa, about to board a plane to Antarctica. Aldrin walked on the moon in 1969, as part of Apollo 11, the first manned mission to Earth's satellite. He has written numerous books about space travel and Mars.

David Davis's suggestion that the government would consider making contributions "in any shape or form" to the EU budget in exchange for access to the single market suggests one option for Brexit could be the so-called Norway model. What is the Norway model, how does it work, what does it cost, and might it be suitable for Britain given what we also know about the government's priorities for Brexit? What is the Norway model? The Norway model is membership of the the European Economic Area (EEA), an extension of the EU's internal market which is made up of the 28 member states and members of the European Free Trade Association (EFTA), which includes Norway. In order to join the EEA after leaving the EU, Britain would first have to join the EFTA. What would be the advantages for the UK? In principle, EEA-EFTA membership would give Britain access to the single market and to selected EU programmes in exchange for a financial contribution but without the additional burdens of being a full European Union member. The UK could benefit from the aspects of European integration it chooses, but avoid those it dislikes, such as political integration. How does it work? The EEA requires accepting the core principles of the EU's internal market, including free movement of people: in fact, per head of its population, Norway has significantly higher EU immigration levels than Britain. It also entails following the EU's social and product rules in areas such as employment, the environment and consumer protection, which are considered an integral part of the single market. EEA-EFTA countries are bound by whatever legislation the EU adopts in these areas, but do not get to vote on the rules or take part in the decision-making process, beyond trying to influence its early stages. A report for the Norwegian government has said Norway "is, in practice, bound to adopt EU policies and rules on a broad range of issues without being a member and without voting rights". EEA-EFTA countries such as Norway are not members of the Council of the EU, and are not represented in the European parliament. One of the prices of preferential access to the single market is becoming a law-taker, not law-maker. What are the costs? For its membership of the European single market and the EU programmes and agencies it takes part in (mainly research, education, social policy, culture, criminal justice and home affairs), Norway makes a total annual contribution of about €870m. It does not pay into the central EU budget, but transfers money directly to poorer EU states and contributes to specific programmes. Norway's net contribution is difficult to work out because it does not publish figures for its gains from the EU, such as research grants. The group In Facts estimates Norway and the UK pay about the same per person: about £96 per head. But other analysts have reached different conclusions: Open Europe suggests the UK contribution is €139 per person, compared to Norway's €107. Would this work for Britain? If it is indeed willing to make a financial contribution, can agree on the amount, and assuming the other EFTA members approve (which is not guaranteed – Norway has expressed misgivings), there is no reason why Britain could not join the EEA through EFTA to obtain preferential single market access. Doing so, however, would entail accepting EU immigration, which Theresa May has said it is the government's top priority to curb, and abiding by a large number of EU rules and regulations, which would seem to be at odds with the government's other key objective of regaining full judicial control for UK courts and judges. Politically, it may be hard to convince pro-Brexit ministers, MPs and voters that continuing to make payments to the EU (albeit not into the main budget), accepting free movement of people and becoming a law taker rather than a law maker is compatible with the referendum vote.

Approximately 150 people have staged a protest in support of two men who appeared in court in Sheffield after they tried to stop a 100-year-old tree being cut down. Simon Crump and Calvin Payne are two of five people to have been arrested in the long-running battle over the local authority's tree-felling programme. Campaigners claim 4,000 trees across the city have been chopped down since a 25-year private finance initiative (PFI) deal with the private contractor Amey was signed in 2012. The deal to maintain the city's roads and pavements claims it will "see Sheffield's roads transformed from some of the worst in the country to the best". The controversy attracted national media attention this month when two women in their 70s spent eight hours in a police cell after they staged a similar demonstration to prevent trees on their road being chopped down. Scores of people gathered outside Sheffield magistrates court on Thursday morning to protest against the charges against the two men and the cutting down of what they say are healthy trees. The former Green party leader Natalie Bennett addressed the rally saying that people in the city were being "terrorised" by the police and the council. Bennett has been chosen by her party to stand in the Sheffield Central constituency at the next election and she is in the process of moving to the city. It was a target seat for the Greens in May 2015, when the party secured 15.8% of the vote. The Labour MP Paul Blomfield increased his majority there and won 55% of the vote. Crump and Payne pleaded not guilty to charges under section 241 of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992, which criminalises anyone who persistently stops someone from carrying out lawful work, in this case tree surgeons contracted by Amey to chop down trees on 2 November. A trial date has been set for 9 March and the pair remain on unconditional bail until then. Speaking outside the court, Crump, a lecturer in creative writing at the University of Huddersfield, said he was pleased the case would be heard in court. "My reaction is, bring it on," he said. Payne, a well-known local campaigner, said the protest outside the court was about more than tree felling. "It's about the imposition of this contract. It's the undemocratic nature of it and the fact that the democratic process seems to have shut down while this 25-year contract with the company is in place." A council spokesperson said they could not comment on police proceedings, but they have previously said the roots of many of the trees earmarked for felling prevent people in wheelchairs and people pushing buggies from using pavements. Bennett said none of the protesters had a problem with the council taking action to deal with diseased or dangerous trees, but said independent experts had declared many of the felled trees to be healthy. She argued that it was cheaper for Amey to chop down old trees with big roots and plant new ones, than it was for them to maintain mature ones. "Amey is acting to maximise its profits. It's a private company and that's what it is supposed to do," she said. Sheffield city council apologised last week after a team from Amey woke up residents on Rustlings Road at 5am to ask them to move their vehicles so they could fell trees. Freda Brayshaw, a retired French teacher, and Jenny Hockey, a professor emeritus of sociology at the University of Sheffield, both in their 70s, were arrested along with another man when they tried to protect the trees. The dispute has caused headaches for Labour, with the chair of the Sheffield Central constituency party warning the council's leader that the controversy threatened the party's future in the city. On Thursday South Yorkshire's Labour police and crime commissioner, Alan Billings, hit out at Sheffield council for causing "reputational damage to the force at a time when it cannot afford it". "There was no plan to involve SYP officers in door knocking, but on the morning there were insufficient council/contractor staff to knock on all doors in a timely fashion," he wrote in a letter to the MP for Sheffield Hallam, Nick Clegg. Vanessa Leeming, who lives in the Nether Edge area of the city and has several trees earmarked for felling on her road, said she had decided to get involved in the campaign when she heard about the morning raid this month. "People are trying to make us out to be tree-hugging idiots, but it's got nothing to do with that," she said. "We want an organised programme so that dangerous, decaying and diseased trees are managed. But they are murdering and felling completely healthy 100-year-old trees that have given Sheffield its green reputation. "Sheffield is an ugly city. It was bombed and annihilated in the war. We've got no architectural beauty like other cities, but what we have got is our greenery, our trees and our parks."

Officials in Canada are readying for a potential surge in Mexican migrants, as a promise to scrap a visa requirement comes into effect amid uncertainty over Donald Trump's promises to crack down on undocumented immigrants. From Thursday, Mexican visitors to Canada will no longer need visas. The move has left the government anticipating an increase in Mexican tourists and business travellers, a spokesperson for Canada's immigration ministry said. The visa was put in place in 2009 by the previous Conservative government to address an increase in what it described as bogus refugee claims. But the timing of the visa lift – following on the heels of Trump's vows to expel millions of illegal immigrants – has sparked concerns among officials that Canada could again see a substantial increase in Mexican asylum seekers, government sources told the Guardian. Between 2005 and 2008, Canadian officials said refugee claims from Mexico nearly tripled, making Mexico the number one source country for claims. Of the more than 9,400 claims filed by Mexicans in 2008, just 11% were accepted. The visa was embraced as a means of border control by the Conservative government. "The visa requirement I am announcing will give us a greater ability to manage the flow of people into Canada," the then immigration minister Jason Kenney said in a statement. "In addition to creating significant delays and spiralling new costs in our refugee program, the sheer volume of these claims is undermining our ability to help people fleeing real persecution." After the visa was introduced, the number of Mexican asylum seekers plunged – dropping to 120 in 2015 – but the Canadian government came under tremendous political pressure from Mexico to end the policy. In June, the government agreed to do so, in exchange for Mexico expanding its imports of Canadian beef. "This move will make it easier for our Mexican friends to visit Canada, while growing our local economies and strengthening our communities," Justin Trudeau, Canada's prime minister, said at the time. At the time, few had considered the possibility that Trump – who had vowed to build a wall along the shared border between the US and Mexico and deport millions of undocumented workers and illegal residents – would win the US election. If Trump carries through on those pledges, it could result in a substantial impact on Canada, said Toronto immigration lawyer Lorne Waldman. "It's the lifting of the visa and the fact that Trump is going to take over, those two factors together are seen as a major pull factor attracting people to come to Canada." He drew parallels with another wave of migrants that headed north in recent years. "After 9/11, when there was a significant crackdown in the United States on Muslims, there was a significant number of people who came across the border from the United States into Canada at that time." Others disputed whether the visa lift and Trump presidency would result in a substantial increase in Mexican migrants to Canada. "I imagine there will be some increase, perhaps to numbers similar to before the Great Recession hit," said César Cuauhtémoc of the University of Denver Sturm College of Law. "The reality, however, is that many Mexicans have strong reasons – family ties and longstanding economic relationships are two of the most prominent – to set their sights on the United States despite the difficult path to lawful migration." Net migration from Mexico to the US has dropped over recent years, thanks to tougher enforcement on the border and a relatively stable jobs market. But Trump's election victory – and his promises to tear up existing trade agreements and impose stiff import duties – have caused the peso to plunge and sparked fears of an economic crisis in Mexico. Canada's minister of immigration, refugees and citizenship has downplayed any concerns, arguing that the visa lift will yield deeper ties between Canada and Mexico and boost tourism. "We are very happy to welcome more Mexican tourists to this country and to accept the jobs that go along with that," John McCallum recently told the House of Commons. "Of course we knew there were risks. There are risks when you do anything." The government will continue to closely monitor migration from Mexico, he said, and could move to reinstate the visa if it sees a spike in the number of Mexican asylum seekers. "There would come a point where a visa could be reimposed," he said. "Canada retains its sovereignty on this issue. There comes a point where it would become unsustainable, but we are hoping that point will not arrive."

Citizen Kane might be the critics' evergreen rosebud in most best-ever-film polls, but it is not the people's choice: every country has its own supreme movie. How national favourite films are appointed is an obscure process, the incumbent often bedding in through countless collective holiday viewings until it is sitting there decades later, covered in dust, on the cultural mantelpiece. They are not usually the films that most blatantly peddle local stereotypes for outside consumption (in the UK, that might be James Bond, rather than The Great Escape), but ones with a more casual feel for the national psyche, displaying family foibles and preferences, sometimes to a fault, which is why they are rarely critical darlings. Appointed by this mysterious consensus-making process, national favourites tend to transcend age and class; we consulted with cinephiles and Joe Public around the world to compile this list of nine local heroes. La Grande Vadrouille (France) Gérard Oury's 1966 wartime comedy was France's undisputed domestic box-office champ for more than 40 years until 2008. Reminiscent of 'Allo 'Allo!, it paired up comedy institution Louis de Funès and the singer Bourvil as plucky Parisians helping out a squadron of stranded British airmen, led by none other than Terry-Thomas. But the reconciliation work was really for the benefit of French audiences: a rare mirthful treatment of France's second world war, with the protagonists heading for the Vichy border, it steadfastly blanks the agonies of collaboration in favour of rampant farce rooted in gastronomy (flyboys hiding in wine barrels) and petty class differences (De Funès is a snooty conductor, Bourvil a house-painter). The magnificent final escape in gliders over Lozère's belle campagne glosses over the vicious resistance hunts that took place on the ground, which is part of the reason, along with De Funès' jack-in-the-box energy, why the film got the French bravoing so successfully. Irony of Fate (Russia) It seems improbable that Soviet Russia produced much self-satire, let alone that a piece of it could become the national talisman. But 1976's Irony of Fate, or Enjoy Your Bath! – a two-part television special produced by the state film company Mosfilm that has been the country's New Year's Eve viewing fix ever since – is exactly that. It takes flight on a dart cheekily aimed at bland regime architecture: a drunken Moscow man mistakenly boards a plane to Leningrad, where he gets a taxi to an identical building in an identically named street – and meets the love of his life. Apparently, this kind of gentle satire was fairly common in the late Soviet era (although the film was belatedly banned under Gorbachev, supposedly for promoting drunkenness). Director Eldar Ryazanov's lyrical delicacy prioritised people over ideology, ensuring that the film – watched by three-quarters of the population on its first broadcast – lived long past communism. Unfortunately, the man responsible for Abraham Lincoln: Vampire Hunter handled the 2007 sequel. The Great Escape (UK) "The way it happened," postured the release publicity for what has become a Christmas Day perennial in Britain. Not that the bumped-up quota of US stars (no Americans were involved in the real Stalag Luft III escape) for this American production stopped The Great Escape from becoming the cinematic equivalent of a Keep Calm and Carry On tea-towel in the UK; indeed, a liberal approach to history is why it is beloved. Its Boy's Own approach to what was presumably a not-so-fun stretch at the Führer's pleasure was irresistible; it came late in the cycle of epic second world war films, but it was still too early for the bitter and divisive tone of works about Vietnam. Contrasting the brash Yanks with the self-contained Brits, it fed the myth of the great British underdog all the better. More than 50 years later, fans are still lulled into catatonia when the title song is parped out at England matches. Sholay (India) If uptake by sports fans is the national-treasure litmus test, Sholay passes: Yeh Dosti, the ode to friendship sung by lead rogues Amitabh Bachchan and Dharmendra, can often be heard in Indian cricket grounds. The 1975 blockbuster rips off Sergio Leone and Charlie Chaplin rotten, but it transcends them cockily, stretching the definition of "something for everyone" by gorging the movie on action, romance and knockabout comedy in one of the first multi-genre "masala movies". Sholay, India's first 70mm production, used sheer scale to steamroller the masses: it was two and a half years in the making and 204 minutes long. It played in one Mumbai cinema for five years and was the national box-office topper for 19 years. But it also had soul. Its stylish outlaws flirted with the combustible mood that provoked Indira Ghandi's declaration of national emergency as the film was released, but it corralled this rebelliousness into a vision of Indian society in which everyone fits into place. Drei Haselnüsse für Aschenbrödel (Germany) Yet another holiday-season staple, this 1973 East German-Czechoslovakian co-production for TV, like Irony of Fate, outlasted the regime. But continuing fervour for this version of the Cinderella story cannot be explained away by ostalgie. Drawn from the writings of 19th-century Czech nationalist Božena Němcová, it is more the fresh-cheeked retelling that has allowed it to stand its ground against countless Hollywood alternatives. Libuše Šafránková's Bardot-pretty lead is given an unusual amount of agency, with the emphasis placed on her approval of the prince. Coupled with the Saxony locations – especially Moritzburg castle, where cash-in Drei Haselnüsse exhibitions are still held – it has a once-upon-a-time immediacy that places it right in the heartlands of the European fairytale. Nosotros los Pobres (Mexico) The Golden Age beefcake Pedro Infante, who died in a plane crash in 1957, was such an icon of Mexican masculinity that it was later rumoured he was alive and masquerading as El Santo, the masked kingpin of lucha libre. Nosotros los Pobres (We the Poor), which came out in 1947, was the pinnacle of his screen run as a big-hearted working-class hero. The start of a trilogy in which he played struggling yet invariably pec-flexing carpenter Pepe el Toro, it remained Mexico's highest grossing film for almost four decades and was later a TV-schedule placeholder. It parcelled up the popular daily grind in a more saccharine way than the likes of Luis Buñuel's Los Olvidados and came to signify a swaggering period of commercial Mexican cinema bookended by Infante's premature death. The country's new-school box-office champion, Nosotros los Nobles – about spoiled rich-kids – nabbed the title in 2013. Gone With the Wind (US) US cinema is so wide-ranging that it is hard to single out one leader. But perhaps Gone With the Wind is it: an archetypal blockbuster – it had a budget of $3.9m, worth $66m (£53m) today – that tantalised the public by coasting on hype (producer David O Selznick had a national casting call for the role of Scarlett O'Hara) and flirting with disaster in the way James Cameron has since made his modus operandi. Speaking to the US's size fixation, the civil war drama's epic panache made it a monster hit that ruled the domestic box office until The Exorcist came along in 1973. If you really want to be cynical, there is even something American about a film becoming a majoritarian classic by so blithely overlooking the racial oppression of its biggest minority. Tora-san (Japan) Japan's choice isn't a film, but rather a character. The Otoko wa Tsurai yo (It's Tough Being a Man) series ran for 48 films from 1969 to 1995, by which time its protagonist, roving peddler Tora-san, had worn a deep groove in the nation's heart. The films ran to a strict formula: Tora-san, returning home, would annoy his family so much that they would chuck him out on the road, where he would invariably meet a woman who would fail to reciprocate his affections. He padded through almost every Japanese prefecture during his run – which lasted until lead actor Kiyoshi Atsumi's death in 1996; his bumbling rogue, drawing on Charlie Chaplin and Jacques Tati, became a nostalgic focal point for audiences as the country modernised. There is a Tora-san statue outside the Shibamata train station, the old-time Tokyo neighbourhood towards which he always gravitates. Living in Bondage (Nigeria) This 1992 supernatural drama supplies the origin myth for Nollywood, which is, by films produced, the No 1 film industry in the world. Nigeria had virtually no cinemas at the time, so it was ripe for a more down'n'dirty folkloric mode of storytelling. This is where Chris Obi Rapu's video quickie Living in Bondage came in: its garish plotline (country boy comes to Lagos and ritually sacrifices his wife in return for riches) translated easily beyond its minority Igbo-language base and spoke universally to an urbanising country. Like most origin myths, it is apocryphal (it was not the first Nigerian video feature), but LiB provided both an economic and a storytelling template that persists to this day. The film that launched a million shrinkwrapped juju potboilers on market stalls across Nigeria is still fondly cited. Not quite national treasures (South Korea, Turkey and Egypt) It is usually large, affluent countries with unbroken cinematic traditions that produce consensus favourites. You would expect other places with vibrant industries to have done the same, but for various reasons their totem-pole films aren't necessarily popular classics, or not unanimously. Kim Ki-young's torrid and stylistically adventurous domestic thriller The Housemaid, from 1960, provided the foundation for the dark Korean new-wave of Park Chan-wook et al and is often cited by those directors. But no one watches it these days. The collapse of Korean cinema in the 1980s and 1980s, or the disdain for "heritage" outside the west, might explain that. It could be a similar story in Turkey, where Yeşilçam (the Turkish Hollywood) produced many fading crowdpleasers, such as 1978's The Girl with the Red Scarf, but where new-school works such as Eskiya (The Bandit), the 1996 blockbuster that revived Turkish cinema, haven't had time to percolate deeply enough. Or perhaps it is a demographic split between traditionalist and modern that keeps people on opposite sides of the Netflix library. In Egypt, the biggest Arab film industry, golden-age favourites such as Eshaet Hob (Rumour of Love) – Omar Sharif does geek-cool – are fondly remembered, and more recent comedy Terrorism and Kebab broke records. But neither is the one film to bring them all. The 4K restoration of La Grande Vadrouille is available now on DVD, Blu-Ray and via download

When Donald Trump tweeted that "millions" of people voted illegally in the presidential election, headline writers were quick to point out that he had no evidence. The US president-elect had not given his source but fact-checking websites and newspapers traced it to a two-week-old "random tweet" by a little known former Republican party official in Texas. Gregg Phillips claimed on 12 November to have found "more than three million votes cast by non-citizens" – but he too failed to provide data. Accused of the very topical sin of spreading fake news, all the way to the White House, Phillips is unrepentant. He stands by his original assertion, though he still offers no evidence, and denies that he was Trump's inspiration in any case. "The tweet that I put out had died down; nothing else was being said," Phillips told the Guardian on Tuesday. "And then when Mr Trump came out with his tweet, it seemed to erupt again because somebody erroneously linked me to Mr Trump's tweet. The campaign came out and cleared that up: what he was talking about was a Washington Post article." Indeed, when asked to explain Trump's claim of illegal voting, his transition team pointed journalists to a 2014 article in the Washington Post by two academics – which the Post's website has since prefaced with a disclaimer – along with a 2012 Pew Research study. Neither proved that non-citizens voted in 2016. Media analysts still believe, however, that Phillips's "Twitter-born conspiracy theory", as the Washington Post put it, is the most likely explanation for Trump's unsubstantiated outburst on 27 November. The episode offers a study in the power of lone activists to make claims that soon become reported with the confidence of facts on myriad websites. It also illustrates the blowback they can endure when, rightly or wrongly, Trump is perceived as having recycled those claims to serve his dangerously selective worldview. Phillips, a 56-year-old grandfather based in Austin, Texas, said: "I'm on the edge and you can probably hear it in my voice. In the last couple of days I've been called a child molester. Somebody posted something up there that I've been arrested for armed robbery; it turned out that if you drilled into that it was some black guy that was 15 years younger than me. They've accused me of being a Nazi, a fascist, a Russian spy, an Israeli spy – they've called me all sorts of words that I won't even repeat on here." Phillips is no political novice. The former Republican official in Alabama and Mississippi was managing director of a Super Pac that supported Newt Gingrich's 2012 campaign for president. He has worked for the state governments of Mississippi and Texas and now runs a company that provides data analytics and fraud protection to healthcare providers. He has also long taken an interest in the issue of voter fraud and says he is on the board of True the Vote, a conservative campaigning organisation focused on US electoral standards. So it did not come out of the blue when Phillips tweeted four days after the election: "Completed analysis of database of 180 million voter registrations. Number of non-citizen votes exceeds 3 million. Consulting legal team." Phillips did not provide any data to support his assertion and still declines to do so. The website PolitiFact rated the claim of 3 million illegal aliens casting votes in the election as false. Other fact-checkers concurred. But a tweet can travel halfway round the world while the truth is putting on its shoes. On 14 November Infowars, a conspiracy-laden site run by Austin-based shock jock Alex Jones, ran a story that began: "Three million votes in the US presidential election were cast by illegal aliens, according to Greg Phillips of the VoteFraud.org organisation." An exact text search for the phrase "according to Greg Phillips of the VoteFraud.org organization" in Google shows it has been incorporated into hundreds, if not thousands, of versions of the story. Dan Cassino, a political scientist at Fairleigh Dickinson University, said the involvement of Infowars gave the Phillips's assertion the momentum of a runaway train. "There are whole parts of the internet where it then becomes accepted by lots of people. It essentially becomes non-falsifiable at that point." The Infowars story made it to the top headlines on the hugely influential Drudge Report: "CLAIM: 3 Million Votes in Presidential Election Cast by Illegals..." Finally Trump, stung by his 2 million popular vote deficit to Hillary Clinton and efforts for a recount in three states, lashed out by apparently recycling the story for his own ends. "In addition to winning the Electoral College in a landslide, I won the popular vote if you deduct the millions of people who voted illegally," he tweeted. Articles by the the Washington Post, Austin American-Statesman and others drew a causal link between Trump and Phillips, who was bewildered to find himself in the eye of a storm. "I'm just an ordinary guy who has an interest in free and fair elections," he said on Tuesday. "This has been a passion in my life. This is not something I decided to do on 12 November. I'm not a public figure, I'm not an elected official, I have no authority in the world about this. I'm doing this on my own dime." Phillips, who voted for Trump, denies that what happened is an example of the so-called "post-truth" era in which mainstream media is distrusted. "This is not false news," he said. "Just because you haven't seen it and just because the haters on Twitter haven't seen it doesn't make it false." "Some of these nutbags who already talking about killing me; if I release the data does that mean they're really going to do it? Who knows, right? This is absurdity. This is the land of the absurd. But this stuff's real. This is not a joke. I've been doing this for seven years. It's real." Phillips claims to have started building a database in 2009 of all voter registrations in the US with details including geocoding. "We know where everyone lives, we can look at it on a map, we can see shifts, we can see how things go, move and operate. If I'm wrong, it's a matter of degree: is it bigger, is it smaller. What we know is that non-citizens voted. If only people would put the passion they've had about my tweet into agreeing to sit down and fix the frigging problem." Until Phillips can back his claims, concerns will persist that Twitter rumours can start a rightwing media firestorm that bears little relation to reality and engulfs even the White House. Cassino said: "It's incredibly difficult to counteract because the ones to whom it appeals the most are the ones who least trust the mainstream media who are doing the debunking. "It needs media on the right, people like Rush Limbaugh, to take a stand about the truth so those people will listen. The establishment media has been declawed as a fact checker."

What happened? At about 10.15pm on Monday 28 November a BAE146 Bolivia charter flight Lamia 933 from Santa Cruz slammed into the mountainside eight miles short of its intended destination of Medellín airport. The crash killed 71 people on board, including most of the Chapecoense team and a delegation travelling with them that included 21 journalists. Who survived? There were six survivors, including three of the team's players Alan Ruschel, Hélio Neto and Jackson Follman, who were all severely injured. By contrast, two members of the Bolivian crew, flight technician Erwin Tumiri and flight attendant Ximena Sanchez, escaped with relatively minor injuries. The sixth survivor, a journalist Rafael Valmorbida, is in intensive care with multiple rib fractures. Why did the plane crash? The authorities have given no definitive answer as an official investigation, which is likely to take months to complete, has only just begun. But it has become increasingly clear that the plane ran out fuel. What is the evidence pointing to a fuel burnout? In a call to Medellín air traffic control, the pilot, Miguel Quiroga, said the plane was "without fuel". In exchanges played by Colombian media Quiroga requests emergency permission to land citing "fuel emergency". The recording is corroborated by the surviving flight attendant. "We ran out of fuel. The airplane turned off," a rescuer quoted her saying. Unusually, the plane did not explode or even catch fire when it crashed. Witnesses said the plane was making no noise before it slammed into the mountain. "The engine must have gone," said Nancy Munoz, who grows strawberries in the area. Colombian aviation officials are assuming the plane's fuel burned out before it crashed. "Our theory is that there was a lack of fuel," Jaime Sierra, an official, told the Brazilian broadsheet O Globo. Why did the plane run out of fuel? The plane's operators, Lamia, have suggested the pilot was at fault for not stopping to refuel. Its chief executive, Gustavo Vargas, said: "He had alternatives in Bogotá in case of fuel deficiency. He had all the power to go to refuel. It's a decision that the pilot takes." Alternatively the ground crew could be to blame for not providing enough fuel, or there could have been a fuel leak. And questions have also been raised about why a plane with relatively limited capacity was being used for a 1,600-mile journey that usually takes four and half hours to complete. John Cox, a retired pilot and head of the US-based Safety Operating Systems, said: "The airplane was being flight-planned right to its maximum. Even if everything goes well they are not going to have a large amount of fuel when they arrive. I don't understand how they could do the flight nonstop with the fuel requirements that the regulations stipulate." Planes need to have enough extra fuel on board to fly at least 30 to 45 minutes to another airport in case of an emergency. They rarely fly in a straight line because of turbulence. The stormy weather conditions may have contributed to the plane running out of fuel earlier than the pilot expected. What else could have caused the crash? In one of the cockpit recordings the pilot also mentioned a "total electrical failure". A statement from José María Córdova airport in Medellín confirmed the plane had declared an emergency 15 minutes before the crash. An electrical malfunction will be one of the possibilities explored by the official investigation. But if there was an electrical failure it was not total otherwise the pilot would not have been able to communicate by radio. Have the flight recorders been found? Yes, two black box recorders were recovered from the hillside on Tuesday. They will be vital for the official investigation. But it is not yet known what they reveal. Why have British inspectors been sent to investigate? Under international protocol investigations from countries where the plane was built must be part of any crash inquiry. Britain's Air Accident Investigation Bureau said it was following that protocol by sending a team to help Colombia's Aeronautica Civil, as the Avro RJ85 aircraft was built in Britain. The plane, a variant of the BAE146 model which went out of production in 2002, was manufactured by British Aerospace, now part of BAE Systems. Representatives from BAE Systems will join the AAIB team in assisting the investigation. The US National Transportation Safety Board is also taking part as the plane's engines were made in the US. Why was the pilot initially denied permission to land? A chart of the plane's last movements published by Flightradar24 shows it flying in a circular pattern, suggesting it was stacking in a holding pattern while waiting to land. In the recorded exchanges with Medellín airport, a female air traffic controller initially said that Lamia 933 had to wait seven minutes, because another plane had priority due to mechanical problems and was already approaching the runway. When 933's pilot became more desperate, the other plane was told to wait. But by then it was too late. The final words of the pilot were a plea for a directional steer or landing code: "Vectors, señorita. Landing vectors." It is unclear why Lamia 933 failed to declare a mayday signal. If it had it could have been given priority to land earlier. How did anyone survive the crash? Pictures of the wreckage make it difficult to imagine how anyone was rescued alive. The flight technician, Erwin Tumiri, said he saved himself by following the safety advice and getting into a brace position. "I put the bag between my legs and went into the foetal position as recommended," he said. Tumiri said others on the flight were standing and yelling as the plane crashed. While the plane may have crashed because of a lack of fuel, this may also have been the reason it did not explode, giving some on board the chance of survival. The map graphic in this article was corrected on 1 December 2016.

The fossil fuel projects the US littered around the world Through the US Export-Import Bank, Barack Obama's administration has spent nearly $34bn supporting 70 fossil fuel projects around the world, work by Columbia Journalism School and the Guardian has revealed. Guardian reporters have spent time at American-backed projects in India, South Africa and Australia to document the sickness, upheavals and environmental harm that come with huge dirty fuel developments. In India, for example, the reporters heard complaints about coal ash blowing into villages, contaminated water and respiratory and stomach problems. "While Obama can claim the US is the world's leader on climate change – at least until Donald Trump enters the White House – it is also clear that it has become a major funder of fossil fuels that are having a serious impact upon people's lives," they write. Obama's dirty secret: the fossil fuel projects the US littered around the world How Obama's climate change legacy is weakened by US investment in dirty fuel Abortion laws challenged in three states Planned Parenthood, the American Civil Liberties Union, and the Center for Reproductive Rights have filed lawsuits relating to abortion rights in Alaska, Missouri and North Carolina. In Missouri, the groups are challenging a pair of abortion restrictions that have reduced the number of abortion providers to just one. They are taking aim at a similar clinic restriction in Alaska. In North Carolina, they will mount a challenge to a 20-week ban on abortion that has some of the nation's strictest exceptions – only the second time reproductive rights advocates have challenged a 20-week ban on abortion in federal court – potentially setting the table for these restrictions to go before the supreme court, as Molly Redden writes. Planned Parenthood and ACLU mount abortion law challenges in three states Support the Guardian's fearless journalism Never has America needed fearless independent media more. Help us hold the new president to account, sort fact from fiction, amplify underrepresented voices, and understand the forces behind this divisive election – and what happens next. Support the Guardian by becoming a member or making a contribution. Teen becomes seventh 'faithless elector' to protest Trump Levi Guerra, 19, from Vancouver, Washington, has become the seventh person to indicate that she will break ranks with party affiliation and become a "faithless elector", joining the ranks of the so-called "Hamilton electors". "The renegade group believes it is the responsibility of the 538 electors who make up the electoral college to show moral courage in preventing demagogues and other threats to the nation from gaining the keys to the White House, as the founding fathers intended," Ed Pilkington writes. Washington is a blue state and Guerra has been mandated to vote for Clinton, but she intends to write in an "alternative Republican" to highlight her fears over a Trump presidency. The last time more than one elector broke ranks was in 1912. Teen becomes seventh 'faithless elector' to protest Trump as president-elect Senators hint at interference in US election Seven Democratic and Democratic-aligned members of the Senate intelligence committee have hinted that significant information about Russian interference in the US presidential election remains secret and ought to be declassified. The senators wrote to Obama requesting he declassify intelligence and did not directly accuse the Russian government or President-elect Donald Trump, a Republican, of wrongdoing in the letter. The particular intelligence, its strength or its impact on the outcome of the election has not been detailed. Senators call for declassification of files on Russia's role in US election Keith Scott shooting: no charges filed No state criminal charges will be brought against the police officer who fatally shot Keith Scott in North Carolina earlier this year. On Wednesday, the district attorney in Charlotte said that officer Brentley Vinson's shooting of Scott in September was justified because Scott refused to drop a gun held at his side. The prosecutor said Scott never raised or pointed the gun but Vinson felt he posed a threat because he ignored orders to drop it and stared in a "trance-like state". Scott's wife Rakeyia, who filmed some of his confrontation with police and the aftermath, insisted that he was not armed when he was killed. In a statement, Scott's family said they were "profoundly disappointed" by the decision. His death on 20 September became another flashpoint in the nationwide unrest over the killing of African American men by police officers. Protests and riots followed in Charlotte. Keith Scott shooting: no charges to be filed against Charlotte police officer Emotional service after reports Chapecoense plane ran out of fuel An emotional service was held in southern Brazil on Wednesday night for the 71 players, technical staff, sports journalists and crew killed when a plane chartered by local team Chapecoense crashed on a Colombian mountainside, and there was anger at the news that the plane may have run out of fuel. Chapecoense plane crash: fans' anger after confirmation plane ran out of fuel Colombia's government ratifies revised Farc peace deal Colombia's government has formally ratified a revised peace agreement with the Farc leftist rebel group after the initial pact was narrowly rejected by voters last month. Colombia's president, Juan Manuel Santos, decided to skip a referendum on the new version and go directly to congress, where the deal's supporters hold a majority. Opponents, led by former president Álvaro Uribe, boycotted the legislative votes. Colombia's government formally ratifies revised Farc peace deal Kanye West checks out of hospital Kanye West has checked out of a hospital in Los Angeles after being admitted with exhaustion after canceling his remaining tour dates last week. Kanye West checks out of hospital after being admitted for exhaustion And another thing ... A single dose of psilocybin, the active ingredient of magic mushrooms, can lift the anxiety and depression experienced by people with advanced cancer for six months or even longer, two new studies show. Researchers involved say the results are remarkable. The volunteers had "profoundly meaningful and spiritual experiences" which made most of them rethink life and death, ended their despair and brought about lasting improvement in the quality of their lives. Magic mushroom ingredient psilocybin could be key to treating depression

Last Thursday, an 89-year-old Auschwitz survivor recorded a video which promptly went viral. She compared "the humiliation, the demonization of others" and "the attempt to bring out the worst traits in people" in contemporary Austrian politics to her own experience of fascism. Gertrude – her last name has been withheld – lost her entire family in the Holocaust. Her testimony has now been watched more than three million times. On Sunday, Gertrude's compatriots will vote for their next president. Norbert Hofer, the far-right candidate whose anti-immigration party was set up by a former SS officer, looks set to win. Across Europe, a wave of hyper-nationalist politicians is threatening to splinter the European Union, with Geert Wilders in the Netherlands and Marine Le Pen in France waiting in the wings. In the US, many Americans are still figuring out how they're going to face the next four years of a president elected after a campaign built on racism, anti-intellectualism, misogyny and truth distortion; his suggestion of a register for Muslims horrified many. It also prompted comparisons – some of them lazy, some of them astute – between the 1930s and now. Against this backdrop, Volker Ullrich's timely recent account of Hitler's rise to power, Hitler: Ascent 1889-1939, has received critical acclaim and prompted considerable debate about the historical parallels between our times and that of the pre-war period. It also raises questions about whether history can teach us how to rewrite our own script. Ullrich, a German historian and journalist for the Hamburg broadsheet Die Zeit, based his book on decades of research. He tells me it was written between 2009 and 2013 to a background noise of extreme right movements on the rise. As a result, he says, one question became fixed in his brain: "What are the necessary social and psychological conditions that allow populists of Hitler's ilk to gain a mass following and attain power?" Making Germany great again "There are certain traits you can recognize that Hitler and Trump have in common," Ullrich says. "I would say the egomania, the total egocentricity of both men, and the inclination to mix lies and truth – that was very characteristic of Hitler." Like Trump, "Hitler exploited peoples' feelings of resentment towards the ruling elite." He also said he would make Germany great again. Ullrich also notes both men's talent at playing the media, making use of new technology and their propensity for stage effects. Ullrich, however, is keen to highlight how they differ. "I think the differences are still greater than the similarities," he says. "Hitler was not only more intelligent, but craftier. He was not just a powerful orator, but a talented actor who succeeded in winning over various social milieus. So not just the economically threatened lower middle classes which Trump targeted, but also the upper middle classes. Hitler had many supporters in the German aristocracy." Trump was also democratically elected, while Hitler never had a majority vote. "He was appointed by the president of the German Reich." Then there's the fact that Trump does not lead a party "which is unconditionally committed to him". "A further obvious difference is that Trump doesn't have a private militia, as Hitler did with the SA, which he used in his first months after coming to power to settle scores with his opponents, like the Communists and Social Democrats. You can't possibly imagine something similar with Trump – that he'll be locking Democrats up into concentration camps. Even Hillary Clinton, who he threatened to send to prison – that was just an empty threat, he's not going to do that." "Finally, the American constitution is based on a system of checks and balances. It remains to be seen how far Congress will really limit Trump or if, as is feared, he can override it. It was different with Hitler, who, as we know, managed to eliminate all resistance in the shortest space of time and effectively establish himself as an all-powerful dictator. Within a few months, there was effectively no longer any opposition." According to Ullrich, Hitler's rise was neither an accident nor inevitable, and could have been prevented very early on. "Hitler profited from the fact that his opponents always underestimated him," Ullrich explains. "His conservative allies in government assumed they could tame or 'civilise' him – that once he became chancellor he'd become vernünftig (meaning sensible, reasonable). Very quickly it became clear that was an illusion." "There were many situations where he could have been stopped. For example in 1923 after the failed Munich putsch – if he'd served his full prison sentence of several years, he wouldn't have made a political comeback. Instead, he only spent a few months behind bars, [having been released after political pressure] and could rebuild his movement." The western powers made the same mistake with their appeasement politics, indecision and indulgence. "In the 1930s Hitler strengthened, rather than weakened, his aggressive intentions," Ullrich says. "So you could learn from this that you have to react faster and much more vigorously than was the case at the time." Ullrich also contends that if Hindenburg, the president of the Reich, had allowed Chancellor Brüning, of the Centre party, to remain chancellor to the end of 1934, rather than responding to pressure from conservatives to dismiss him in 1932, "then the peak of the economic crisis would have passed and it would have been very questionable whether Hitler could still have come to power". At the same time, Hitler's ascent was no mere fluke. "There were powerful forces in the big industries, but also in the landowning class and the armed forces, which approved of a fascist solution to the crisis." The 'boo' word Ullrich is not the only historian leery of comparing like for like. "The problem with fascism is that it's a sort of 'boo' word," says Richard Bosworth, a professor of history at Oxford and award-winning biographer of Mussolini. "If you tag somebody with it, then on the one hand you're saying that person is going to murder six million Jews and invade Russia, and on the other hand you feel rather good about using the term and so you don't engage in proper analysis." The result, Bosworth argues, is that you become distracted from "trying to work out more clearly what Trump stands for, and what the contemporary United States stands for". If fascism "now just means aggressive nationalism, racism, patriarchy and authoritarianism, then maybe it is back on the agenda," Bosworth continues. But today's context is fundamentally different. Today's "alt-right" agitators "live in a neoliberal global order where the slogan, 'all for the market, nothing outside the market, no one against the market' is far more unquestionably accepted than the old fascist slogan of 'all for the state, nothing outside the state, no one against the state'". "Whatever history's instruction is, it's not literal," agrees Simon Schama, a professor of history at Columbia University who has written histories of the French, American and Dutch revolutions. "You don't match present predicaments to some sort of template of what fascism is or isn't." Schama is clear: Trump is obviously not Hitler. "But, you know, if you like, he's an entertainment fascist, which may be less sinister but is actually in the end more dangerous. If you're not looking for jackboots and swastikas – although swastikas are indeed appearing – there's a kind of laundry list of things which are truly sinister and authoritarian and not business as usual." Schama points a finger to Breitbart, the website of Steve Bannon, Trump's senior adviser. "There's no question that, for all Bannon wants to say, Breitbart has run a kind of dog-whistle antisemitic show because the crucial headlines were: Bill Kristol: Renegade Jew, or [Washington Post columnist] Anne Applebaum singled out as 'Polish, Jewish, American Elitist'. You don't use a word like that unless you're operating from a set of dog-whistle assumptions about an antisemitic constituency." Schama also points to deeply worrying messaging, such as "the parallel universe of lies which are habitual, massive, cumulative"; the criminalization of political opponents; the threat to change the libel laws against the press and the demonization of different racial and ethnic groups, going as far as proposing a Muslim registry. "What is that if it's not racially authoritarian?" asks Schama. "If you want to call it fascist, fine. I don't really care if it's called that or not. It's authoritarian, you know, ferociously authoritarian." Six history lessons to keep in mind On 2 May 1935, Winston Churchill addressed the House of Commons after the Stresa Conference, in which Britain, France and Italy agreed – futilely – to maintain the independence of Austria: When the situation was manageable it was neglected, and now that it is thoroughly out of hand we apply too late the remedies which then might have effected a cure. There is nothing new in the story. It is as old as the sibylline books. It falls into that long, dismal catalogue of the fruitlessness of experience and the confirmed unteachability of mankind. Now that the world has lived through the brutal years that followed Churchill's grimly prescient oratory, what can we do to prove him wrong? If historians are best placed to distinguish between illuminating and misleading historical analogies, how do they think history can help us and what is distinctive about the present? Don't ignore what people vote for If you're of German heritage, it's hard to understand how so many people could have bought Mein Kampf and gone on to vote for Hitler. Maybe no one really read it, or got beyond the first few pages of bluster, or took antisemitism seriously, you tell yourself. "Or they liked what he said," Mark Mazower says bluntly. Mazower is professor of history at Columbia and author of Dark Continent, the acclaimed study of the forces that shaped 20th-century Europe. "I think one of the mistakes this time around would be not to think that the people who voted for Trump were serious. They may have been serious for different reasons, but it would be a big mistake not to try and figure out what their reasons were." Politicians need to rethink their modus operandi Hitler presented himself as a "messiah" offering the public "salvation", Ullrich points out. With austerity and hostility to the EU and to immigrants riding high, there is fertile ground for European populists next year to seduce with equally simplistic, sweeping "solutions". The problem, in Mazower's view, is that establishment politicians currently have no response. "The political class has very impoverished historical memory and as a result it has a very limited imagination," Mazower contends. "It is by and large made up of people who do not see themselves in politics in order to effect sweeping change and so they tend to operate very incrementally and very technocratically. They're very suspicious of vision and as a result what fills their brains is party calculation – which of course always occupies politicians but in the past coexisted with bigger things. The current crop of leading political figures in Europe in particular is just not up to the task." Mazower goes on to argue that the development of an alternative narrative able to inspire is, "going to be a long-term project", which will be, "in the hands of people under 30, 35, not the current political class". Beware the rise of the surveillance state "The Gestapo was piddling compared with the size and reach of surveillance equipment and operations today," says Mazower. "Very belatedly, everyone is waking up to the fact that there was a general assumption that no government in the west would fall into the wrong hands, that it was safe to acquiesce in this huge expansion of surveillance capabilities, and the debate wasn't as vigorous as it could have been." "Now, there is a lot of discussion about allowing this kind of surveillance apparatus in the wrong hands," he adds. "And we've woken up to this a bit late in the day." Deal with the inequalities caused by neoliberalism Ullrich calls crises, "the elixir of rightwing populists", and urges that politicians "do everything they can to correct the inequalities and social injustice which have arisen in the course of extreme financial capitalism in western countries". Jane Caplan, a history professor at Oxford University who has written about Trump and fascism, highlights the want of "dissenting voices against marketisation and neoliberalism. The failure to resist the incursion of the market as the only criterion for political utility, or economic utility, has been pretty comprehensive. That's pretty problematic I think." Build alliances Narrow sectarianism plays into the hands of populists. Bosworth points out that the Italian fascists "only had 35 seats out of 500-odd in the Italian parliament after the 1921 elections" when Mussolini became prime minister. The establishment was so desperate to sideline socialists and trade unions that it preferred to "give him a chance". The fasces – or bound bundle of wooden rods, from which the word fascism derives – symbolises strength through unity, and if opposition to fascism is to be successful it is essential to combat like with like. "I think all of us will say that you must have alliances," Caplan says. "You can't do this on your own. In a crisis situation like America it's got to be a broad-based alliance. There's not room to say, 'Well, we'll wait for things to get worse and then we'll have a communist revolution' or something. That's not going to happen. The objective is so much more important and so much more urgent." But as Caplan points out, there is cause for hope too: local institutions like the churches and the NAACP, "are very, very rooted organizations and it would take a huge effort to crush them". Don't normalize fear, intimidation and self-censorship Paranoia, bullying and intimidation are a hallmark of authoritarian regimes. They are also alive and well in our culture today, where online trolls, violent thugs at rallies, threats of expensive libel action and of course terrorist acts are equally effective in getting individuals and the press to self-censor. "You just have to call this out," says Schama. "It requires government. Trump should have repudiated the Ku Klux Klan. Not just left it out there. It requires responsible, moral, aggressive repudiation. The Daily Mail 'Enemies of the People' front page was disgraceful and the government should have made that clear. It's the kind of thing Stalin would have said, or Robespierre."

In 1948, Claude Shannon published an extraordinary article, defining for the first time a mathematical model of information and determining the maximum information quantity that can be transferred over a channel, now called the shannon limit, and the limits to possible lossless data compression. Since, engineers have been trying to approach such limits dealing with two other practical factors the speed to compress and the speed to uncompress data. This article will present two quite recent algorithms and how you can already benefit by using them. Zstandard Zstandard is both a new compression algorithm and a reference implementation which has been designed to be extremely performant with modern hardware. It is a general-purpose compression for a variety of data types. While usually algorithm trades-off either compression ratio, compression speed, or decompression speed, Zstandard is designed to be good at all 3! Compared to zlib (wrapper and de facto standard implementation of the deflate algorithm), which tries to balance compression ratio and speed: At the same compression ratio, it compresses ~3-5x faster At the same compression ratio, it decompresses ~2-3x faster At the same compression speed, it compresses to 10-15 percent smaller files Zstandard achieve this performance thanks to several design decisions: an increased memory window to 1MB with no limit (deflate only allows 32 KB) a format designed for parallel execution a format compatible with branchless algorithms a new entropy encoder based on Asymmetric Numeric Systems (ASN) At the Guardian we are now using ZStandard instead of zlib (using the java JNI binding) for compressing articles in our most critical component, the publication pipeline! Brotli Brotli is a general purpose lossless compression algorithm, that has been recently been standardised as an http compression encoding. Brotli has been developed by google, and has the following characteristics: sliding window between 1KB and 16MB a static dictionary with around 13,500 words or syllables in 6 languages and common phrases in HTML and JavaScript 121 transforms to combines entries in the dictionary A huffman based entropy encoder Brotli trades-off compression speed for decompression speed and a slightly improved compression ratio. Compared to gzip (thin wrapper around zlib, if you are confused this is expected), it decompresses about 20% faster, at the same compression ratio. Although brotli uses a less efficient entropy encoder than Zstandard, it is already implemented and available in Google Chrome, Mozilla Firefox, Opera and (support is in development in Microsoft Edge) Support has as well started to be added in web client and servers: curl apache nginx IIS At the Guardian we are using the play framework which provide a built-in gzip filter but not yet a brotli one, so I decided to write it. Google's brotli repository doesn't yet provide a reference java implementation, however you can use jbrotli, a JNI binding. CDNs have recently improved their support as well: Fastly (through custom VCL) - no compression on the fly yet KeyCDN - no compresssion on the fly yet CDN77 - compression on the fly MaxCDN (coming soon) - no compression on the fly yet At the Guardian we have been successfully using the playframework brotli filter on an internal tool and plan to apply it soon to our main frontend.

Anthony Joshua has taken on Robert McCracken, the Great Britain Olympic team coach, as part of his team ahead of the second defence of his IBF world heavyweight title against the Mexican American Eric Molina in Manchester on 10 December. His current coach, Tony Sims, will still be the lead second in the corner but Joshua reckons McCracken, who the trained three-time world super-middleweight champion Carl Froch and worked with Joshua when he won Olympic gold in 2012, will bring extra expertise to his development. They already have a strong relationship and Joshua, a regular at Great Britain training camps, flew to Rio in the summer to support the Olympic boxing squad. "I have remained close to Rob and the GB Boxing squad since 2012," Joshua said on Thursday. "I have consistently turned to him for advice and guidance so I am really excited to have him in my corner. "I would like to put on record my thanks to Tony Sims, who will remain in my corner working with Rob, as he did to such [effect] with Carl Froch." McCracken said: "Anthony is a special talent and I am looking forward to working with him on the next stage of his career as he looks to defend his titles and, ultimately, to unify the heavyweight division. "I know from working with Carl that combining my work coaching a top professional boxer with the role of GB performance director has mutual benefits and that having a world champion in the gym has a very positive impact on the whole of the squad. "It gives the boxers an insight into what it takes to be the best in the world and provides top-class training opportunities that will help to develop and improve the heavyweight and super-heavyweight boxers in the squad."

Nestlé says it has found a way of slashing the amount of sugar in some of its chocolate bars by 40%, without compromising the taste. The Swiss food company, whose products include Kit Kats, Aeros and Yorkies, said it has achieved the reduction by discovering a way "to structure sugar differently". The new process is said to make sugar dissolve faster so that even when less is used, the tongue perceives an identical level of sweetness. It plans to patent the process, discovered by its scientists, which it says will enable it to significantly decrease the total sugar in its confectionery products. Sugar has been blamed for fuelling the obesity epidemic crippling the NHS in the UK and health campaigners have urged confectionery companies to cut unnecessary sugar from their products. In 2014, Action on Sugar was launched with the goal of encouraging government and manufacturers to cut sugar in food by 30%. In that context, Nestlé's self-proclaimed breakthrough is likely to be welcomed, should it live up to its claims, and be potentially lucrative to the company. It says it will begin to use the faster-dissolving sugar in its confectionery products from 2018. A four-finger milk chocolate Kit Kat currently contains 23.8g of sugar, a plain (milk chocolate) Yorkie contains 26.9g and a medium peppermint Aero has 24.9g of sugar. If the amount of sugar in each of these products was cut by 40% the new amounts would be 14.3g, 16.1g and 14.9g respectively. Dietary sugar should account for no more than 5% of daily calories consumed, which equates to 30g for those aged 11 and over, according to the UK's official nutrition advisers. Figures published in September showed that in 2012-14 the average was 13.4% for those aged between four and 10, 15.2% among 11- to 18-year-olds, 12.3% for adults under 65 and 11.1% for those aged 65 and over. Nestlé's chief technology officer, Stefan Catsicas, said: "This truly groundbreaking research is inspired by nature and has the potential to reduce total sugar by up to 40% in our confectionery. "Our scientists have discovered a completely new way to use a traditional, natural ingredient."

Britain could retain access to the European single market and considerably more national sovereignty if it joins the European Free Trade Association (Efta), the president of the body's court has said. In an interview with the Guardian, Carl Baudenbacher urged Britain to study the advantages of joining Efta seriously. Baudenbacher's private secretary has submitted a 19-page paper to the Cabinet Office, setting out how an updated version of Efta could be "a natural home for the UK post-Brexit". Speaking from Luxembourg, Baudenbacher said the Efta court over which he presides was quick, flexible, would allow the UK to leave the European customs union and preserve the sovereignty of UK law. It would also give the UK business access to the single market. Efta currently consists of Norway, Lichtenstein, Switzerland and Iceland. Together with the EU member states they form a trading zone called the European Economic Area. It "is a clear route to access the single market, but you keep sovereignty with regard to common policies, and in particular to foreign trade policies because we are not a customs union. Our structure exists, the structure is well tested", said Baudenbacher, who is Swiss. The Efta court handles cases against Efta member countries for failing to implement the rules of the single market. "We are fast. You get a preliminary ruling within eight months," he said. "I am not British and I do not have role, but I think it would be worthwhile for the British to seriously evaluate the European Economic Area, and to look at the pros and cons. "I do not see much understanding in the debate so far. The EEA and Efta is little known. Most people have not looked into it deeply." He said some of the understanding of Efta in the UK had been coloured by a Norwegian political elite that would like to leave and join the EU. UK ministers and civil servants have been looking at the option of joining Efta either permanently or as a temporary arrangement after leaving the EU, but Eurosceptics have so far rejected it because membership requires acceptance of the principle of free movement and an external judicial body overseeing UK law. EU diplomats in the UK, however, are known to be lobbying ministers not to close down the Efta option, pointing out that the cost of UK contributions would be halved, forms of co-determination rights could be offered and national sovereignty would rest in national hands. The paper Baudenbacher private secretary, Michael James-Clifton, submitted to the Cabinet Office was written in a personal capacity and says the EEA is "a workable framework for the UK". He writes: "There is no 'ever closer union'. There would be no judicial oversight by the ECJ [European court of justice] once the European Communities Act 1972 is repealed. The UK could join the existing free trade agreements Efta states have signed and would have the freedom to make its own FTAs [free trade agreements] and set its own trade policy as the EEA is not a customs union." Efta states have 27 free trade agreements covering 38 countries. Baudenbacher said the UK judiciary could have greater influence over the Efta court's decisions than over those of the European court of justice, because the Efta court was smaller. "If you have court of three or four, the individual judge will have more influence than in a court of 13 sitting in a grand chamber." He said his court was also less intrusive than the ECJ. "Our setup is more sovereignty friendly than the EU's. There is no written obligation on any court of last resort to make a reference to us, and our rulings in these reference cases are strictly speaking advisory. There is no direct effect and no primacy of EEA law, and if you do not implement an infringement judgment there is no possibility to impose a penalty payment. That shows greater flexibility." He acknowledged Efta members were required to follow EU commitments on free movement, but said he saw the potential for change. "Right now there is not such a big difference between the EEA and the EU," he said. "Our court has also accepted the free movement of persons, particularly in relationship to workers and the right to reside. But European citizenship is not, as such, part of our setup. There is a difference in that regard." He said he could see possible reform of free movement ahead. "Speaking as a citizen and consumer of media, and not as a judge, I see that Donald Trump has won the US presidential election. Immigration was a big issue there and a lot of economists are critical of the current system in Europe. "The Bruegel thinktank in Brussels argues that free movement of goods, services and capital is economically motivated, but free movement of persons is politically motivated. So there are new arguments." He also said his court, which operates in English, largely followed UK common law principles. "The Efta court was not set up in a historic vacuum," he said. "The Efta way of thinking has always been dominated by the idea of free trade and we do not carry a French civil law rucksack. That becomes manifest, for instance, in our judicial style. "We have to reason our judgment because we are small. We must try to convince our audiences. We cannot just give judgment on a few pages, so that is already a parallel with a common law court." Baudenbacher was sceptical of claims the UK could simply leave the EU and remain a member of the EEA without applying to join Efta. "According to international law the Norwegians, Icelanders and Liechtensteiners would have to have a say on this," he said. "That the UK would automatically become part of the Efta pillar is hard to imagine. The UK would have to reapply."

Michael Carrick has expressed his happiness at seeing Bastian Schweinsteiger return to Manchester United's first team in the 4-1 EFL Cup victory over West Ham United. The German came on for the last four minutes of the quarter-final at Old Trafford. He replaced Anthony Martial in his first appearance since the 1-0 win at Manchester City in March. Schweinsteiger's United career appeared to be over after José Mourinho made it clear soon after taking over that the World Cup winner was not part of his plans. "I think it's very difficult [for Schweinsteiger to play for United], said the manager in August. "I'm not saying it's impossible. I'm saying it's very difficult." The midfielder has gradually been reintegrated into the squad and returned during an impressive performance by United on Wednesday. "He got an unbelievable reception. It was great for him," Carrick said. "Just to see him back playing. He nearly scored as well, so that would have been nice. It was good to see him back. "You understand all sorts of situations occur in football. You get on with it. Decisions are made by people. There are all sorts of ups and downs along the way. You just have to get on with it. That is the only way you can do it. Bastian has trained well. He has trained hard. He has got his game, which is great. Who knows what the future will hold." The victory over West Ham was also a positive occasion for another player whose United's future has looked in doubt for some time. Martial scored twice to double his goal tally for the season and suggest he is not the busted flush that has appeared the case following an excellent debut season. "The ability and attributes he has got are frightening at times. When he is on fire he is a threat for anyone," said Carrick of the 20-year-old France striker. "He started the game terrifically well. It is great to see him playing like that. He is fully confident and believing. There is plenty more to come from him, which is a good sign for us." Carrick is in his 11th season at United, with his latest deal expiring in June. Mourinho has stated he would like the 35-year-old to remain at Old Trafford beyond then and the player is open to that idea. "I am quite relaxed," Carrick said. "It [his future] is not something I am looking to do at the minute but it would be very difficult to play somewhere else. "At any stage of your career, people have their strengths and what they can't do so well. You just have to put yourself in a position where you can play to your strengths more often than not. You learn that from experience. As long as I am enjoying it, can feel I can contribute and the manager does, then great."

A 15-year-old boy has been charged with the manslaughter of a Polish man killed in Harlow in August. Arkadiusz Jóźwik, 40, died after a late-night clash with a group of youths in the Essex town. The Crown Prosecution Service announced the charging decision and said five other youths arrested over the incident would face no criminal charges. Essex police said Jóźwik, 40, was attacked at about 11.35pm on Saturday 27 August. He was taken to the Princess Alexandra hospital, and was later transferred to Addenbrooke's hospital in Cambridge, where he died two days later. The senior investigating officer DI Danny Stoten, of the Kent and Essex serious crime directorate, said: "The Crown Prosecution Service has now authorised Essex police to charge a teenager with manslaughter in connection with the death of Mr Jóźwik. He is due to appear at Chelmsford youth court on 6 January 2017." It is understood that the CPS has decided it will not prosecute the case as a hate crime. There were concerns at the time of the death that the incident may have been a hate crime because it occurred at a time of heightened community tension in the aftermath of Britain's vote to leave the European Union on 23 June. The factory worker, who had been living in England for four years, was knocked unconscious outside a row of takeaway shops. Shortly after the incident his brother, Radek, linked the death with a surge in hatred towards eastern Europeans after the Brexit vote. Such was the concern that Polish police officers were allowed to patrol Harlow alongside British officers. Paul Scothern, crown advocate in the complex casework unit for CPS East of England, said:"Following early investigative advice from the reviewing lawyer, the police decided to take no further action in relation to five other youths who were at the scene. "May I remind all concerned that this youth has a right to a fair trial. It is very important that there should be no reporting, commentary, or sharing of information online which could in any way prejudice these proceedings. For these reasons, it would be inappropriate for me to comment further."

Eight years after the banking crisis, Royal Bank of Scotland (RBS) has failed its annual health check. If this were a medical before getting life insurance, it would be like a doctor telling the patient to get fit; it is not notice of sudden death. So the bailed-out bank – already being kept alive by a £45bn lifeline from the taxpayer – is taking another dose of medicine to try to get itself into better shape. The prescription involves pulling back from riskier activities, and cutting costs. Next year it could get more difficult when the chief executive, Ross McEwan, is expected to embark on a fresh round of cost-cutting. That may well mean more jobs are on the line. The failure, though, is important. It illustrates the battle McEwan faces in getting the bank into a good enough shape so that the government stands a chance of selling off the 73% stake it still owns in the Edinburgh-based bank. As the Bank of England put it: "RBS remains susceptible to financial and economic stress." Why? The lending spree it embarked on before the 2008 crisis has left the bank with customers who find it difficult to make repayments when times get tough. Some 60% of its loans in Ireland are at risk of not being repaid. The bailout in 2008 was regarded by Brussels as state aid and one of the conditions attached was that RBS sell off a 300-branch network. That is proving troublesome (and any hope of a profit on the sale seems to be long gone). Low interest rates are making it harder to generate profits that can be used to help bolster its financial position. Crucially, it is still confessing its sins from the past. A key reason its health check went badly is that the Bank of England asked it to fess up about how much it might face in fines and legal costs in the year ahead. The figure has not been made public but analysts have calculated that the US Department of Justice could demand up to £8bn to rectify a decades-old mis-selling scandal. The Bank of England said it had included "stressed projections of misconduct costs". In one way, though, the results of the so-called stress tests can be used to demonstrate that this is not the RBS of the past. The hypothetical scenario that the Bank of England subjected the main lenders to was the toughest yet – and not too dissimilar to the backdrop of the 2008 crisis. The test included a contraction in the global economy of almost 2%, a plunge in oil prices and nose-diving UK house prices. In 2008 a key measure of its financial strength – its capital ratio – stood at 4%. RBS went into this assessment with a 15% capital ratio – the highest of any of the seven lenders tested, apart from Nationwide. Even so, there is little to cheer for taxpayers. Philip Hammond, the chancellor, has already admitted he has abandoned any immediate hope of selling any more of the stake. The Office for Budget Responsibility is no longer factoring in any sales during the lifetime of this parliament. In March it had expected £21.5bn of sales of RBS shares – although given the stake is currently worth around £16bn, this projection would have been revised down. For savers, the picture is the same as before: £75,000 of savings is guaranteed – as it is for all UK banks – by the financial services compensation scheme. With the sell-off heading further into the distance, the questions about whether a new prescription is needed may start to get louder. The New Economics Foundation, for instance, thinks a better medicine would be the more radical option of turning it into a network of local banks. Ideas in the past have included carving out a bad bank or giving away the shares to the public. RBS will be hoping that its own medicine will be enough to get it fit for next year's assessment.

Gemini News Service was launched from Wheatsheaf House, Carmelite Street, London on 1 January 1967 by journalists Derek Ingram and Oliver Carruthers. One of the key aims of Gemini was to improve the exchange of news between developed and developing countries by providing subscribers with news, opinion and features relating to countries across the world. Gemini distinguished itself from mainstream news agencies with its use of articles written by journalists who were from, resided in, or had significant knowledge of the country they were reporting on. The agency built up a large network of regular and occasional correspondents based across the world. These contributors were a mix of well established journalists and those in the initial stages of their career. Contributors included Kuldip Nayar, Johnny Maseko, Francis Mwanza, Tony Cozier, Abby Tan, Gamini Navarante, Nicola Cole, Clyde Sanger and Chris Mullin. Once written, copy was edited and illustrated by a small team of journalists and graphic designers at Gemini's London offices. It was then dispatched twice weekly to subscribers all over the world. Gemini's articles and graphics could be found in regional and national newspapers across Asia, Africa, Australia, Europe, North America and South America. As well as publishers, subscribers included broadcasters, schools, universities and government offices. Gemini covered a wide variety of subjects including politics, economics, culture, gender, the Commonwealth, human rights, education, entertainment, science and the environment. The service had a number of successful stories and exclusive reports, one of the most famous being Richard Hall's coverage of the end of the Nigerian-Biafran War in January 1970. This coverage appeared in national newspapers including the Guardian, The Observer and The Sunday Times. Many of Gemini's articles were accompanied by distinctive black and white graphics often in the form of maps, charts and illustrations of key personalities. Used to provide a visual accompaniment to articles that covered complex issues or were about remote countries, the graphics were often kept simple so that they could be easily reproduced by other publications. Graphics proved popular with subscribers, with some choosing to use only the graphics in their publications. A number of Gemini's artists, including Cliff Hopkinson, Brana Radovic, Peter Clarke and Paddy Allen, went on to pursue careers in national newspapers. Gemini endured financial troubles throughout its existence. In 1973 it was bought by the Manchester Guardian and Evening News Limited and shared offices with the Guardian for a time. In 1982, due to its own financial difficulties, the Guardian handed Gemini back to founder Derek Ingram who was forced to suspend the service in April 1982. Following the suspension Gemini's supporters looked to find financial backing to relaunch the service. In late 1982 the NewsConcern International Foundation was established as a not-for-profit international organisation, with the aim of reviving Gemini. The Foundation was funded by a range of international agencies and managed by a board of governors. Gemini was relaunched in March 1983 and under the Foundation it maintained its editorial independence, gained new subscribers and created a range of seminars, training schemes and publications for journalists. In the late 1980s the Foundation formed a partnership with the The Panos Institute, an international development charity for which Gemini produced features. The Panos Institute took over the management of Gemini in 1999. The service continued to operate under The Panos Institute until 2002 when it was closed. Despite efforts to relaunch Gemini, the pioneering service remains closed at the time of writing. Gemini News Service's records were donated to the GNM Archive in 2002 to ensure their long-term preservation and to provide access to researchers. The collection consists of 185 boxes of records dated from 1966-2008, and includes news articles, graphics, photographs, records relating to the foundation and management of the service and correspondence with Gemini's journalists and subscribers. With the help of a grant from the International Development Research Centre the GNM Archive was able to catalogue these records in 2009. The Gemini archive catalogue is available to search online and records can be accessed by appointment in the GNM reading room in King's Cross, London.

Australia needs to work faster on lifting water quality to save the Great Barrier Reef, according to its first progress report to Unesco since the world heritage site was spared an "in-danger" listing. The report admitted that a key plank of Australia's conservation plan – land-clearing reforms in Queensland to staunch water pollution – had failed. It also highlighted climate change, which is the biggest threat to the reef and led to the worst recorded coral bleaching in its history this year, but which the plan makes no attempt to address. But the Australian government reports "good progress" over the first 18 months of its Reef 2050 plan, citing limits on new port developments and a ban on dumping in reef waters the spoil from the dredging of shipping channels. Australia had clinched an "investment framework" that mapped out $1.28bn in spending over the next five years, with $716m from the federal government, $409m from the Queensland government and $161m from "other sources". The report noted "no undertaking of comparable scope, complexity and financial commitment has been attempted in a marine environment or world heritage site". While the priority was to lift the quality of water running into the reef and things were "steadily" improving, the update flagged the "need to accelerate our progress towards the ambitious targets that have been set". The update pointed to the 2015 reef report card – written before bleaching this year wiped out about a quarter of all coral – which still gave the reef a "D" for its overall health for the fifth year in a row. Progress in cutting nitrogen pollution was "very poor" and improving farm practices "poor", it said, with Queensland poised next year to bring in tougher laws governing use of fertiliser. On funding the water-quality targets, the report acknowledged a Queensland government study showing it would cost $8.2bn over 10 years. But it then indicated it wasn't willing to invest the required amount. "The diminishing return on investment for the more expensive interventions makes these options impractical to implement at this time," the update said. The Queensland environment minister, Steven Miles, said he was confident the report would be enough to avert fresh consideration of a Unesco "in-danger" listing as it "demonstrates that we've done everything we can to be on track" with conservation plans. Miles said a "lot of those big important things" such as the ban on dredge spoil dumping, limits on new ports and reef water-quality investment were under way. "However, given the bleaching event, given the failure of the Queensland parliament to pass the land-clearing laws, and also given the continuing slow progress towards the water-quality targets, there's obviously some concerns out there," he said. "If this goes to a debate about in-danger listing, the responsibility will rest at the feet of the [state Liberal National opposition] who, despite claiming credit for the plan, then refused to support a key element of the plan, land-clearing laws. "We know that land clearing is driving massive amounts of sediment out on to the reef and that is one of the biggest threats to the reef." Miles said bleaching had increased the focus on the failure of the promised land-clearing reforms, which the Queensland Labor government vowed to push through if it won the next election. "Having said that there is a lot of progress and a lot of commitment particularly from the state and commonwealth governments and I think the global community is likely to see that for what it is and recognise we need more time to demonstrate we can get these things on track," he said. The federal environment minister, Josh Frydenberg, said the report showed "significant progress" and that "the blueprint for a new era in reef protection has been established for ongoing cooperation and collaboration involving governments, science, industries and communities". "The update highlights that of the 151 actions scheduled in the initial five years, 32 have been completed and another 103 are under way and on track." Miles said Australia's reef conservation plan mainly dealt with "localised" threats. A market-based mechanism for pricing carbon was needed to address the reef's biggest threat of climate change, he said. "We've actually been damaging the reef for decades through what we've done up and down the coast. So we need to address those things if we're going to give the reef any chance of surviving." Miles said Queensland was poised to introduce tougher regulations about the use of fertiliser in early 2017, with the sugar cane industry in particular having "a long way to go" in cleaning up its act "enough to actually have an impact on water quality". The report made frequent mention of the bleaching event that hit the reef this year but it didn't earmark any further funding for conservation action in response. Ian Chubb, chair of the independent expert advisory committee and former Australian chief scientist, wrote an introductory note emphasising the dire threat climate change meant for the reef. Chubb said global action on climate change would be "paramount" but that it must be coupled with initiatives to reduce other pressures. Penelope Wensley, chair of reef 2050 advisory committee, said in an introductory note that the plan "represents the best possible chance for the reef" and "we cannot afford to fail". Progress was pleasing, she said, but "we have to quicken the pace". She said many committee members were "calling for stronger action and a greater investment of effort and resources to accelerate progress towards achieving the targets, objectives and outcomes of the reef 2050 plan". Before seeing the update, the Greens senator Larissa Waters said the government risked "failing its homework" by underfunding the reef plan, delaying water quality targets, spruiking new coal and ignoring global warming.

Last week, I argued that liberal, progressive readers could make an effort to read articles from the opposite side of the political spectrum. This week, I picked five articles for you to get started. Anti-Trump voices on the right have been grappling with many of the same issues that progressives have. Donald Trump's tweets are bad enough on their own, but they're doubly frightening from a man who is little more than a month away from assuming executive power. And the picture becomes grimmer still when we consider how Trump's media cadres insulate him, and his whole movement, from the intrusion of reality. This week's message from outside the progressive bubble contends with all of these issues in a way that might enrich our own thinking, or at least deepen our anxieties. Enjoy? What Trump Could Do With Executive Power Publication: The American Conservative Author: Peter van Buren Van Buren was a state department employee until he wrote an unflattering book about US failures in Iraq. State responded by initiating proceedings against him in 2012, at which point Van Buren retired to become a full-time author and commentator. Early on he wrote in a wide variety of outlets (including twice in the Guardian), but his acerbic takes on the national security state have earned him a regular column at the paleocon mothership, the American Conservative. Why you should read it: In frightening detail, Van Buren sets out the range of things Trump could do with his presidential executive powers. President Trump, thanks in part to the precedents set by Obama and Bush, could torture captives, assassinate American citizens, refill Guantánamo, or prosecute journalists and whistleblowers under the Espionage Act. Van Buren's biography and expertise make it a chilling read. Best paragraph: "Many bleated they had nothing to hide and thus have nothing to fear during the Obama (and Bush) administration, out of trust for a president or fear of terror. Well, on January 20 they can join the rest of us who have been terrified for a very long time." The Alt-Right is Using Trump Publication: Slate Author: Mike Pesca Pesca interviews conservative ideologue Ben Shapiro. Shapiro is a rightwing pundit and podcaster. He used to work for Breitbart News until he departed this year during the election campaign, after Breitbart threw one of its own reporters under the bus in a short-lived dust-up with the Trump campaign. Shapiro was hired by Andrew Breitbart himself, and has said repeatedly that the faction in control now are tarnishing Breitbart's dubious legacy. Why you should read it: Shapiro is no friend of the left, and his own work regularly attacks social justice movements and engages in white victim politics. Most of the time you're safe to tune him out unless you want a hate-read. The interview is interesting, though. In telling us about his own rivalries with Steve Bannon and Milo Yiannopoulos, Shapiro reveals something about the fissures that have been opening up on the far right since Trump's victory. He also offers some good reasons for putting the rise of the "alt-right" in perspective. As he avers: they are fascists, they're on the march, they should be resisted, but their numbers are still relatively small. Best paragraph: "I mentioned earlier this Anti-Defamation League study that said that I was the No. 1 target of anti-Semitism in the journalistic world this year. And that's because one, I'm Jewish; two, I left Breitbart; three, I didn't back Trump. I think they said there were, between January and September, something like 20,000 anti-Semitic tweets directed at journalists. And I was the personal recipient of 7,400 of them. So the top 10 was me by a landslide, and then a bunch of people coming in behind. They traced virtually all of these tweets, or a huge percentage of these tweets, to 1,600 accounts." Trump, Playing the Public for Fools Publication: Commentary Author: Noah Rothman Rothman is the deputy online editor of the hawkish, rightwing Jewish public affairs magazine Commentary, and a reliable neocon talking head. Again, this is not someone who likes the left, and the feeling is largely mutual. (Some other recent posts by Rothman include Has The Left Lost It? and The Left's Panic In The Popular Vote. But his take on Trump's Twitter presence is worth considering. Why you should read it: Many have offered reasons for Trump's refusal to pivot towards a more presidential demeanor on social media. Rothman argues that Trump is using distraction as a means of playing for time. The stench of corruption and conflict of interest is so heavy around him, it's inevitable that Congress will be forced to reckon with it. Trump's Twitter game allows him, for now, to fight on his preferred ground: trolling and manufactured controversy. Best paragraph: "These are scandals in the making, and scandals have a way of snowballing. Scandals related to personal corruption can make an administration toxic. They steal away friends, stiffen the resolve of adversaries, and make compromise impossible, even for members of the same party. The longer Donald Trump can keep the public's focus off of that which matters and on frivolous, fabricated controversies, the longer he can postpone an inevitable clash with Congress. In this, Trump's greatest assets are a public that demands nothing too complicated from the arbiters of political discourse and a media culture that is all too eager to oblige." Trump, the pick-up artist who seduced America Publication: The Spectator (UK) Author: Hugo Rifkind Rifkind writes for the Spectator and the Times, and while he has supported liberal social measures and even joined Labour to vote against Jeremy Corbyn, he comes from Tory stock, and is best understood as a moderate conservative. Why you should read it: Rifkind makes an insightful connection between Trump's dissembling used car salesmanship and the loserverse of so-called "pick-up artists", which he explored as a journalist a decade ago. Best paragraph: "This week, the newspapers are full of alt-right types, gleeful at the rise of Donald Trump, sieg-heiling their way around Washington restaurants. Doubtless plenty of them would be furious at the suggestion that they evolved from pick-up artists, and pick-up artists would likewise be furious that these are their offspring. They'll just have to be furious, though, because the link is clearly there. And while I doubt Trump himself has ever read a book on pick-up artistry, because I doubt he has ever read a book on anything, his own hinterland is very similar. He is the king of fake-it-till-you-make-it. The perfect businessman, if your whole notion of the perfect businessman has been gleaned from self-help books about how to become the perfect businessman. This is his politics, too. For actual depth, actual truth, he has only contempt. A pick-up artist who copied him would be him. There is nothing else there." Donald Trump and the Rise of Alt-Reality Media Publication: Politico magazine Author: Charlie Sykes Skyes is a conservative talk radio host in Milwaukee, Wisconsin. He is a #nevertrump Republican, and he had a moment of national prominence during the campaign when he put critical questions to Trump on air. His job and his location offered him insight into the nature of the Trump wave as it swept through the upper midwest and on to the White House. He has recently announced he'll be wrapping up his career as a radio host after two decades. Why you should read it: Sykes argues that Trump's victory was also the victory of "alt-reality" media – he names sources like Breitbart and Alex Jones – whose main function is to insulate conservatives from the truth. He hoped that a Trump loss would discredit them. But now, at the right hand of the new president, these outlets will provide him propaganda cover and attack his enemies on the left and the right. Best paragraph: "It's possible that a Trump loss would have led to an exorcism of the worst elements of the conservative media. But they saw Trump's victory as their victory too. The newly weaponized conservative media genuinely believe that they have changed the paradigm of media coverage. In the new alt-reality bubble, negative information simply no longer penetrates; gaffes and scandals can be snuffed out, ignored, or spun; counternarratives can be launched. Trump has proven that a candidate could be immune to the narratives, criticism and fact-checking of the mainstream media. This was, after all, a campaign in which a presidential candidate trafficked in "scoops" from the National Enquirer. And got away with it."

Just over a fortnight before the roof falls in on the US, another institution prepares itself for another phase in its long, checkered and legendary existence. On this Monday afternoon, the Rolling Stones have taken over the Four Seasons hotel in Boston in order to talk about their new album, Blue &amp; Lonesome, and to prepare for the night's show. It's the last of a few American dates including Desert Trip, the California festival that saw them join a bill completed by Paul McCartney, Bob Dylan, Neil Young, Roger Waters and the Who (earning it the nickname Oldchella). Then came two dates in Las Vegas – one of which was cancelled after the desert dust gave Mick Jagger laryngitis. However, tickets are not available for Boston. "It's a private show," Charlie Watts tells me. Is it for someone's birthday? "They're usually big corporations," Watts shrugs. "Elton does loads of them. Elton John at the old piano – he's perfect for that but we're really not very good at these things. I mean, people like it, but we're more used to the huge stage." It later turns out that the Stones are playing for Robert Kraft, owner of American football team the New England Patriots, in a tent pitched at the Gillette stadium, rather than the hotel ballroom I'm imagining. "I love playing in clubs, actually," Charlie Watts says. "These thing aren't like that, they're functions. To be honest, it's what I started out playing." As well as finding themselves a band for hire playing parties again – albeit for a businessman worth $5bn, paying them a rumoured $3m – the Rolling Stones are returning to their roots in another way. This week they release Blue &amp; Lonesome, comprising cover versions of old blues deep cuts, mainly by Chicago artists (four by Little Walter and two by Howlin' Wolf). Twelve tracks long, it's the first Rolling Stones album to contain more songs by other people than any since their self-titled debut from 1964, the days when they were essentially a blues covers band (their name itself is taken from a blues song, Rollin' Stone by Muddy Waters). The way Keith Richards tells it, the album happened pretty much by accident, when the Stones gathered in British Grove Studios in London last December to work on some new material. The sound wasn't gelling, so Richards told the band to play Little Walter's Blue and Lonesome. "We cut that, we listened to it back and suddenly the sound is there. Mick turns round and says, 'I wanna do this Howlin' Wolf song,' and then he says, 'And I'd like to do this Lightnin' Slim,' and now I've got the man on a roll. When you've got the lead man calling the shots and saying, "I want to do that, I want to do this,' keep the tape rolling." And they do record on tape, Richards says. "This is not digital crap." The band recorded the bulk of the songs in two days. "Maybe Ian Stewart was sending a message from above," Richards says, referring to the Rolling Stones' sixth member, kicked out of the band for not having the right look, but who stuck around as their tour manager and pianist until his death in 1985. "It's almost like getting something off your chest that had been there for a long time. I'm looking forward to volume two already." Jagger took more convincing. "At first Mick was a little bit, 'The blues album? Oh no,'" Richards says. "I said, 'On this you shine, man. This is Mick Jagger at his fucking best!'" And indeed, Blue &amp; Lonesome has a purposeful swagger that cuts through the showbiz to reveal the Stones as musicians and fans reunited with songs they have known, as Richards says, "since babyhood". Jagger isn't talking – he's saving his voice – so I interview the other Stones one by one. I meet Watts and Richards in two empty hotel conference rooms; speaking to Ronnie Wood is a cosier experience up in his suite of rooms on the sixth floor. His baby twins Gracie and Alice wriggle in the arms of his wife, Sally Humphreys, while Wood gets stuck into an early evening drink. At 69, does he ever feel that he can't be bothered to go onstage? "No, it's a delight," says Wood, still regarded as the band's new boy (he joined in 1975). "As long as we can still do it and each of us in our own departments takes care of that particular thing, as long as Mick is out there selling the song in such a good way, that's great." The world is finally coming to terms with the fact that, like their bluesmen heroes, the Rolling Stones have no intention of giving up performing, more than 50 years after they started. "Howlin' Wolf almost died on stage, plugged into his kidney machine, so there's no reason why we wouldn't go exactly the same way," Wood says. "I saw John Lee Hooker not long before he died [aged 83, in 2001] and he was showing me backstage, showing off his new CD and his new white hat and his new girlfriend – he was rocking right to the end." Those that don't have the same attitude leave the band. The day I interview the Stones, it's Bill Wyman's 80th birthday: Wood, a talented artist, has painted Wyman's portrait and given it to him as a present. "I know – we're quite kind sometimes, aren't we? Even to old members," chuckles Wood's manager Sherry Daly, hovering nearby. Then there are those band members who haven't lasted the course – not just Stewart, but also Brian Jones, who founded the band and drowned in 1969, aged 27. Since Jones was the band's blues purist, I ask Watts whether he thought of him while recording Blue &amp; Lonesome. "Nah," says the drummer. The Rolling Stones could never be accused of being overly sentimental. "When I was playing the Jimmy Reed one, Little Rain, I was remembering Brian and figuring it out in 1962," offers Richards. "The guy is not totally obliterated, but don't forget that we have another Jones in the band now – Darryl" – their bassist, Wyman's replacement. "And that guy can kick ass, man." Richards, dressed in a scarf that trails from around his head to the floor, scarlet hi-top sneakers, and a bracelet that looks as if it's made from the locks you might use while abseiling, is at pains to disabuse me of the notion that being in the Rolling Stones aged 72 might now be a bit boring compared to their decadent peak. "I'm actually still recovering from a rock'n'roll party," he says, lighting up a fag (of course, the Four Seasons is a non-smoking hotel). "Cats came to my room, Peter Wolf [of the J Geils Band] came to see me, Darryl Jones comes by, then we start to play some Little Richard shit, then in walks Sasha Allen [who sings back-up with the Stones] and before you know it it's eight in the morning and I'm, 'Guys, we've got to knock it off here.' If it was on film it would be hilarious." With mild trepidation, I tell Richards that I recently watched a Stones-on-tour documentary – Cocksucker Blues. Made by Robert Frank, it captures the band's 1972 tour, with scenes including Richards nodding out while watched over by a groupie, an orgy on the band's private jet, and several lovingly detailed scenes of intravenous heroin use – all reasons why the band have kept it from general release. I think it's a great film, I tell him. "Me too," Richards agrees, "Frank really captured some moments." I hate to be bourgeois, I say, but I also found it pretty shocking. "Life on the edge," says Richards. "The monument of the unknown junkie." He's referring to a section where one of the Stones's bombed-out entourage proposes a memorial to an OD victim akin to the tomb of the unknown soldier. "It was a monument to himself I think but the way he put it across was a great idea. It's the characters that you meet on the road – you're not in a cocoon, you're working with people. Danny Seymour, who's doing the sound on there – all these cats are dead now, man." Seymour was Frank's sidekick, credited as "Junky Soundman": Cocksucker Blues is nothing if not gonzo. It also captures the mixture of lowlife and high society that was (and perhaps still is) unique to the Rolling Stones' backstage ecosystem, in which Andy Warhol and Truman Capote swing by the dressing room, alongside Richards' favoured ne'er-do-wells. "They're wondering, 'Is this art or what?', I'm looking at Andy Warhol thinking, 'Are you art or what?'" Richards splutters out his famous laugh, which sounds like 60 years' worth of fags and drugs residue attempting to escape from his chest. "I love the Campbell's soup can, but I really don't think it's the Mona Lisa." He isn't too keen on the work of Roger Waters, either, who was on the bill at Desert Trip. "To me it's got nothing to do with rock'n'roll. What if he played in daytime?" He laughs. "It's a light show, for Christ's sake! But that's all right, it's a piece of theatre. I guess what the Rolling Stones are is a little bit of theatre and a little bit of reality at the same time." One person the Rolling Stones do rate is Dylan; the Desert Trip shows coincided with him being awarded the Nobel prize for literature. "He kept calling me Sir Ronnie," Wood says, "and when Charlie walked in he said, 'And Sir Charlie, too! Everyone from England is a sir, right?' And we said, 'Yeah Bob, but it's not like ... it's really good about your Nobel prize.' And he went, 'You think so? It's good, huh?' And we said, 'You deserve it.' And he said, 'That's great – thanks.' He didn't really know how to accept it but he thought he had done something pretty good." Like Coachella, Desert Trip took place on the same site again the following week. "I did notice that the next week, Bob's standing up at the piano like Little Richard and he's got this little flash Nudie shit going down – shit, dog, go for it," Richards says. "Mick and I were watching Bob's first set and it sounded good, the band was great, and I said, 'Mick, notice – very little concession to showbusiness,' and Mick went, 'Yeahhh, right.'"The Rolling Stones are far more dependable than Dylan in that regard – every night you get the hits, in a recognisable rendition, with some deeper cuts alternating through the set. Watts, a bone-dry wit in a cardigan who says his preferred listening is "jazz or Radio 3", is enjoying their late career as a festival band. "Glastonbury was the first one that I said, 'We don't want to do that, it's a load of crap,' and actually it was very nice. I'd never go to see a band in a bloody field playing – I wouldn't go to a stadium to see a band either – but Glastonbury and the desert thing were fun." "The job never stops changing," Richards says. "We were playing for 10 years without a soundsystem, that came around 1969. You used to just go up there with your amplifier, plonk, and do the best you can." The Rolling Stones' most notorious gig, was also in California – Altamont, where a decision to allow the Hell's Angels to act as security guards led to a fan, 18-year-old Meredith Hunter, being stabbed to death by an Angel in front of the stage while the Stones played. Is it true the stage was only 4ft high? "That was about right, it was pretty low," Richards says. The collapse of plans to play a free show, a Woodstock of the west, in San Francisco's Golden Gate Park, then at Sears Point Raceway, which would have been a more suitable venue, led to the band choosing at short notice to play the bleak Altamont speedway in the hills, well outside San Francisco. "There were no cops there, the Angels were running the joint and I wouldn't trust the Hell's Angels to get me a coke – and I just mean a Coca-Cola, I don't even mean coke!" snorts the guitarist. "But they were out of it, things got out of hand. Also in '69 there was that angst in the air, kind of like there is now, but I don't want to get into that because it ain't over and it's not my country." Nonetheless, says Richards, the gig often regarded as marking the end of the innocent dreams of the 60s wasn't all bad. "I think given that there were about half a million people there, I'd say that 499,000 had a good time," he says. "Which is not bad on the average, you know? And one man died, but a baby was born, so the same number came out as went in. If that hadn't happened it would have been considered a Woodstock on the coast. All it takes is one sucker with a knife." In fact, as Joel Selvin's book Altamont earlier this year made clear, the event was a pretty much unmitigated disaster from start to finish, as thousands upon thousands of people on bad drugs, rival groups of Angels, a lack of basic facilities and a hippie faith in good nature came together in a perfect storm of disaster. Meredith Hunter was not the only person to die at Altamont. One person trying to reach the site drowned in a drainage ditch; two more were killed when a hit-and-run driver ran them over at the side of an access road to the site. Altamont alone would have finished off many bands, but not the Rolling Stones. Equally, death claims younger musical peers such as David Bowie and Prince, but the Stones march on. "Prince was a real shock," says Watts. "Quite young as well." He points out that Prince had history with the Rolling Stones, playing a disastrous support slot on their 1981 American tour. "You know that album cover with the knickers?" He means Dirty Mind, from 1980, on which Prince wears black bikini briefs and a flasher's mac. "Well, Mick and I both loved that album – Keith hated it – and we got him on our show. Of course, being Prince he duly went on in his knickers and our audience booed him off. Which didn't deter me from liking him." Prince's early albums were a black American take on new wave and rock. The Rolling Stones approached music in the opposite direction: white Englishmen tackling African-American blues, as Blue &amp; Lonesome makes crystal clear. If they were a group starting out now, trying the same thing, they would be accused of cultural appropriation, of stealing someone else's culture. "It's emulating, I don't think it's stealing necessarily," says Watts. "That's all I've ever done. I never learned to play the drums, I used to watch Phil Seaman and listen to Max Roach or Baby Dodds or Louis Armstrong." Seaman was white and English; the other three were black Americans. Watts believes that coming from a specific culture is a factor: "I'm never going to play reggae as well as Sly and Robbie or the Barrett brothers" – the last being Bob Marley's rhythm section. "They're Jamaican, their aunties used to dance to that when they were children, you know what I mean? It's where they come from. But you know, Ginger [Baker] is as African as any African when he plays the drums. So was Phil Seaman, actually." This is the kind of talk that makes hackles rise, though perhaps not so much among musicians as their defenders in the press or the academy. When the Rolling Stones actually went to Chess studios in 1964 – when Muddy Waters was doing jobs around the studio – and 1965, the bluesmen welcomed these skinny, white Englishmen with open arms. "Those blues people had a lot of heart, they reminded me of the art school crowd and my dad and mum's drinking pals from the pubs – they were all warm people," says Wood. "When I was up in my mum's little council house with my first little Dansette player, I used to learn the riffs, and when you meet with these guys later on they were as much of a delight to play with. They were all a bit sad that they got ripped off, they all had that in common, but they certainly didn't let it get them down that much." "If we're playing a Muddy Waters song and it sells 10m and Muddy sells 1m, I can see that his descendants would be angry about that," Watts says. "Even if you gave all the money back I don't know whether the situation would be any better. All you can say is that you admire whoever it is. I mean, I owe my living to Freddie Below. I do. That's who I copied." The consummate blues drummer, Below's playing drove many of the records the Stones have covered on Blue &amp; Lonesome. "Music's a bit like poetry or something," Watts continues. "Once it's recorded it's anyone's. You could be an Israeli that can't speak English and play as well as Roy Haynes [the great jazz drummer]. What they call world music on the BBC is full of that. You're suddenly going, 'Bloody hell, who's that?' and it's some guy from Tashkent. Because they listened to the record, you know?" Blue &amp; Lonesome suggests that 50 years on, the Rolling Stones are in the astonishing position they are today because they also listened to some records. Yet they made plenty that were equal to – or surpassed – their inspirations. Will we ever hear more Stones originals? So Wood claims: "In 2017 we'll shape up these news songs – we've got some in the can and then there's a lot more on the back burner." In the meantime, the Stones corporation adapts for a new era, though Wood disputes that description. "What do they call the farmers with the little dairies – home farms?" A cottage industry? "Cottage! That was the word I was looking for. I was just talking about this cottage industry, the Rolling Stones." This article was amended on 1 December 2016. An earlier version said that Brian Jones had died at the age of 26.

What is it? A Gallic head-scratcher with a high body-count and twists aplenty. Why you'll love it: It's only six episodes long. That isn't the only reason, of course, but it's a pretty good one in these dramatically saturated times when every box set demands months of evenings and an almost religious devotion. Just six hours of your life to inhale a complete start-middle-end adventure through your cortex and out the other side. Praise be. The Passenger is a sullen, swaggering teen in a leather jacket, all devil-may-care where danger is concerned and prone to flights of pretentious fancy. It is ultimately better than True Detective, which I found pushed my tolerance for paint-it-black, side-mouth muttering, humourless nonsense too far. The Passenger stars the mesmeric Jean-Hugues Anglade (also in pacey thriller Braquo) as the mysterious Mathias, a psychiatrist who becomes embroiled in a murder mystery when carefully posed bodies (not women for a change) start turning up in the lush Bordeaux countryside. The first corpse is discovered naked, missing its head and sporting the pate of a bull. Captain Anaïs Châtelet (Raphaëlle Agogué) is on the trail of the killer and enlists Mathias's help, despite finding him infuriating, obviously. Perhaps, among the vineyards of western France, that frustration will blossom into something fruitier and more full bodied. They are sexy French people. These things happen. It has literally everything you could require of a murder mystery, including a troubled protagonist, running gun battles, thrilling chases, a pair of wordless, bald assassins and all the killings done in tribute to various well-known Greek myths. So, for example, one body turns up deep-fried with a pair of charred wings sewn to his back. You get the idea. But in case you don't, one of the characters often helpfully explains the myth we're dealing with, as if they are hitting you over the head with le Ladybird Livre de Mythe Grec. The saving grace of The Passenger is its Frenchness and the panache with which it's shot. Like any subtitled offering from the continent, your brain imbues it with more sophistication than it might actually possess. Agogué's effortless screen presence and tomboy-ish style are hard to take your eyes off as she angsts her way through gruesome murder and family trauma while Anglade's trademark quiet intensity perfectly compliments his character's unknowable core. The two play a breathless game of cat and mouse across France, from Bordeaux to Marseille and back up to Paris for the thrilling denouement. The only annoying thing about it is the ending, which, while offering a perfectly satisfactory reason for all of this Grecian theatricality, does seem to be trying very hard to herald a series two. Hands up who would like a story to end, for a change – and stay that way. Just me? Where: Walter Presents on All 4 Length: Six one-hour episodes, all available to stream now. Stand-out episode: Episode three is when the rug is well and truly pulled. But at no point during this series should you trust the rug for long. If you liked The Passenger, watch: Braquo (Netflix), Marseille (Netflix), The Hunter (Walter Presents, All 4).

Students at Plymouth university have followed students at City, University of London by deciding to ban three newspapers from their campus. It means that the campus shop run by Plymouth's students will not sell copies of the Sun, Daily Mail, Daily Express and their Sunday equivalents from the new year. According to a report in the Plymouth Herald, the decision was taken by the executive council of the University of Plymouth Students' Union (UPSU). The motion was passed, says a UPSU Facebook statement, by "a large majority". It states: "Whilst we believe that freedom of expression and speech are inalienable human rights, as defined in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, a number of British tabloids are known to express hateful views. They aim at belittling and demonising certain groups in society, such as immigrants, refugees, asylum seekers, disabled people, the LGBTIQA+ community, Muslims, Black and Asian communities... It is our duty to protect and empower and represent marginalised and discriminated against groups... UPSU opposes hatred, discrimination and demonisation of any individual.. Because of these very values that we hold and we are proud of, we believe that it is unethical for us to profit out of the sale of hateful, non-factual and anti-scientific media platforms." But the decision has split the student community, as happened a couple of weeks ago following the City University vote. Many students have accused their union leaders of censoring free speech. Several students quoted by the Herald argue that the executive council's decision does not represent their views. One complained that it "is made up of 13 members, only six of whom are elected to represent the student body." He said: "There was no consultation with the students, no referendum or anything like that... I don't read these papers, but to call it hate speech is wrong. Another student told the Herald that "universities are supposed to be institutions for promoting students to think for themselves, not sheltering them from the outside world." At least one student was supportive of the ban. He said newspapers like the Mail and the Sun "spread bigoted and poisonous lies". Such papers have "no place in a culturally diverse educational institution." NB: At City, University of London, where I teach, I am assured that journalism students - none of whom voted for the ban - will seek to overturn the ban at the next students' union meeting in February. COMMENT: No matter how much one dislikes the content of a newspaper, to ban it amounts to censorship and is a clear denial of press freedom. Perhaps the students would care to visit the library and read John Milton's 1644 book, Areopagitica, in which he condemned censorship and made an impassioned defence of free speech. People must be able to read heretical books, he wrote, in order to discover their wrongs and be prepared to deal with their arguments. He wrote: "Give me the liberty to know, to utter, and to argue freely according to conscience." The ban is illiberal. Think again, Plymouth students' union. Think again, students' union at City, University of London. Think again, all students. Fascists burn books. Tyrannies ban newspapers. Despots lock up journalists. Think again.

Android, the world's most used mobile operating system, is going through a step change. For years, its creator, Google, only made a small number of own-brand devices running it for developers and enthusiasts. That changed with the release of the Pixel. The Pixel is Google's first real attempt to challenge Apple and Samsung's smartphone dominance, but it wasn't made by the same team that makes Android. In fact, Google's hardware team, headed by the ex-Motorola chief executive Rick Osterloh, aren't even in the same building as the Android team, but instead are situated across the street. The Pixel phones introduced a new version of Android to the world, a version more Google-y than any before, that broke away from the standard or so-called pure Android experience of the open-source operating system underneath. Hiroshi Lockheimer, Google's head of Android, Chrome OS, and Google Play told the Guardian it was a conscious decision for Google to not change core Android: "The Google consumer hardware team's product vision is a phone for Google fans, who have adopted Google technologies. "Samsung takes a different approach, LG and HTC take a different approach: that's the core of Android - they get to customise Android and build own experiences on top. The one from Google happens to be for Google fans. It makes sense." But that act of Google making both Android and a phone that runs it could be seen as a big kick in the teeth to long-time licensees of the mobile operating system who have driven its success. Samsung has been Android's champion for years and there are hundreds of other smartphone and device manufacturers who license and use Android on their products. OnePlus, a rising Chinese smartphone manufacturer, is just one of Google's licensees. It creates a modified version of Android called OxygenOS, which runs on the companies smartphones including the recently released OnePlus 3T. Carl Pei, co-founder of OnePlus, told the Guardian he embraced Google's decision to make its own smartphone for the mass market. He said: "The interesting thing about the Pixel series is that Google's diverging from pure Android. "That gives everyone else much more creative freedom, because before we've had the purists complaining that every time you made a small tweak that 'this is not pure Android', but now even the Pixel is not pure Android so that gives you more creative freedom to realise your vision." Lockheimer's pleased other manufacturers see it that way: "For Carl and OnePlus to feel free with OxygenOS, that's great, that's exactly what we wanted to see happen. And what he and the team did with OxygenOS, Rick [Osterloh]'s doing with the Pixel team. Differentiating for a Google-orientated audience," he said. 'Android has always been about choice' Google's open-source moves with Android – giving it away free with a liberal licence to make it your own – but still maintain some control in the form of licences with conditions over app bundling and compatibility has put it in the firing line of the European commission. Google is embroiled in a battle with the European commission, accused of using its dominance over Android to exclude competitor apps and services. While Google's legal counsel and the European commission thrash out charges, responses and eventually a likely settlement of some kind, does that change the way Android is built? Lockheimer said: "Android has always been about choice, about enabling others to build business on top, whether that's multiple OEMs adopting the same source code because we're giving it away, millions of developers building businesses on top of it, or simply being an open platform to provide consumer choice from the high to the low end. "So I think we're very much aligned with the goals of the commission. We want choice, we want openness, and that's how we've been thinking about it for a while. And that's how we've always been operating." Time will tell if the commission agrees. Being able to customise Android is certainly one of the operating system's strengths, but it also introduces a weakness beyond European commission filings: software update delays. In a world where products radically change, normally for the better, over their lifetimes through software, updates are more crucial than ever. They're the linchpin of modern security, delivering critical fixes for holes that could let hackers into the one device that knows more about you, your comings and goings and your personal information than anything else. Google releases annual updates to Android, denoted by a new name such as Lollipop, Marshmallow and now Nougat, but it can take months, sometimes a year or so before those big updates reach devices made by third-party manufacturers. Some put the blame on chip makers, others manufacturers, networks or even Google. Lockheimer acknowledges the difficulties: "We share the source code with chip makers such as MediaTek and Qualcomm, as well as manufacturers including Samsung and others before we publish Android. But it really is a pipeline. "If you're in an operator-driven market, such as the US, they also add their customisations, so it adds another layer in the pipeline of development. We're doing things to make Android more modular to speed things up." One such effort has been the unpacking of some services specific to Google that get updated more regularly into what's known as Google Play Services - a layer that sits on top of the Android operating system and delivers all of the Google-ness of the smartphone. Lockheimer said: "Android is an operating system that's not tied to any one company. The Android Open Source Project, doesn't know that Google exists, it doesn't call into any Google servers or anything like that. So all the Google specific technologies are put into a thin layer on top of Android." With Google's apps and Play Services updatable separate from Android operating system underneath, material updates that change the look and field, the way Android works can be performed directly without having to go through various channels and without significantly changing the underlying system. Security updates have also been made more modular, although still require Android system updates to apply. Here there has been progress from the big manufacturers including Samsung, Google and others that have pledged to keep up with the Android team's monthly security update releases. Cross-pollinating Chrome OS and Android Even full Android updates are being made easier on the user, according to Lockheimer. Google's other operating system, Chrome OS which runs on laptops and desktop computers as an extended Linux-based version of the company's Chrome browser, has been doing seamless updates for years. Now the latest version of Android 7 Nougat (N) has the same technology employed. Lockheimer explained: "Android N does operating system updates in the same way as Chrome OS, in the background so that the user doesn't know it's happening. You just reboot and boom you're using the new version. It's literally the same technology as used in Chrome OS." Much has been said over the years about the slow merging of Chrome OS and Android, with speculation that Google would eventually ditch Chrome OS for Android and run a desktop version of Android. The introduction of the Android Google Play store onto Chromebooks this year did nothing to quell rumours of the merge. Lockheimer said: "We're not interested in merging the source code of Android and ChromeOS, but we are doing is to bring the best of both systems to each other. One area where ChromeOS was lacking was app support. We happened to have this great ecosystem in Google Play for Android, so why not stick it on ChromeOS? "So not really a merge, more taking the best elements of both and cross-pollinating." Could Google claim Huawei's spot in the market? The future of Android is still unclear. Google's experiment with the Pixel has changed the landscape, whether that's for the better for all or simply for Google remains to be seen. Samsung and Apple dominate the smartphone market, selling vastly more smartphones than anyone else, but the race to be the third biggest smartphone manufacturer is on. Huawei occupies that spot, according to the latest data from analysts firms – could Google take its place with the Pixel, and how would everyone else feel about the Android maker out competing them? Pei is bullish: "It's fair game. If Google makes a product that everyone likes and remembers, they will get the number three spot. But if we do it, we get the spot behind Samsung and Apple." Five of the best phablets for 2016 Pixel is a direct challenge to Apple – and a referendum on Google Google Pixel review: an iPhone beater but not quite an Android king Google Pixel XL review: very good phablet but with price tag to match

The US dictionary Merriam-Webster has implored word-lovers to help prevent "fascism" becoming its word of the year. The Twitter feed for the dictionary, which picks its word of the year according to popularity in online search, announced: "There's still time to look something else up." People responded by suggesting other, more cheering, terms to look up: Meanwhile, one tweeter spoke for many when she wrote: "I wish people had looked it [fascism] up a month ago". (The day after the EU referendum vote in the UK, the search term "what is the EU?" briefly spiked on Google search.) Merriam-Webster suggested that people might wish to look up "flummadiddle" en masse to push fascism from the number one spot. According to the Merriam-Webster website, Flummadiddle means "nonsense" or "trash". There was no word on whether this was a more oblique response to the US president-elect's policies. Global politics has influenced other dictionaries' words of the year. Oxford Dictionaries' choice, which was "post-truth", is defined as: "Relating to or denoting circumstances in which objective facts are less influential in shaping public opinion than appeals to emotion and personal belief". Dictionary.com's word of the year – just as depressing a result as fascism would be – was "xenophobia". Cambridge Dictionary went for "paranoid". Collins plumped for Brexit. Other shortlisted terms from various dictionaries included "alt-right", "Trumpism" and "snowflake generation". It all seems a world away from Oxford Dictionaries' word of the year for 2015 which was actually an emoji: tears of joy.

'Sometimes, when someone asks how you are, the only answer is: 'Terrible, thanks for asking,'" says Nora McInerny. She knows. And in a new podcast, Terrible, Thanks for Asking (iTunes, APM), she makes a powerful case for telling casual enquirers how you really feel. The past few years have been tough for McInerny. Actually, that's an understatement. When her partner Aaron was diagnosed with brain cancer, they got on with the business of living. "Life was really good and normal even though there was this big, scary shadow following us around everywhere," she says. "Then the shadow caught up with us." She miscarried their second baby, then lost her dad and Aaron within weeks of each other. McInerny's honesty stops you in your tracks as she prologues the podcast on the second anniversary of her husband's death. Her son, Ralph, won't have any memories of his father. She is wading through grief and, when people ask, of course she's not OK. Instead of small talk, she wants big talk. Crying and telling it like it is, rather than bottling up her feelings – some of which don't even have names. Even at the funeral, people told her she would meet someone new, but when it happened she found a "stew" inside her of grief and love. "Happiness to me was only acceptable in small increments," she says. "Falling in love didn't take my grief away, it scootered over a little bit." She had dreamed of having another baby some day, but when it happened she didn't shout about her pregnancy. "I pretended life was going on as usual, but with more heartburn and bigger pants," she says. The way McInerny talks about grief is refreshing. She will make you cry on your commute. Her words are always clever, often witty and sometimes matter of fact. "Not to totally bum you out, but you're going to go through something hard in life," she says. The message is clear: don't pretend you're fine, talk about it. Terrible, Thanks for Asking is not all about death: there is divorce, jealousy and more of the uncomfortable stuff to come. "I only cry in 60% of episodes," says McInerny. If the first few are anything to go by, the listeners' sob rate might be nearer 100%, but that's OK. If you like this, try ... The Mental Illness Happy Hour.

The Vale of York has been granted permission this week by NHS England to put fat people and smokers to the back of the queue for operations. Starting in January, their treatments will be delayed a year; the obese must lose 10% of their body weight, and smokers give up for at least two months. The Royal College of Surgeons says it is "very disappointed that NHS England and No 10 seem to be backing this arbitrary policy". It's always good advice to live healthily, but this crosses a new red line. The clinical commissioning group (CCG), which buys services for people in York and Selby, is the first to be given official permission, agreed by Downing Street, to discriminate against particular patients – something forbidden in the (non-justiciable) NHS constitution. But the CCG is in trouble, in July judged "inadequate" and put into special measures and prescribed a "financial turnaround" for its debts. Rationing will always be a part of the NHS social contract. Every system in the world rations: just look at the strict limits in US health insurance policies. There never was, or can ever be, an instant, ever-open door – however much politicians pretend, with their impossible seven-day pledges on no extra money, that there can be. But the UK system is judged one of the most efficient in the world, getting the biggest bang for its modest bucks, spending less than similar countries. The key is its unique gatekeeping GPs who dispense the great bulk of treatment, while the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (Nice), devised by the last Labour government, judges which drugs and treatments are good enough value for money for the NHS. The rule of thumb is to spend up to £30,000 for an extra year of good quality life. Right from 1948, when the NHS was first set up, waiting lists were the traditional rationing mechanism. When governments tightened spending, waiting times grew, which was good for surgeons' private practice. For the first time in history, the last Labour government all but abolished waiting lists, something seasoned NHS experts never thought possible. With a spending increase of 7% a year, new targets saw waiting times drop from sometimes two years to just 18 weeks maximum, and two weeks for suspected cancers. Surgeons' incomes plummeted, as did payments for private healthcare. But in the present crisis, rationing is tightening everywhere. You get only one cataract fixed where CCGs think one eye is enough. The list of treatments being struck off is lengthening, and the postcode lottery of what your CCG pays for produces injustices. I reported recently on a podiatry clinic treating severe diabetics that can give some patients a cast that cures ulcers in eight weeks. Those in other CCG areas get a cheaper bandage, which means healing takes 52 weeks. In the past, old people were often denied many life-enhancing treatments. All such rationing may be unfair, but at least it was never personal. The abiding principle was that the NHS treated people in order of medical need, according to resources available. Minor complaints went to the back of the queue. Urgent cases were treated first, followed by those people likely to be rendered wheelchair-bound and needing social care if they did not get surgery on hips or knees – as will many of these obese patients. The system was blind to everything but medical priority, a founding NHS principle that treated viscount and vagrant according to urgency, priest and sinner in next-door beds regardless of rank or virtue. But once a patient's personal failings can be taken into account, where does that lead? More people on low incomes are obese and smoke, and therefore already suffer worse health. This is for a host of psychosocial reasons, including the sheer stress and hardship of being at the bottom. (See Michael Marmot's work, or the irrefutable evidence from Richard Wilkinson and Kate Pickett, authors of The Spirit Level, on the link between low status and poor physical and mental health.) The poor often get worse NHS treatment, having less sharp elbows, and living in areas where the best doctors are harder to recruit. Undoubtedly most will have tried to lose weight and quit smoking, but public health budgets for obesity and smoking programmes have been cut, and are set to shrink again. This blaming of the individual conveniently shuts out social context. Don't they have free will, these people? Politically, they will be easy to cast to the back of the queue, shamed into silence for their fatness and addiction. They will make much less fuss than local campaigners against any closures to hospital units. This opens up new horizons: how much easier rationing becomes when we can blame the patients. Hey presto, waiting lists can be pared right down, targets hit, leaving only the virtuous on the lists. But who are they? Let's weed out anyone in any way responsible for the burden they put on the NHS. Away with the boy racers smashing themselves up with their first motorbikes and cars. Out with the extreme sports addicts – the climbers, potholers, boxers, base jumpers paragliders, skiers and F1 drivers, who get their adrenaline kicks at the NHS's expense. Forget all sports injures. Away with my own age group, too: drinking too much wine of an evening, slowly corroding our livers: a host of cancers are caused by drink and diet. And what about people bitten by their own horrible, fierce dogs? Or idiots tripping over while texting on smartphones? As Hamlet said, use every man after his desert (or perhaps desserts) and who shall 'scape whipping? Until now, in the NHS, the service may have creaked under the strains of the worst funding crisis in its history, but the quality of mercy was not strained. That has been the NHS's great moral strength, as with the Red Cross or Médecins Sans Frontières, or indeed the Hippocratic oath itself. In treating the sick, let there be no discrimination over their moral worth.

More than 2300 scientists—including 22 Nobel laureates—this week issued an open letter, outlining how they want the Trump administration and 115th Congress to make use of scientific evidence and expert advice. It remains open for signatures here. The letter calls on the president-elect to appoint cabinet members with a track record of supporting science and promoting diversity; to protect the integrity and independence of government researchers; and to provide sufficient funding for scientific research and data collection. These are far from abstract concerns. Congress has signalled its intent to pass legislation that cuts science out of existing public health and environmental laws. Without an independent Food and Drug Administration, we become more vulnerable to unsafe medical devices. When Environmental Protection Agency scientists are sidelined, people are more likely to be exposed to unsafe water. With inadequate data collection, we will be less able to deal with floods and forest fires. Donald Trump, meanwhile, is surrounding himself with people who have attacked scientists in the past, and are openly hostile to the agencies they are being tapped to lead. Bob Walker, leading the NASA transition, wants to rid the agency of climate research, despite its vitality to national security and the economy. Congresswoman Marsha Blackburn, who put the lives of foetal tissue researchers in danger by publishing their names and addresses, is on the Trump transition team. Kathleen White, in line for EPA administrator, is a climate change denier who dismissed scientific advisors as "mandarins brandishing their scientific credentials." As an Oklahoma Senator, Tom Coburn attacked individual National Science Foundation grantees and attempted to wipe out funding for political science research. He is under consideration to run the White House Office of Management and Budget, an obscure office that regularly hosts industry lobbyists intent on preventing agencies from developing science-based regulations. The scientists' letter is not without precedent. In 2004, a bipartisan group of experts penned a letter expressing outrage about the Bush administration's pervasive political interference in science. That letter received widespread attention in the press and galvanized scientists to expose and push back on censorship and manipulation of science. In 2008, a small group of scientists called on the next president to "create conditions conducive to a thriving scientific enterprise." Signatories included John Holdren, who became President Obama's science adviser and subsequently pushed federal agencies to develop scientific integrity policies to protect scientists from political interference in their work. But never before has the scientific community been this organised to scrutinise the new administration and Congress. For example, last week, twenty-nine scientific organisations urged the president-elect to appoint a senior science advisor early in his term. Alarmed by growing sexism and racism, a group of women in science wrote a statement aimed at creating "an inclusive scientific community dedicated to training a more diverse group of future leaders in science." They hoped for 500 signatories; the statement now has more than ten thousand on six continents. Participation, both inside and outside of government, is key. There is no more important time to be a government scientist, even if hostile leaders are appointed and confirmed. Government scientists can keep agencies strong by doing good research and reporting interference and malpractice. The Union of Concerned Scientists is well-versed at investigating and exposing such activities, and is setting up secure methods for agency employees to anonymously share any evidence of such activity. If and when the Trump administration politicizes science (and it seems inevitable that it will), scientists and journalists need to do a better job of connecting the impacts of those actions to people's everyday lives. Scientists are ready to push back and bring the American people with them. "Americans recognise that science is critical to improving our quality of life," said physicist Lewis Branscomb, who worked as chief scientist at IBM and has advised four presidential administrations. "And when science is ignored or politically corrupted, it's the American people who suffer." We cannot afford to allow attacks on scientists, draconian budget cuts, or pervasive conflicts of interest to become routine. The battle to defend science has already started, and it does not end on Inauguration Day. We need the summon the stamina to stay engaged throughout 2017 and beyond to ensure that those who choose to attack or undermine science are held to account. Michael Halpern (@halpsci) is deputy director of the Center for Science and Democracy at the Union of Concerned Scientists.

Wednesday's episode of South Park was the ninth in a season-long arc revolving around both the American presidential election and the international problem with trolling. There are two major national arcs: Mr Garrison, in Trumpian form and with Caitlyn Jenner as vice-president, has ascended to the highest office in the land assisted by an infestation of nostalgia-inducing 'Member Berries. The other revolves around Denmark developing a software program (Troll Trace) that will result in everyone's private internet history becoming public after a Danish icon killed himself after being trolled by Kyle's dad, Gerald Broflovski. In the post-election episode, Hillary Clinton traded Gerald and his troll compatriots to the Danes and, in the interim, he was given a cellphone and told he could call one person. He called his five-year-old son, Ike, and directed him to resume his trolling to prove it wasn't him. After that plan pans out the way you might expect Gerald figures out the one thing that can help: riling everyone up against Denmark the same way that Garrison had riled up Americans to vote for him. So Kyle and Ike head to church, where everyone is praying that they'll be saved from the inevitable release of their internet histories. Kyle and Ike demand to know why no one is willing to stand up to the Danes: "Let's take a stand and try to end this. We can't let Denmark change who we are," yells Kyle, and suggests they call the president. But they have a secret weapon: President Garrison's ex, Mr Slave. Mr Slave explains that Americans are scared of Troll Trace and the best plan is to bomb Denmark. Garrison, of course, demurs, since his advisers have explained that bombing Denmark would have broader, terrible consequences. "Jesus Christ, you're such a little bitch," says Mr Slave. "You're a little bitch president, you're too scared to bomb anybody." After more puerile baiting, Garrison declares he'll bomb Denmark before hanging up the phone. Eventually, the Broflovski boys realize that their father is actually in Denmark and have to get Garrison to call it off, so Kyle calls the Pentagon. Garrison, gorging on ice cream, ignores calls from several world leaders to take Kyle's call, but isn't keen to call off the bombing. In Denmark, Gerald is strapped to a chair inside the Troll Trace headquarters, alternating between begging for mercy and trying to justify his month of being horrible to other people as "satire". But one of his mini-speeches nets him some mercy: the head of Troll Trace invites him to dinner to supposedly make his case. During their conversation in the glassed-in dining room, the head of Troll Trace reveals his ultimate plan. "What if you could troll the entire world?" he asks Gerald, suggesting that the ultimate troll might be "someone who could rise to political power through nothing more than pushing people's buttons and getting them riled up". Gerald wonders why it would be funny to start a third world war. "Because it's freaking hilarious: getting a Scandinavian country to fight trolls by building a giant machine that actually shows everyone on Earth is a giant troll too," says the head of Troll Trace. Then he reveals his endgame: all the naked trolls and all the Danish Troll Trace employees get treated to Rick Astley singing Never Gonna Give You Up. In the third plotline, Cartman and his girlfriend had attempted to escape Troll Trace by hitching a ride on Elon Musk's SpaceX to Mars. But not only are there hordes of Americans outside the gates like a scene from The Walking Dead with the same plan, but Cartman has convinced Musk that Heidi is the funniest, smartest girl in the world and can solve SpaceX's technological problems. Heidi has worked out the SpaceX math by replacing all the mathematical symbols with Emoji and possibly solved the secret to space travel. She runs off with the SpaceX engineers, as Cartman contemplates the end of his relationship. Back at the Broflovski household, the brothers have one final plan to save the world. Unfortunately, it involves locking their mother in the pantry, as she curses, and accessing the internet.

Millions of Italians who live abroad will have their last chance to cast their vote on Thursday in a critical referendum on constitutional reform brought by the prime minister, Matteo Renzi. Renzi, who has promised to resign if he loses, faces a five-point deficit in the polls heading into the final week of campaigning for the 4 December referendum, which centres on sweeping changes to Italy's parliamentary system. But Renzi told a Belgian newspaper that early voting by Italian emigrants could help clinch a victory. "If the yes [camp] manages to win the approval of two-thirds of Italians abroad, then we can do it," he told Le Soir, in remarks that were picked up by Italy's daily newspaper, La Repubblica. There are about 4 million eligible Italian voters abroad, of which about 1.1 million voted in 2013's general election. Renzi calculated that if 1.5 million voted in the referendum, and the yes camp won a million of those votes, "the balance would shift". But there are potential problems with Renzi's maths. Primarily, though Renzi's position is on the line, the referendum is not a national election and could attract less interest among Italians living all over the world. A diplomatic source at the Italian embassy in London – the city with the second-highest number of registered Italian expatriates – said half of all eligible voters in the UK had submitted their ballots by Monday, and more were expected by the end of Thursday. "In general, the [expatriate] community in London has been active [on the referendum]. Over 60% have a higher education degree and they're interested in politics," the official said. He added that the referendum had received a lot of media attention in the UK, where resident Italians were more politically engaged with their homeland, in comparison to Buenos Aires, the city with the most registered Italian emigrants. Italians living abroad are considered to lean more towards the yes camp in the referendum, but each side campaigned outside of Italy to target those voters. Both Maria Elena Boschi, Renzi's reform minister, and Luigi Di Maio, a star of the anti-establishment Five Star Movement, which is leading the opposition against the referendum, appeared in rallies in London to help get out the vote. Italian emigrants have been decisive in two elections since winning the right to vote by mail in 2001, according to an analysis by Lorenzo Piccoli, a researcher at the European University Institute in Florence: the tight election of 2006, which ended in a victory for Romano Prodi's centre-left government; and the 2013 election in which the centre-left secured a majority. Referendum ballots from emigrants are sent to a processing centre in Castelnuovo di Porto and will be counted on Sunday, the day the rest of the country goes to the polls. The Renzi government was criticised last month for sending emigrants a signed letter from the prime minister urging them to vote yes, along with a two-page brochure in whichRenzi was pictured with Barack Obama and Angela Merkel.

I have a good friend named Tomos Parry who is also a chef. Having done stints at institutions including the River Cafe, which by popular definition makes you a "proper chef", Tom's cooking is grounded in an understanding of good technique and familiar ingredients. Yet his food is unmistakably his own: incredibly simple, movingly delicious. We were on holiday together in Mallorca last year and spent a lot of time preparing extended lunches: roasting legs of lamb over vine wood and dry fennel bush we found in the grounds of the house where we were staying, grilling langoustine with the fat from cured pig's cheeks, picking sea urchins off the rocks in our flip-flops and storing them in our straw hats. We'd go back to the house and crack open their spiny shells, scoop out the delicate orange flesh and wash it down with a beer. None of those things, though, was the highlight of my week. My favourite was the simplest. Tom rummaged in the fridge one lunchtime and came up with something based on petit pois à la française. Frozen peas, some salad, a splash of white wine, a dash of milk. It took him all of five minutes to make and it was the best thing I'd eaten in ages. Why was that? Tom had done no planning. He'd used underwhelming ingredients. But he was able to improvise because he knew what he was doing with heat and, most importantly, with seasoning. He knew how the latter would lift those humble components into something greater than the sum of their parts. The meal was a good example of how crucial seasoning is – perhaps the common denominator in all good cooking. The two Thai recipes here live or die by good seasoning. The Thais have vastly more complex and engaging options when it comes to seasoning than we do in the west. We might typically have salts, sugars and vinegars to play with (to my mind, pepper is less a seasoning than a spice). But in Thai cuisine, and in my kitchen, you see palm sugar (warming sweetness) and caster sugar (more urgent, impactive sweetness), fish sauce (clean, salty, umami), fermented shrimp paste (heavy, earthy salt and deeper umami), fermented freshwater fish (more about this later), a couple of types of citrus and sea salt. While that may sound excessive, cooking Thai food has taught me that sometimes how you add seasoning is as important as knowing what to add. All those salty, pungent fishy things give you so many options. Let's say you are seasoning a curry that will stay hot for a while: then gapi (fermented shrimp paste) may be the best option, as it doesn't intensify in hot liquid in quite the same way as fish sauce. However, if a freshly made, tart dipping sauce needs zip, then the clean immediacy of fish sauce might be perfect. Both add saltiness, but in very different ways. Gaeng omm is a simple curry soup. It's principally herbal and pungent, the kind of reassuring farmer's food you are likely to find in more rural areas of Isaan, the mountainous north-eastern region of Thailand that borders Laos and Cambodia. I have found that it benefits from being seasoned at the last moment, so that the curry doesn't absorb all the liveliness of the citrus flavours and the fish sauce. Season it too early and you have a salty bowl of deadened pork and lemongrass. But take it off the heat and add a light dash of fish sauce and a spritz of fresh lemon or lime and you'll find these seasonings lift the herbal notes beyond what you expected. Gaeng omm is served with jasmine rice, the neutral nuttiness of which counterbalances the curry's seasoning. On occasion, a specific type of seasoning works perfectly with the ingredients in the dish. Just as braised lettuce and peas work best simmered with a little sea salt (table or rock salt wouldn't do), my example would be mushroom salad with pla raa, fermented freshwater fish made with roasted rice, which helps to define the pungent, spicy, citric food of Isaan. Charred, umami-rich mushrooms combined with pla raa and fish sauce, then balanced with roasted chilli and citrus, is quite a devious combination. You can get pla raa from specialist Asian retailers such as importfood.com, although we source a milder version for use in this salad. When travelling, I have eaten versions made with crushed mud snails and found the unrefined gutsiness to be addictive. Refined foods are delicious in their ability to lift, balance and give poise to a dish, but I always miss the extra information we sacrifice with refining, and I am prepared to ingest a little stink and rot to get it. Isaan mushroom salad Serves 4 4 large handfuls meaty mixed mushrooms (such as oyster or wild mushrooms), tough stems trimmed and reserved to make mushroom stock Vegetable oil, for frying A pinch of salt 4-5 shallots/1 red onion, finely chopped Half a handful of mint leaves, roughly chopped 1 tbsp roasted sticky rice powder (optional) For the dressing 1 tbsp lime juice 1 tbsp lemon juice 1 tbsp light soy sauce 1 tbsp mushroom stock (see below) 1 tbsp palm sugar (or caster sugar) 1 tsp dried red chilli powder 2 lemongrass sticks, outer stalks removed, finely chopped 1 In a heavy-based pan (or even better, on a barbecue), cook the mushrooms in a little oil with a pinch of salt. 2 To make the mushroom stock, grill or fry the mushroom trimmings, then boil with a cup of water, and reduce by half. 3 Combine the dressing ingredients in a bowl and mix well. 4 Add the remaining ingredients to the mushrooms, cover with the dressing and mix well. Taste the liquor for seasoning: it should be umami-rich and a little sour: adjust if need be. Heap on to a plate and serve. Herbal pork curry soup from Isaan (gaeng om) Often eaten with laap – a meat-based salad usually made with chicken, duck, pork or beef – or grilled meats, this is a herbal, cleansing soup, seasoned with pla raa or fish sauce. Serves 3-4, as part of a meal For the paste (produces 10 portions) 10g long red chillies, soaked then roasted over a flame to bring them to life, then sliced 15g lemongrass stalks, tough outer leaves peeled, using the fragrant inner leaves, finely sliced 2-3 garlic cloves, peeled and chopped 1 makrut lime leaf, smashed into a paste For the soup 300g pork shoulder or belly meat, cut into 1cm thick, bite-size pieces 2 tbsp vegetable oil 750ml chicken or pork stock 1 large handful of lemon basil or Thai basil leaves 1 large bunch dill, cut into 3cm strips, stems included 30ml fish sauce/pla raa if you can find it A squeeze of lemon or lime 1 Grind the paste ingredients finely in a pestle and mortar in the order listed. 2 Rub the paste into the meat and, in a large wok or saucepan, fry on a low heat in the oil until fragrant, about 10-15 minutes. Be careful not to let it burn. 3 Add the stock and simmer until it has thickened to the consistency of minestrone. It should have reddish oily slick on the surface. 4 Remove from the heat, add the basil and dill, stir in the fish sauce or pla raa in small quantities and taste as you go. 5 Squeeze in the lemon or lime, stir and taste. It should be fragrant, and have a balance of spicy and sour and slightly salty. 6 Pour the curry into a large bowl and serve with unseasoned steamed Thai jasmine rice. Ben Chapman is a chef and founder of Kiln and Smoking Goat Thai restaurants in London; @Kilnsoho and @SmokingGoatSoho

The re-release of Blue Velvet this week serves as a reminder of how stylish it was – perhaps a strange notion for a film in which Dennis Hopper wearing a gas mask is it's most enduring, see-it-when-you-close-your-eyes image. But, as with all the best David Lynch productions, it's the tension between a best-face-forward American glamour and a dark, stay-with-you horror that makes it so compelling, even 30 years after it was first screened. The opening shot of a white picket fence, blue sky and bed of roses is followed by the camera burying under the flowerbed to find an ear crawling with ants: the two sides of American suburbia for all to see. Isabella Rossellini's blue velvet floorlength gown, red lipstick and big hair is the most iconic look of the film, of course, worthy of a costume party, or Lana Del Rey video. At home in her claustrophobic flat, she's a fantasy femme fatale, whether in bed with Kyle MacLachlan's super-square Jeffrey Beaumont or abused by Dennis Hopper's terrifying Frank. Transformed to a nightclub singer, in sequinned strappy slip dress, she's another image of seduction. This dangerous, 40s-style glamour contrasts starkly with the strictly-daytime-hours, 50s wholesomeness of Beaumont. Blue Velvet introduced two frequent Lynch collaborators – MacLachlan and Laura Dern, who plays Sandy, the daughter of the detective out to discover who the ear belongs to. Both exist in a kind of Norman Rockwell painting – one of diners, old-fashioned fire trucks and aforementioned picket fences. They have the look to match – pretty floral dresses and ponytails for Dern, and khakis and freshly parted hair for MacLachlan. Expect more of the same in the new series of Twin Peaks planned for next year. Clothes spell out the dark and light in Blue Velvet – and how one can't exist without the other. Lynch's costume designer, Patricia Norris, who died last year, was responsible for this contrast, and they worked closely together. "On Blue Velvet, we collaborated on the sets and things like that," said Lynch. "We'd talk about colour, where things were going and what was happening, the feeling and the mood." It all combines to make Blue Velvet's look – beguiling, horrible, beautiful and haunting – feel completely unique, even now. As Beaumont says, it's a strange world, with strange style. Time to get lost in it all over again.

Just weeks after it was announced that art history A-level was to be dropped – an act described by the historian Simon Schama as "a big dull axe wielded by cultural pygmies" – the government has said that the qualification will be saved after all. An array of leading figures from the art world, including artists Anish Kapoor, Jeremy Deller and Cornelia Parker, as well as the Tate gallery's director, Nicholas Serota, lined up to offer warm words welcoming Thursday's reprieve. "[It is] a huge relief to hear this news," said Kapoor. "Art and art history are the study of what inspires and guides the poetic in us. How could we imagine an education without them?" "A good day for art and culture," said Deller, who has said that the subject was his favourite A-level. "Art history is the study of power, politics, identity and humanity. It makes perfect sense to keep the exam." "As a working-class girl, receiving free school dinners, I studied art history," said Parker. "It has hugely enriched my life and career, and hopefully those of countless students I passed the knowledge on to, during the 15 years I spent teaching at art school. Now more than ever, as we face Brexit, we have to fully understand what our cultural capital is and how we can best use it. We should be widening our cultural knowledge, not shrinking it." Dr Gabriele Finaldi, director of the National Gallery, said: "The arts are one of the great strengths of the UK and I am pleased that A-level provision in art history will not be interrupted for students starting sixth form in 2017. The National Gallery is keen to work with schools that already offer, or are thinking of introducing, the history of art in their teaching." And from Charles Saumarez Smith, secretary and chief executive of the Royal Academy: "On behalf of the Royal Academy of Arts and the royal academicians, we are delighted that the art history A-level exam has been saved. Art history teaches rigorous analytical skills and requires students to engage not only with art but with history, literature, politics, languages and the sciences." There was somewhat less excitement about the news that the statistics A-level – also due for the chop, but without the high-profile fan base – will also be retained. What's more, archaeology A-level – also due to be scrapped – remains dead and buried, despite the best efforts of Tony Robinson, wearing his Time Team hat. The schools standards minister, Nick Gibb, announced in a written ministerial statement that new A-levels in art history and statistics are being developed by the Pearson exam board for teaching from next September. (Of archaeology, there was no mention.) "We believe there is value in having a broad range of high-quality choices available to A-level students, and our intention has always been that there should continue to be A-levels available in these two subjects," said the minister. "I am therefore pleased that the Pearson exam board has confirmed that it intends to develop new AS and A-levels in statistics and a new A-level in history of art for teaching from September 2017." Rod Bristow, president of Pearson in the UK, added: "The response from the public, from teachers and from young people shows many have a real passion for these subjects. We're happy to help make sure they remain available." Pearson's intervention follows widespread outrage across the art world and education sector when it emerged in October that AQA, the last exam board in England offering art history A-level, would be dropping the subject from 2018. There has been a low uptake – this summer just 839 students sat the A-level exam, which is only offered in a handful of state schools but is more widely available in the private sector. AQA, which had been trying to draw up a new specification as part of the government's revised qualifications, pulled out saying there were too many difficulties establishing grade boundaries and finding examiners with enough experience. In response, a star-studded campaign to save the threatened A-level, led by the Association of Art Historians with the support of the mighty Courtauld Institute of Art, the University of York, the National Gallery, Tate and the Royal Academy of Arts, was mobilised attracting enormous coverage. Even a former education secretary Michael Gove, whom some have blamed for the threat to the art history A-level, rushed to its defence (and his own) on Twitter. He said its demise was nothing to do with his drive to improve rigour in qualifications; if properly taught, art history "stretches minds and expands sympathies," he said. Late on Thursday, as news of art history's reprieve filtered through, a crestfallen Mike Heyworth, director of the Council for British Archaeology, could not hide his disappointment. "I don't fully understand their reasoning as to why they've taken on these subjects but not archaeology. We think there's a very strong case." Uptake of archaeology is even smaller than that of art history at A-level. Nevertheless campaigners on its behalf have collected 12,000 signatures calling for it to be given a stay of execution and Heyworth hopes to have a meeting with Pearson to discuss options. And archaeology's chief cheerleader, Tony Robinson, is certainly not ready to give up the fight yet. "Venceremos!" he tweeted defiantly. Jeremy Deller on his art history A-level I studied art history as an extra A-level – my other subjects were English, economics and history. Art history was my favourite. It was a bit of a godsend. It wasn't studied by many people at my school. There were four students in my class and one of the other students is now the director of the National Gallery (Dr Gabriele Finaldi). The study of art history is the study of humanity. As a subject it was distinctive taught in a different way – a discipline that was about looking at things, rather than just rote learning of dates and quotations. It was more subjective and there was a lot more enjoyment in it because of that. It was a lot more grownup. It's given me a lot. I didn't do art at school. We had an art department but I didn't study art. This was my opportunity to get as close to art as possible without actually making it. It's a subject that teaches you about the way ideas travel around the world. On me, at least, it has a positive, civilising influence. Saving the art history A-level is a start but there's a general narrowing of opportunity in the curriculum that cannot be a good thing. It's something you would have expected 100 years ago – not now. We need to push for these other subjects to survive. Archaeology [which has also fallen under the axe in the A-level curriculum, with no reprieve as yet] has never been more popular in terms of its profile in TV shows and interest in personal history and genealogy. There's a huge hunger for these subjects. Why they should be taken off the curriculum is a mystery. It can only be about money. Jeremy Deller was talking to Sally Weale

Listening to dancehall on the radio, you might easily forget that this is music with a proud political tradition, stretching right back to the times when calypso would mull over contemporary events with the energy of today's rolling news. Gaika, a Brixton vocalist sitting somewhere between MC, crooner and street-corner evangelist, is reigniting it. "Nothing can stop us, no Theresa, no Boris," he ad-libs between songs which sketch out a London teetering on apocalypse – but which still holds the potential for sex and abandon. Warming up the city's famously aloof power-hipsters on a cold Wednesday evening proves difficult, but Gaika's anthems finally win them round after 15 minutes or so. Backed with a laptop-wrangler, and a drum programmer who provides live dub echo with ultra-faint backing vocals, he delivers bracing sermons, with melody dispensed in favour of a rhythmic monotone. Bipolar Sunshine cameos, but he can't match the sheer brimstone weight of Gaika's delivery. He has the iconic, unteachable magnetism of a cult leader, and can therefore invest a chorus as banal as Roadside's "under the streetlight" with intense drama merely by repeating it. On Buta, his sexuality sounds calculating, with erotic demands delivered as if from a throne; but on Bohdy Knows At 90, he's vulnerable, pleading for forgiveness. He closes with 3D, and its announcement of "this is my city, and these are my streets, in a state of emergency" feels appropriate in Corsica Studios, where, over the road, social housing has been bled out of the Heygate estate and replaced with luxury flats. Gaika is a politician, a seducer, a poet and a preacher, and on stage is where his words have the most power.

Metro, the newspaper given away in British cities on weekdays, has climbed to second place in the circulation league by overtaking its stablemate, the Daily Mail. ABC figures show Metro achieved a Monday-to-Friday average of 1,480,187 copies in October, some 171,000 greater than the Mail and about 88,000 below the top-selling Sun. In all three cases, these are weekday figures. If the bumper Saturday sales achieved by the paid-for titles were included, Metro's margin would vanish. But there is no denying its success. It has been achieved because of the boost in distribution following its deal with bus companies. Thousands of copies were available on buses in the mornings around London last month, taking the total up to 896,845 in the capital. That's about the same as the number given away by the London Evening Standard. Clearly, if a free paper is available at the right moment - going into and coming home from work - there remains an appetite for print. Despite Metro's 9% fall in revenues and 12% drop in profits, as reported today by its owner, DMG Media, its £15m profit looks rather healthy compared to many a national title. Advertising, as we all know, has fallen off a cliff this year. The interesting feature of Metro's content in a newspaper landscape dominated by opinion is its reliance on old-fashioned tabloid virtues: brevity, simplicity, readability. It covers the news, but it does so without hectoring. It isn't vulgar. It packs in several short, entertaining items. Sure, there is a lot of trivia and it isn't the least bit intellectually challenging. But Metro doesn't pretend to be anything it isn't. And, as a bonus, the occasional punning front page headlines are often much better than those in its red-top rivals. It cannot be long, given the downward sales trend at the Sun, before Metro becomes the most read morning newspaper in Britain on weekdays. And that, of course, will improve its prospect with advertisers... if there are any left by then with enough faith in newsprint. *In the original posting, it said the figures were unpublished. In fact, they were available on 17 November

The temperatures are dropping fast in the northern hemisphere as December signals the start of the winter months ahead. While we're getting ready for wintry weather, the southern hemisphere will be trying to adapt to the summer heatwaves and plenty of sunshine. So what sort of wildlife will we all discover on our doorsteps? We'd love to see your photos of the December wildlife near you. Share your photos and videos with us and we'll feature our favourites on the Guardian site. You can share your December wildlife photos, videos and stories with us by clicking on the blue 'Contribute' buttons. Or if you're out and about you can look for our assignments in the new Guardian app. GuardianWitness is the home of readers' content on the Guardian. Contribute your video, pictures and stories, and browse news, reviews and creations submitted by others. Posts will be reviewed prior to publication on GuardianWitness, and the best pieces will feature on the Guardian site.

Hello and welcome to this week's Money Talks – a roundup of the week's biggest stories and some things you may have missed. Money news Petrol prices set to rise after Opec deal Government promises to stamp out abuses of new-build ground rent Banks act to stop transfer scams and errors Plans for 'simpler, more modern' UK train fare system to be announced NS&amp;I bond raises hopes of greater savings competition Feature Handcuffed in Waitrose: the innocent man in search of justice In pictures Homes for hermits Consumer champions GWR fails to deliver on the final cost of online special offer rail tickets Calling John Lewis about my Partnership card ... is there anybody out there? Parcel Monkey delivers customs duty bill to Filipino children instead of gift In the spotlight Budget utility provider GB energy has folded. Miles Brignall looks at what happens next for gas and electricity customers. Money deals Get competitive exchange rates and free online currency transfers from moneycorp, providers of the Guardian money transfer service, provided by Moneycorp. Save time and money with the Guardian's annual travel insurance, provided by Voyager.

Members of the armed forces or their families are to receive more generous compensation if they are injured or killed in combat, Michael Fallon has promised. The defence secretary announced the move in an effort to avoid lengthy court actions. Cases brought in recent years have included claims of negligence by the Ministry of Defence in failing to provide proper equipment or came as a result of friendly fire incidents. The MoD has launched a consultation on the proposals, which will require legislation. The consultation is a first step and will look at how the scheme would work as well as trying to find agreement on a definition of combat. Senior military staff want the legislation to provide a clearer definition of the term and give immunity from claims of negligence. They resent judges "second-guessing" military decisions often made at speed in stressful situations and claim the legal actions are negatively affecting operational effectiveness. They have also complained about the "judicialisation of war". The MoD was culpable in both the Iraq and Afghanistan conflicts in failing to provide appropriate equipment for troops on the ground. Fallon said court cases were often costly as well as time-consuming. The compensation would be roughly equal to the kind of payments awarded by the courts, he said. The defence secretary said: "Our armed forces put their lives on the line to keep us safe. This new scheme will mean more generous payments to anyone injured – or the families of those who are killed – in combat. By making these changes we will put more money into compensation and remove the stress of lengthy legal action." As part of these reforms, the MoD will clarify in that the common law principle of combat immunity should apply to deaths or injuries which occur in the course of combat situations. The chief of the defence staff, Sir Stuart Peach, said: "Clarifying combat immunity and offering better compensation will remove the need for legal action and the courts will no longer have to second-guess military decisions. This will allow our armed forces to do their job knowing they, or their families, won't have to go to court for compensation in the case of injury or death in combat." He called on military personnel to contribute to the consultation. Lawyers reacted warily to the announcement, welcoming the prospect of improved payments as a result of death or injury from combat but sceptical about how generous it will turn out to be. Sue Bowler, a partner at Coffin Mew Solicitors, said: "What is not yet clear is whether the new proposals will truly match what can be achieved in the civil courts. Quantifying claims for those who are severely injured is a complex and skilled process. It usually involves expert evidence from a range of professionals to set out the medical prognosis for the future, life expectancy and an individual's needs. "The detail of how it is proposed that this is achieved without legal representation for injured personnel needs to be carefully scrutinised."

Perhaps the most ambitious, compelling and hard-hitting history book published in 2016 came out at the very beginning of the year. The magnum opus of the late David Cesarani, Final Solution: The Fate of the Jews 1933-1949 (Macmillan) is an attempt to bring the results of an outpouring of scholarship from the past three decades to a wider audience. But it is much more than a simple work of synthesis. Cesarani's book is also a daring act of revisionism. The author's own exemplary contribution to the world of Holocaust memorialisation gives force to his argument that commemoration is not the best route to understanding such a complex, multifaceted event. Cesarani's combination of clarity and nuance allows him to make good on a startling claim: "Unlike most previous narratives, this account contests whether Nazi anti-Jewish policy was systematic, consistent or even premeditated." The effects of this tragedy of unforeseen consequences transformed individuals and families all over Europe. The human rights lawyer Philippe Sands takes up the crisscrossing strands of four of these stories as they intersected in the city of Lviv in Baillie Gifford prize-winning East West Street: On the Origins of Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity (Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson). Sands's book is partly a family memoir, written with urgency and sensitivity, but its range is much wider, following the story of the men who introduced the two concepts quoted in his subtitle, genocide and crimes against humanity, as well as one of the perpetrators brought to justice at Nuremberg, Hans Frank. The book is an extraordinary work of research and evocative empathy, in which consciousness of present effects is never allowed to trump the complexities of the past. A third book on the second world war, Norman Ohler's Blitzed: Drugs in Nazi Germany (translated by Shaun Whiteside, Allen Lane) cannot, in good conscience, be recommended without something of a health warning. Ohler is a German novelist whose approach to history can be rather dizzying by comparison with his professional contemporaries. And in telling the story of the Nazis' (and Hitler's own) addiction to artificial stimulants, especially methamphetamine, he is not afraid of making bold, possibly overblown statements. He describes the tablet prescribed to so many Germans, for example, as "National Socialism in pill form", and interprets Hitler's doctor's notes to show the maximum possible use of such drugs. While he is careful to argue that neither Hitler himself nor the German population at large can possibly be exonerated on the grounds of their mind-altering habits, it has been suggested that the book's popularity in Germany may have something to do with that very interpretation. But, for his description of the effects of drug consumption on the course of blitzkrieg alone, the book is well worth reading, even if with a sceptical eye. Conquest comes in many forms, and Jon Wilson's polemical India Conquered: Britain's Raj and the Chaos of Empire (Simon &amp; Schuster) is a forceful reminder that Britain has its own messy past to come to terms with. Wilson junks any notion of a "civilising mission" early, but another casualty of his account is an impression of the Raj as a "stable and authoritative regime". Wilson's narrative focuses as much on those Indians the British tried to rule over, with varying degrees of success, as it does on the "imperial servants" themselves. He delves into every aspect of Indian life, from law to religion, the economy to education, to show how the interaction between rulers and ruled played out in unexpected and often calamitous ways. Overshadowing it all, despite the best efforts to imply the opposite, was "the perennial British sense of danger", to which they responded by making a "fearful effort to destroy any centres of authority in India that displayed the smallest flickers of independence". Two 19th-century trials from opposite ends of the social spectrum were the inspiration for a contrasting pair of histories this year. The first is Elizabeth Foyster's account of the bizarre case of the third Earl of Portsmouth, whose family attempted in 1823 to have him declared insane, and thus prevent him from running his own estate. It didn't help the earl's cause that he appeared to have declared himself the "King of Hampshire". When questioned about that at the trial, he tried to explain that "he was a sort of king". He further admitted that he had ordered a throne, and that he expected to be seated on it to "receive the congratulations of his friends on his return". The Trials of the King of Hampshire (Oneworld) is a well-informed, sympathetic portrayal of an extraordinary world. The second trial is an altogether grimmer affair. Robert and Nathaniel Coombes were accused of stabbing their mother at their house in Plaistow while their father was away at sea, and calmly going about their business until her rotting corpse was discovered days later in her bedroom. Not the least shocking of the details of the case at the time was the fact that the boys had made barely any attempt to conceal what had happened. On the two days after the murder, they attended Lord's to watch WG Grace compile a patient century for the Gentlemen against the Players. Kate Summerscale brings the same painstaking intensity to her description of the case and its aftermath in The Wicked Boy (Bloomsbury) as she did to her bestselling The Suspicions of Mr Whicher. Summerscale's signature virtue is her attention to detail, crucial in any mystery, but here the question hanging over the case is not whodunit, but why. In following Robert's story to Broadmoor and beyond, she gives all the participants back their humanity. Historians, like journalists, tend to focus on misfortune, but there was some light among the shade. A perfect example is Adrian Tinniswood's The Long Weekend: Life in the English Country House between the Wars (Jonathan Cape), which tells an unexpectedly upbeat story of a brief revival in the fortunes of this British institution. Those who were not born into it could simply "buy themselves a piece of the past". Wittily written and beautifully illustrated, Tinniswood's book recreates a world far more peculiar, but at times rather more enviable, than any fictional version. Save at least 30% on this year's critics' choices when you buy at the Guardian Bookshop. Visit bookshop.theguardian.com or call 0330 333 6846. Support the Guardian and its journalism with every book you buy this Christmas. *Free UK p&amp;p for online orders over £10. Minimum £1.99 p&amp;p applies to telephone orders. Best book lists of 2016 Best fiction Best crime and thrillers Best science fiction and fantasy

Here is this week's playlist – songs picked by reader Marco den Ouden (who runs the Marconium website) from your suggestions after last week's callout. Read more about how our weekly readers recommend series works at the end of the piece. Iron is the most abundant element in the Earth's crust. Not surprisingly then, it has been used as an industrial metal since ancient times. But pure iron is a soft metal ... in practice, it is almost always mixed with carbon to produce steel. Although knife-like implements date back at least 2.5m years, it wasn't until the bronze age that knives were forged from metal, and mass production of swords to equip armies started in the 13th century BC. Tenpole Tudor sing this weapon's praises and begin our playlist with Swords of a Thousand Men: "Hoorah, Hoorah, Hoorah, Yea!" Bronze horseshoes have been dated from 400BC and the first ones incorporating iron date from ancient Rome. It was apparently when a blacksmith became archbishop of Canterbury in the 10th century that they acquired cultural significance as talismans of good luck. Caracol's Horseshoe Woman personifies that. Steel production was commercialised with the invention of the Bessemer process in the 1850s and further developed with the open-hearth furnace in the 1860s – leading directly to the second industrial revolution. The development of steel rails spurred the growth of the modern railroad; in those early days, track was laid by hand and the prowess of steel-driving men such as John Henry was celebrated in song. Several versions of this classic were suggested. I liked the one by Harry Belafonte. The romance of the rail had locomotives fondly called "iron horses" and singers such as Arlo Guthrie have eulogised rail in song: "The sons of Pullman porters and the sons of engineers ride their fathers' magic carpets made of steel" is from Guthrie's City of New Orleans. Modern steel production also brought the production of modern guns. A band appropriately called the Steeldrivers ask whether this weapon really deserves its sobriquet of Peacemaker. Sung from the point of view of the gun, it laments that "I coulda' been a hammer or a railroad spike. I coulda' been a train rollin' through the night." But until the "lion lays down with the lamb, I'm a cool 3lbs of cold blue steel. I shoot even deader than the way I feel." Indeed, as long as there are those like Blondie's gang plotting the heist of an armoured car ("25 tons of hardened steel"), guns remain a necessity to keep the peace. The Hardest Part of their plan is figuring out how to get to the "big man of steel behind the steering wheel". The skyscraper was another revolution propelled by modern steel production. In New York, the men of the high steel were a special breed. In Steel Monkey, Jethro Tull sings the praises of these fearless men. With the advent of the second world war, men went off to fight and women were needed to work in the factories, building ships and planes. They were celebrated in song and film as the iconic Rosie the Riveter. The Four Vagabonds sing this tribute to the feminist icon. After the war, a Swiss engineer revolutionised the production process. Instead of blowing air through pig iron to create steel, he blew pure oxygen. This simple change reduced capital costs and smelting time, increasing labour productivity by a factor of 1,000. And the industrial prowess of Asia grew as China rose from insignificant player to producing over half of all the steel made today. So even as worldwide production tripled in the last 50 years, these changes led to a drastic decline in the west. In the following decades, there were dozens of songs written on the subject, often referencing the staggering decline in employment rates in the industry – and plenty were nominated. They include Big Country's Steeltown, Mischief Brew's Jobs in Steeltown and Bruce Springsteen's history of Youngstown, Ohio, one of the towns hardest hit by the steel employment crisis. The most disturbing song about this era is undoubtedly Pete Atkin's story of a skilled machinist who, discarded after 40 years, maintains his dignity: "The hands on his chest flared more brightly than his name for a Technicolor second as he rolled into the flame." Suicide by blast furnace. The Carnations on the Roof are the flowers on the roof of the car that leads his funeral procession. But rather than end on such a downer, let's note that iron and steel have been and remain symbols of toughness and strength in popular lore. The iron man triathlon ; the man of steel; the iron man. We close with an upbeat reggae number from Bob Marley, who is on the run but vows to be tough as Iron like a Lion in Zion. Note: not all songs appear on the Spotify playlist because some are unavailable on the service. New theme: how to join in The new theme will be announced at 8pm (GMT) on Thursday 1 December. You have until 11pm on 5 December to submit nominations. Here's a reminder of some of the guidelines for RR: If you have a good theme idea, or if you'd like to volunteer to compile a playlist from readers' suggestions and write a blog about it, please email matthew.holmes@theguardian.com. There is a wealth of data on RR, including the songs that are "zedded", at the Marconium. It also tells you the meaning of "zedded", "donds" and other strange words used by RR regulars. Many RR regulars also congregate at the 'Spill blog.

Given the election night coup of a certain blustering, overly confident egomaniac, it might seem like channeling a very masculine idea of success is a good way to get ahead. After all, Donald Trump lurked menacingly over Hillary Clinton on the debate stage, blustered and bragged, and he triumphed. It seems a smart strategy to emulate aggressive masculine behavior if planning a power grab. But writing in the journal Hormones and Behavior, two researchers undermined previous findings that standing in a "power pose" – that is "broad posture, hands on hips, shoulders high and pushed back", or what I would describe as "in the manner of a blustering, bigoted kleptocrat" – has no measurable effect on feelings of emotional or physical strength. Previous studies, like one published in 2010, concluded that a person changing his or her natural posture to one more redolent of a proud peacock would raise cortisol and testosterone levels, resulting in dominance over other people. It was a study that shored up these boring and old assumptions about the nature of power: that it's rooted in shows of aggression and masculinity. That it's easier for men to be powerful than women. That women who wish to be in positions in power must downplay their gender, whether they're running for president or working in tech. These assumptions are why many women I know have been told that their chances for success or progress in their careers will be enhanced by working on what's called "executive presence", which seems to be a euphemism to "be more like a man". Something that can be achieved by the way we stand and sit, the way we dress – why not wear a suit? – and even the tones of our voices. Taking this deep-seated assumption that "male" behaviors equate with success farther could lead us to a place, say, that tells us we should regard "locker room talk" not as a sign of an execrable and unacceptable disregard for the rights of women, but as normal and acceptable – just another understandable side effect of testosterone. In an ideal world (which I acknowledge is the one we're not living in), the result of the University of Pennsylvania study would prompt us us to reconsider two things: first, that the importance of recognizing that power and influence can – or should – take many different forms that go far beyond the alpha-male stereotypes. Second, perhaps it's a reminder of the limitations of research that seeks to shore up those stereotypes. Instead of seeking scientific confirmation for our sexist assumptions about human behavior, we should use research to seek ways to change our culture – to make a wider array of behaviors acceptable examples of leadership and power. After all, that's good for business.

African Americans helped to build Venice a century ago, gifting Los Angeles a coastal resort, but were banned from owning homes along the boardwalk and canals, which were reserved for white folk. Instead a one-square-mile cluster of streets a mile inland, away from tourist view, was set aside for black residents. It was called Oakwood and became a tight-knit community with vibrant street life, neighbours saluting each other from porches. Its nickname, Ghost Town, possibly alluded to life in the shadows. It was one of the only enclaves for blacks, and later Latinos, close to the ocean on the entire US west coast. These days Ghost Town has a new meaning. "All the people that used to live here have moved out," said Charles Williamson, 84, a retired clerk. "Took the money and run. Or couldn't afford to live here. Or got harassed out of it." Venice, a chameleon that has been an oil town, bohemian idyll, crumbling ghetto and tourist mecca, is adopting a new guise: tech citadel. Tech-driven gentrification is also transforming San Francisco, Oakland and other California cities but in Venice there is a twist. A police gang injunction is allegedly accelerating the process by hounding black and Latino residents. A drastic measure adopted in 1999 to contain gang violence has endured even though Oakwood is now largely peaceful, with gang members dead, retired or dispersed. The injunction covers parts of adjacent Abbot Kinney Boulevard, a parade of chi-chi boutiques, cafes and restaurants which GQ dubbed the coolest block in America. Members of Oakwood's dwindling population of colour allege police use the injunction's extensive powers to harass them while turning a blind eye to infractions by white arrivals. "We don't feel welcome here. Wrong complexion," said Donald Coulter, 61, a lifelong resident, who was playing dominos with black friends in the park. Another man in his 60s, who declined to be named because he felt targeted by the injunction, said he could be detained just for greeting a friend in the street while whites rode bikes without lights and walked dogs off leashes, trivial-seeming violations that underlined racial inequity. Robin Rudisill, a former neighbourhood council member, shook her head when asked about gentrifiers. "Gentrifuckers," she corrected. Census and city figures show that since 1980 the proportion of black residents has almost halved from 9.6% to 5.4%, a trend probably amplified by the current real estate boom. Soaring property values – Venice is pricier per square foot than Beverly Hills, Bel Air and San Francisco – have tempted many to cash in on properties inherited from parents and grandparents. Some have moved to other parts of LA, others out of California altogether. Jataun Valentine, 79, who lives in a house her grandfather built, said long-term neighbours and the wooden bungalows they called home were vanishing, giving way to high fences and mansions of steel and glass. "The new neighbours are all hiding. You never see them. Everything is like a fortress." Ira Koslow, president of Venice's neighbourhood council, said sellers were just as culpable as the buyers who replaced airy bungalows with "monster" homes. "It's heartbreaking. But it's an economic issue not a race issue. This is capitalism. People who have owned property since forever got a huge bonus." The gang injunction, however, injects an additional factor. A civil court order, it imposes parole-like restrictions on suspected gang members, for instance socialising with other suspected gang members, including relatives. Or wearing colours associated with a gang. Violators can can be charged with contempt and jailed for six months. LA has used such injunctions since the late 1980s when the city became a byword for drive-by shootings. Homicide rates in LA County have since plunged from 2,589 in 1992 to 649 last year, and LA is now one of the US's safest metropolises. But the injunctions endure. The American Civil Liberties Union filed a federal lawsuit last month to stop the enforcement of 46 separate injunctions against approximately 10,000 people covering 75 square miles, or 15%, of LA. The suit complained authorities often obtained an injunction against a gang, not individuals, but that police were then free to slap restrictions on anyone. "Those who have been on the injunction for decades feel like they're under constant scrutiny. It's used as a tool of harassment," said Catherine Wagner, an ACLU attorney who specialises in policing in southern California. Melvin Hayward, a gang-prevention activist with the Helper Foundation, called the Venice injunction obsolete and unjust. "We call it blanket suppression." Affected people could not leave home together, even if related, he said. The harassment fuelled gentrification, Hayward said. "Definitely a connection. You're seeing black and brown being targeted." Josh Green, of the not-for-profit Urban Peace Institute, cited one man, out from jail, who was returning home from his job as a security guard when police stopped and detained him because his cousin was giving him a lift. He was sent back to prison. "Whether or not it was an original tool of gentrification," Green said, "it became a component. People feel fear about being in their communities so they work very hard to stay out of sight or just move out." The LAPD did not respond to an interview request for this article. Matthew Royce, an architect and neighbourhood council member who has built property in Oakwood, said there was bias against residents of colour but that crime remained an issue. "While living in Oakwood I heard shooting several times. Pop pop pop." A hooded man shot and killed a traffic worker in August. For Mark Ryavec, head of the Venice Stakeholders Association, the notion that police act as gentrification agents is "a bunch of radical bullshit". Residents, he said, were cashing in on soaring property values and resettling in comfortable homes in cheaper areas. "A large population of black Americans who may have owned from Abbot Kinney's time voluntarily took their equity and left," he said, referring to the tobacco baron who conceived Venice. Oakwood's transformation unfolds largely unseen by the 150,000 tourists who throng the carnivalesque boardwalk of buskers, drum circles, painters, bodybuilders and exhibitionists every weekend. Guests at the Airbnb properties which now sprinkle Oakwood can see the building blitz but the glass and steel stucco boxes are indistinguishable from the others popping up across Venice. Either from temptation or pressure the slow-motion exodus seems set to continue. The tech cash wave fuelling property prices and a homelessness crisis – hundreds sleep in Venice's doorways and on the beach – is about to become a tsunami. The social media company Snap, which hosts 600 employees across Venice, is expected to debut on the stock market next year with a $25bn valuation. How much longer Oakland's ageing African American population clings on is anyone's guess. Some, like Ricky, 54, a low-income housing resident on disability benefit, who declined to give a last name, are philosophical. Most days he sits on a porch, watching the new buildings go up. "We're getting used to the white folks," he said. "Blacks are moving out all the time. You have to change with the times. That's the way life is."

Seemingly little connects a community in India plagued by toxic water, a looming air pollution crisis in South Africa and a new fracking boom that is pockmarking Australia. And yet there is a common thread: American taxpayer money. Through the US Export-Import Bank, Barack Obama's administration has spent nearly $34bn supporting 70 fossil fuel projects around the world, work by Columbia Journalism School's Energy and Environment Reporting Project and the Guardian has revealed. This unprecedented backing of oil, coal and gas projects is an unexpected footnote to Obama's own climate change legacy. The president has called global warming "terrifying" and helped broker the world's first proper agreement to tackle it, yet his administration has poured money into developments that will push the planet even closer to climate disaster. For people living next to US-funded mines and power stations the impacts are even more starkly immediate. Guardian and Columbia reporters have spent time at American-backed projects in India, South Africa and Australia to document the sickness, upheavals and environmental harm that come with huge dirty fuel developments. In India, we heard complaints about coal ash blowing into villages, contaminated water and respiratory and stomach problems, all linked to a project that has had more than $650m in backing from the Obama administration. In South Africa, another huge project is set to exacerbate existing air pollution problems, deforestation and water shortages. And in Australia, an enormous US-backed gas development is linked to a glut of fracking activity that has divided communities and brought a new wave of industrialization next to the cherished Great Barrier Reef. While Obama can claim the US is the world's leader on climate change – at least until Donald Trump enters the White House – it is also clear that it has become a major funder of fossil fuels that are having a serious impact upon people's lives. This is the unexpected story of how Obama's legacy is playing out overseas. Sasan ultra mega power project, Madhya Pradesh, India by Sonali Prasad A hulking thermal power plant funded by American money shimmers in orange when night settles in India's coal-rich district of Singrauli. A heavy blanket of smog wraps around the industrial district and its residents. Sasan, an ambitious project by Indian energy utility Reliance Power, consumes coal incessantly from a nearby mine in the promise of lighting the homes of almost 300 million people in the country. But since it began operating in 2012, the project has been caught in a storm of health and safety violations, environmental concerns and land disputes. In 2010, Sasan was handed a $650m export finance loan by the US Export-Import Bank (Ex-Im), a taxpayer-funded branch of the federal government that ostensibly exists to support American jobs and contribute to the US Treasury. The Sasan project was initially rejected by the bank for financing because of the extremely high carbon emissions from the coal-powered plant. However, Reliance reapplied for the loan under tighter emission guidelines, promising to "offset" 26.4m tonnes of annual carbon dioxide emissions produced by the plant through renewable power projects. Ex-Im Bank approved the loan to facilitate exports of goods and services from the US, insisting on environmental and safety guidelines for the plant's sustainable development. However, over the course of five years, residents and activists in Singrauli concerns about the project have grown. Ramakali, 30, dressed in a vibrant sari with a thick smear of vermillion on her forehead, bent over a murky green well that was brimming to the top. The towers of Reliance Power stood tall behind her, the lettering on the chimneys within sight of her mud-and-brick home in the village of Harrahawa. Flies and insects flitted in the well water. "The water has started to taste funny," she said. "I have been struggling with strong pains in my stomach ever since they started dumping their trash into our groundwater." She pointed to the residual ash dumpsite of the Sasan plant, which is only a couple of metres from her doorstep. On a hot day, one can see ash dust blowing up from the ash pond in the direction of nearby villages surrounding the plant. The locals complain that ash from the enclosed reservoir is settling into the surface water of nearby regions, causing the wells to fill up to the top with impure water. "We put in a request for a handpump to the company but we never heard back," Ramakali said, shaking her head. "They do nothing. We have complained countless number of times." The national green tribunal, a court that hears environmental cases in India, released a report by a committee of environmental experts in August 2015, stating that the groundwater in Harrahawa next to the plant had high levels of mercury in it. Excess mercury in drinking water has been medically linked to severe nervous disorders and birth defects. Sasan was not exclusively identified as a source of contamination in the report, but the experts are certain that it's linked to Sasan and the other big thermal plants in the region. Two other government agencies determined Sasan's mining waste was illegally overflowing into surrounding forest and farmlands, and that the company had failed to restore the green space lost due to the plant's construction. Toxic coal dust was also found to have settled in the fields located next to the mines. The Singrauli industrial cluster has been dotted with several giant thermal plants and coalmines since the 1980s, Sasan being the most recent addition to the country's coal hub. In January 2010, the Indian ministry of environment and forests declared Singrauli a critically polluted area. "When Reliance was planning to set up a plant in Singrauli, they knew that area already had severe poisoning and massive industrial pollution issues," said Ashwani Kumar Dubey, a lawyer who has repeatedly taken on the coal industry. "Yet, they went ahead and set up their plant. They are adding to the damage, and not doing anything to control it." Reliance's coalmine at Moher and its dumpsite are only a short distance away from the thermal power plant. The coal is transported into the power plant through a 14km long, blue, snake-like conveyor belt, saving Reliance Power the overhead costs of railroad transportation. Devnarayan Sahu, 40, lives with his family and a herd of cattle in a village cluster called Amlohri, within 50 metres of Sasan's overflowing dumpsite. The thud of mine blasting echoes in the background and Narayan's house quivers a little. "We've become used to the tremors," he said. Narayan walked over to his backyard, and pointed to the bulldozers dropping boulders from atop the mounds of toxic mining waste. "Look at how those stones are rolling into my farm and home," he said. "When it rained a couple of days ago, we were flooded with their rubble." A layer of grey coal dust has settled on his impoverished eggplant and tomato farm, his main source of livelihood. "If I don't water them continuously to get rid of the toxic dust, the crop will not flower," he said, wiping off dust from a pod with his fingers. The industrial pollution is taking a toll on Narayan and his family. Difficulties in breathing, stomach aches and joint pains are common. "When we cough in the morning, we see dust in our sputum," he said. "The little that we earn is now going into medical treatments." "Asthma, allergies and bronchitis are prevalent here because of the air pollution, especially in children belonging to clusters around the ash dams, mines and thermal power plants," said Dr Kalpana Ravi, a paediatrician at the local district hospital in Waidhan. Narayan has been pleading with Reliance to remedy the situation for years, but nothing has happened. "Many officials have come and inspected the place," he said. "They come and go, but do nothing. Reliance says they don't need our land as of yet. We can see the big boulders falling. Like many others who have abandoned their homes for the fear of their lives, they want us also to eventually get scared and move away on our own." Families settled almost directly underneath the noisy conveyor belt that brings coal to the plant have a similar tale to tell. "I don't know what will happen sooner: will we go deaf first due to the constant and unbearable rattling over our rooftops, or will we choke on the coal dust falling from the belt," said Sukhlal Panika, who lives under a section of the conveyor belt with his aged mother. Reliance only acquired a part of his farmland for the belt, leaving his house and well exposed to the pollution caused by coal transportation. Sasan has also been hit by reports of accidents, harassment, fatalities and injuries. In February 2015, Ex-Im's chairman, Fred Hochberg, criticized the "poor" safety practices at the Sasan project in a letter to Reliance. Hochberg stated: "the number of all fatalities at the integrated Project is now 19 – which is both tragic and absolutely unacceptable." The chairman's letter said "the alarming number of injuries and fatalities must come to an end" and that "rather than improving, the situation appears to be deteriorating". The police confirmed that 16 cases relating to the Sasan plant and coalmine have been investigated since 2012, resulting from vehicle accidents, beam and tower deaths and electric shocks. Activist Awadhesh Kumar, who has been speaking to workers in Sasan and surrounding villages, believes the real number is larger. "It's harder to account for the migrant workers who have no family here, and they form a huge chunk of Sasan's labour population. When something happens or someone goes missing, there is no one to question the company for a report or explanation." In response to Ex-Im's letter regarding the incidents, Sasan provided the bank with information on a taskforce comprising middle managers for the purpose of improving safety and training. But the steps taken by Ex-Im to regulate Sasan are too little too late, according to people living around the thermal power plant and the coalmine. "Ex-Im's ground inspection should have been done a long time back, and that too on a regular basis," said Kumar. "A federal agency of the United States of America should hold their financed projects to better and more neutral standards. Development is good, but not at the cost of the environment and the people who give away their everything to make way for such projects." All points in the story have been raised with Reliance officials. They are yet to comment. Liquified natural gas plants, Queensland, Australia by Michael Slezak Alan and Ailsa Smith say setting foot on Curtis Island is like stepping back in history. The world-heritage-listed tropical island where they live sits just off the coast of Gladstone in Queensland, Australia, right under the Tropic of Capricorn. "It's a quiet little community here. You slip back 25 years in time," said Alan. The couple own a small grocery store and bed-and-breakfast. It's the only business in the only village on the island, which is home to just 30 permanent residents. But South End has a new neighbour that makes itself known at night, illuminating the clouds with its startlingly bright lights, and occasionally sending flames into the sky. Since 2010, amid a storm of controversy that extended from Australia to the US, Curtis Island's 30 residents have been joined by three giant gas liquefaction plants, with a fourth on the way. When complete, they will propel Australia to become the world's biggest exporter of liquefied natural gas (LNG), overtaking Qatar. Their development has allowed a controversial fracking boom in Queensland, where about 6,000 coal seam gas wells have been drilled to deliver gas to be liquefied at the plants. Two of the three plants – APLNG and QCLNG – have been backed by a $4.7bn loan from the US Export-Import Bank. Once operational, these developments will produce about 11.3m tonnes of carbon dioxide each year – and this figure will be much higher if methane emissions that leak from the wells aren't controlled. Those estimates ignore the carbon emissions that will be produced when the gas exported from Curtis Island is burned. The two US-funded plants will produce up to 17.5m tonnes of liquid natural gas each year. When burned, that will pump about 50m tonnes of CO2 into the atmosphere – roughly equivalent to the annual output of Sweden. Sitting and having a beer at Capricorn Lodge, another of the island's residents, Michael Radcliffe, says he isn't bothered by the LNG plants, but expressed some concern about smoke produced when the plants burn some of their gases in large flares. "There's a lot of black stuff that comes out," Radcliffe said. A week earlier there were a lot of flares that produced a lot of black smoke, he said. "I thought there was a bushfire or something going on." From the top of Ship Hill, it's clear why the locals are interested to see the plants at sundown. As the sun sets, thousands of lights on the gas plants light up. The bushland between the hill and the plants is thick, but through the trees the sight of the huge plants – and the contrast they make with the rest of the island – is astounding. The plants produce a loud hum, a bit like the sound of a giant refrigerator – which is almost exactly what an LNG plant is. To allow ships to dock to collect the liquified gas, the Queensland government conducted a huge dredging operation in the harbour. Around 25m cubic metres of earth have been scooped up from the harbour floor, with the Australian government giving approval for a further 19m cubic meters to be dug up. Some was simply dumped in the Coral Sea and the rest was put behind an 8km "bund wall" and used to reclaim land right opposite Curtis Island – a measure intended to stop the dredge spoil from smothering the delicate ecosystems of the Great Barrier Reef. The wall failed, the dredge spoil leaked through it, and spread through the Great Barrier Reef world heritage area. Satellite analysis showed the plumes of mud that spread through the water stretched for 35km into the Coral Sea, which would have degraded seagrass meadows that support endangered dugongs. As the dredging started, fishermen reported an outbreak of disease among marine life, which scientists said could have been caused by metals on the seafloor that were released into the water. In an unusually forthright step, the International Union for Conservation of Nature, which advises the UN's world heritage committee on scientific matters, called for the LNG developments to be halted. Trevor Falzon used to catch fish in Gladstone Harbour, home to one of the largest ports in the world. He was the lead plaintiff in an unsuccessful case brought by 51 fishermen against the Gladstone Ports Corporation over the dredging. The development meant they lost an area that they used to fish in. And the dredging meant the nets they used in shallow water weren't suitable in the new deep water, but the case was thrown out. "Now I have to sell everything – my house is on the market," Falzon said, sitting among packing boxes in his house on the outskirts of Gladstone. Kusile power station, Mpumalanga, South Africa by Jason Burke As the sun dips across the rolling hills of South Africa's eastern Mpumalanga province the lights come on high above the valley's wetlands, soaring columns and cranes, black against the reddening sky. The vast structure on the ridge is clearly visible from the small settlement of Arbor, a huddle of shacks and huts on a narrow strip of land between a coalmine and railway sidings 10 kilometres from Kusile. "I watch it growing and I wonder what it will bring. It might mean jobs and development, or maybe sickness and drought. I don't know. So I hope and pray it will make things better, not worse," said Sibongile Sibeko, 41, a mother of five children in Arbor. The structure Sibeko can see is what has so far been built of Kusile, which will be among the 10 biggest coal-fired power stations in the world, and is already one of the most controversial. The project is part-funded by the US government, having received a loan of $805m from the US Export-Import Bank in 2011 after Eskom chose a US company to play a key engineering role, creating hundreds of jobs for American specialists. The money was crucial to the $8.4bn project, say campaigners. "Kusile would have been very challenging to proceed with if the money from the Export-Import Bank had not come through," said Melita Steele of Greenpeace. Delayed by decades and wildly over budget, Kusile is emblematic of a development model increasingly seen as outdated. The days of vast mega-projects with enormous financial, social and environmental costs, as well as the potential to transform economies, are over, some experts say. Instead, smaller and cheaper projects can bring change as effectively, supplying energy and other needs with minimal impact. "The only hope for us is renewable energy. That would mean less destruction, less landgrabbing or none at all and no need for coal and water," said Matthews Hlabane, of the South African Green Revolutionary Council, a local NGO. But the loan was also very expensive. As local currency has lost value against the dollar the cost of repayments has soared. The project is immense. When completed Kusile will consist of six units with the ability to generate 4,800MW, making it significantly bigger than any power station in the US except the hydroelectric Grand Coulee dam in Washington. Defenders say Kusile has been designed with advanced technology that will minimise its environmental impact, such as scrubbers to control sulphur dioxide and filters to reduce emissions of dangerous particulates. The plant will use an air cooling system to help conserve water and is designed so equipment to capture carbon emissions can be fitted in the future. The plan to build Kusile, and its twin Medupi, in Limpopo province, dates back to the immediate aftermath of the repressive racist apartheid regime. Conceived as energy providers for a growing and free nation, they were seen as powerful statements of a new commitment to a modern economy that would improve the lives of all South Africa's citizens. Kusile means "New Dawn" in Zulu, a local language. In recent years, South Africa has been hit by severe power shortages, leading to rolling outages. Though these have now eased, in part due to renewable energy sources supplementing supply, local officials say that Kusile is still essential to ensure the developing nation's energy security for decades to come. But circumstances – and attitudes – have changed since the original decision was taken to build the vast plants. "Medupi and Kusile are examples of large-scale mega infrastructure projects that countries see as the basis of a development model that started after World War II. Projects this large are seen as transformational. They cost a lot. They employ a lot of people. Their effects are meant to be big. But it's a model that doesn't make much sense now," Janet Redman, director of the climate programme at the Institute for Policy Studies in Washington DC said earlier this year. "Using coal for energy is hugely expensive, outdated, against international trends and is financially and environmental irresponsible," said Robyn Hugo of the Centre for Environmental Rights, a local NGO. According to one estimate the total cost of the twin projects of Kusile and Medupi could eventually top $32bn. Medupi relies in part on a $500m loan from the African Development Bank and also $3bn from the World Bank, approved in 2010. Both projects have been plagued by allegations of corruption. All concerned deny any wrongdoing. Kusile alone is projected to emit an estimated 36.8m tonnes of CO2-equivalent, according to Eskom's own estimates. With Medupi, it will add 16% to South Africa's current CO2 emission levels. The impact on local towns and villages will be immense. It is not simply the power station itself, and the air pollution and traffic it will generate, but the vast coalmining operations needed to provide the estimated 17m tonnes of coal Kusile will require each year. Farmland and wetlands will disappear as new open-cast and underground mines are opened or, in some cases, reopened. Tens of thousands of impoverished labourers will swell some settlements. Others will have to be entirely shifted to new locations. Roads will be built, bringing access and jobs for some, but exacerbating environmental consequences. This is far from pristine farmland or wilderness, however. Central Mpumalanga is the site of a dozen power stations and a huge mining industry. One of the major complaints of local communities is that local men are rarely hired by companies for anything but casual labour because already acute air pollution has, they claim, damaged their lungs. Mpumalanga is already designated as a zone of acute air pollution in South Africa. Locals complain of sinus infections, headaches and coughing children. Sibongile Sibeko, who has lived in the community of Arbor all her life said her three daughters and two sons had all suffered respiratory illnesses which local doctors blamed on "dust". She lives in a small three-roomed hut only a few metres from waste spoil marking the boundary of a major mine, operational for around five years. The Kendal power station, Africa's biggest, is close by. It has been operational since the early 1980s, is coal-fired and has a capacity of more than 4,000MW. "The doctor saw my little one – my four-year-old – recently. He said his chest was closing because of the dust," Sibeko said. Then there is water. Among the impacts of Kusile will be the destruction of important wetlands around the plant. Massive infrastructure including pipelines and canals has been constructed to bring water for cooling to Kusile, but the plans were conceived in a period when water was more plentiful. South Africa is currently experiencing its worst drought for 50 years, which some blame on climate change. In all villages around Kusile, there are complaints of lack of water, deforestation and other environmental and social problems, ranging from higher crime levels to overcrowded schools, linked to the influx of workers. "Before the mine came we had wood from forests and water from boreholes, and we grew vegetables in small gardens. We had goats, cows and chickens and there was a white farmer and people here worked on his land. But there are no jobs in farming now and there is no forest and the boreholes are dry or the water is bad, and there is no space for livestock or even our gardens because of all the people who have come," Sibeko said. Another nearby village, cut off from the main highway by a strip of dry grass strewn with cider bottles and rusting cans, is often shaken by the blasting at the nearby mine. "There is a lot of dust here, especially when they are blasting," said Patricia Mabaso, 30. "The old people and the children get diseases from it. Once it was all green round here, now it's a desert." The Energy and Environmental Reporting Project is supported by the Blanchette Hooker Rockefeller Fund, Energy Foundation, Open Society Foundations, Rockefeller Brothers Fund, Rockefeller Family Fund, Lorana Sullivan Foundation and the Tellus Mater Foundation. The funders have no involvement in or influence over the articles produced by project fellows in collaboration with The Guardian.

Venice and Bilbao will remain the only Guggenheim museums in Europe for the foreseeable future after Helsinki finally buried a controversial plan for a striking new shrine to modern and contemporary art on the city's waterfront. After a stormy five-hour meeting lasting into the early hours of Thursday morning, city councillors voted by 53 to 32 to kill off the project, which had been fiercely contested in Finland since it was floated in 2011. Helsinki's deputy mayor, Ritva Viljanen, who had supported the plans for a €150m (£126m) museum on a prime dockside site currently in use as a car park, said the project's proponents would have to accept the decision. "Democracy has spoken, and in no uncertain manner; there can be no ifs or buts," Viljanen told YLE, the state broadcaster. She said she was sorry feelings about the project had run so high, with some backers receiving threats of violence. Ari Lahti, chairman of the Guggenheim Helsinki Support Foundation which spent two years gathering private sponsorship for the scheme, told the broadcaster the project had fallen victim to emotion, not reason. "This was an important project and I continue to believe the museum would have benefited Finland and Helsinki," he said. "But yes, I am afraid that now the whole proposal has pretty much collapsed." The council rejected revised plans by the Paris architects Moreau Kusunoki, whose design was chosen from among 1,700 entrants to an international competition last year. Judges described it as a "fragmented, non-hierarchical, horizontal campus of linked pavilions where art and society can meet and intermingle". The project would have required the city of Helsinki to contribute about €80m of the museum's construction costs, with private donors finding about €66m. The nationalist Finns, one of Finland's three ruling parties, ruled out any possibility of state aid in September. Proponents of the project, who included a consortium of Finnish travel, hotel and tourism businesses such as Finnair and the cruise lines Viking and Eckerö, argued it would revitalise the capital's cultural standing and economy. They pointed to the example of the Frank Gehry-designed Guggenheim Bilbao, which has transformed the fortunes of the Spanish city since its opening in 1997, turning it into a thriving art and architectural destination. Supporters also argued that Finland's proud tradition in design, typified by names such as the architect Alvar Aalto and the fashion house Marimekko, merited a showcase like that offered, for example, by Frank Lloyd Wright's celebrated Guggenheim New York. But objectors said one of the Finnish capital's best locations, facing the presidential palace in the port, would have been handed over to a "McDonald's of art", and many Finns were most concerned about the museum's price tag. The country's economy, hit by the financial crisis, has been struggling since 2010, and popular opinion objected to so much public money being spent on culture at a time when the government was pushing through a multibillion-euro austerity programme. There was also widespread resentment at the fact the US-based Solomon R Guggenheim Foundation planned to charge €18.4m over 20 years to lend its name to the planned new museum. "Unfortunately, it's all become very political," Lahti told the Guardian in September. "If the Guggenheim Helsinki had been mooted before the crisis, I have no doubt that it would have been built by now. But times have changed; the whole situation has changed." However, Osku Pajamaki, a council member from the Social Democrats who had resisted the project, said he was delighted with the vote. "There are no shortcuts to tourism and cultural attractions when the Finnish capital is in question," he said.

I was the only black girl in my year when I started at Lamda (London Academy of Music and Dramatic Art). There were only nine girls out of about 30 students. Now it's changing; now it's about half and half. It's an effort that Lamda is making, which is really lovely to see. I remember feeling very much like I was the only one like me there. I stick out like a sore thumb. I always found I was acting in plays by white people for white people, and having to find my place in that world when I felt I didn't belong there. I always had this fear in the back of my head that the audience would think: "They can't be related." I often got the part of someone who wasn't connected to anyone else, in terms of family. So I hardly got to explore that part of relationships – sisters and mothers and stuff – which put me down a little bit. It's the little tiny things that can really get to you, like hair. Drama school is such a bubble: all the girls are straightening their hair, but your hair's different from everyone else. When you're doing a show, everyonegets their hair done in different styles but mine was an afro, so they'd just put a band on it, or leave it. That's the kind of thing that really can get to you – feeling like the industry isn't quite aware of you yet. The fear of being stereotyped is crippling. It really is crippling. It can affect how you carry yourself throughout the day; how you carry yourself when you meet people after shows. It affects you in terms of confidence, and not knowing how people are going to receive you. If you meet a casting director, it's rare that they will be looking for someone like you for a role that's going to be really defining for your career. I changed a lot during drama school: I grew up a lot and became my own person. But I'm always going to be that girl from east London. In third year I felt quite nervous about the future – as any student would – but also knowing that I'm black. I worried about what roles I'd get, what kind of world I'd be'd entering, and how people would receive me. There wasn't really anyone else to talk to because no one else was in my position. I slowly realised that I was actually in a very good position, because there were so few people like me in drama schools. The world is slowly changing: theatre and TV are trying to incorporate more people from different ethnic backgrounds, so now is actually quite a good time to be here. In a way, it could act to my advantage. When I was growing up, the only role model I can remember having was Halle Berry. People would always say: 'You're the next Halle Berry'. And I thought: 'OK, but surely there's more?' I went to dance school when I was 11. We did musicals and I did a film when I was 14, called Dustbin Baby, which was incredible. I did a lot of stuff – singing, dancing, acting – and I think, subconsciously, I did it because I knew I'd need a lot of skills to get to where I wanted to be. I've been really lucky. I got an agent quite early on in my final year and I'm doing the Shakespeare Trilogy now, with an amazing diverse cast. But I know, and I'm very aware, that not everyone gets that. I know that Lamda and other drama schools are trying to reach out to black and ethnic minority students. They want to make them aware that they can come to drama school if they want to. It's going to be a slow change, but I'm very hopeful. It's hard, but we've got to do it. I'd like to think I'm quite versatile. I can play a girl from Peckham who's involved in gangs – that's the stereotype of someone who looks like me. Then again, I could also play a doctor from a wealthy background. I'm trying to tell myself that whatever comes along, I can do it, even if the part is described as a white girl with blue eyes and blonde hair. It takes a lot of courage to tell yourself that, but you have to just do it and try. It's a daunting experience. But I would encourage anyone who is like me – boys and girls – to know that they have an advantage, as long as they work hard. If you're black or ethnic minority, my parents and many of my friend's parents say you have to work twice or three times as hard to get to the same place as your peers. But don't be too downhearted. The world is changing and we are part of that change. Every graduating year is part of it. Leah graduated from Lamda in July 2016. She is currently performing in the Donmar Shakespeare Trilogy, which runs in London until the 17th of December and will be taking The Tempest to New York in January. Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at@GdnStudents – and become a member to receive exclusive benefits and our weekly newsletter.

What languages should we teach children in schools, and why? The question came to the fore on Monday after the Polish prime minister, Beata Szydło, called on Theresa May to introduce Polish classes in British schools. With 831,000 Poles living in Britain – they make up the largest immigrant group in the UK – introducing the language certainly could help communities feel more integrated. Traditionally in secondary schools in the UK, the most widely taught languages have been French, Spanish and German, according to data from the British Council in collected from 2013 to 2014. In 2010 the government also decided to train 1,000 Mandarin teachers to work in secondary schools in England thanks to China's increasing influence on the global economy. How should we select languages for the curriculum? Should we choose those that are spoken the most in Britain? What languages have been most helpful to you? We asked our readers these questions and this is what they said. Tom Sneddon, Northern Ireland: It's not just about the language but giving people an enjoyable experience It is impossible to predict what languages a child will need as an adult. The range of plausible possibilities is too vast. As such, it's vital that we give children the tools to learn a language – rather than focusing on what language that should be. As a citizen of Northern Ireland, I'm a big supporter of primary schools teaching through the medium of Irish. Not just because it's culturally important, but because it provides vital language-learning skills. Speakers of two languages are not as daunted by a third language as monoglots are by a second. Given the huge range of languages available, I'd plump for the not-immediately-obvious choices of either Dutch or Italian. Both are (I think) fun to speak and easy to learn. It's not about the language itself, but giving young people an enjoyable experience. This means they will want to continue language studies. For me personally, German has proved most useful, though that's in the narrow sphere of its actual application. In a broader sphere of what could be called "personal development" the most valuable language for me has been Hungarian. Learning Hungarian involved learning to see the world through new eyes grammatically speaking. It has a dozen grammatical cases, and a host of entirely unfamiliar conceptualisations of the world. The experience was fantastically interesting, and gave me the confidence to feel that I could learn any language. Amir Mohammed, 19 from Canada: Knowing your national language helps you explore your identity As someone outside the UK, I can offer a different perspective. These are some of the reasons certain languages are more present in schools. They tend to be selected because of things like their cultural value or how easy they are to learn. But I think any of the United Nations languages, as well as German, Portuguese and Japanese are all useful. We live in a global society, after all. A lot of foreign languages will be useful for future employment. I can also vouch for German and Arabic as being rich, interesting and beautiful languages. They are of great cultural value. I agree with the fact Wales makes Welsh compulsory. Knowing the national language of your people helps you explore your own identity and gives you more confidence in who you are. I am still a typical British monoglot, unfortunately. But I hope to become fluent in at least two or three languages when I am older. I am of Pakistani descent and have visited my homeland many times, but my father never spoke to me in Urdu, so I never learned it. But, because all the Pakistani side of my family knows English, me and my siblings never bother to learn it. When I was younger, I held this silly little view that there was no point in learning languages because "everyone speaks English". Now I feel left out when I see my cousins, my father, and my uncles and aunts chatter away in their native tongue and realise what a fool I've been. If I could go back in time and tell my younger self one thing it would be to put some effort into learning Urdu. It is not as spoken as English, but on a personal level I do, and would, value it. Anonymous student, 17, from Kent: The languages should reflect our multicultural communities French and Spanish are important as they are spoken in many countries. But I think there also needs to be an introduction of languages that are widely spoken in England, such as Polish, Chinese dialects and Hindi. This would be good considering our multicultural communities. The best languages I learned were French and Hindu. French helped me learn Spanish, the two are so similar. French is a complicated, so learning it has helped me understand other dialects. I believe that we start learning languages far too late in the UK. The Spanish I was taught in school was shaved down to colours and animals. We need to put more stress on languages in primary school. I also know Hindi, the national language of India. I can use this in my travels. Languages in my opinion are the most difficult, but most effective, way of understanding a foreign culture. Language lessons at GCSE are rubbish to be honest. There's no emphasis on pronunciation or spoken conversations, which is the primary method of getting around in another country. No teacher has ever corrected me with my pronunciation, it's a combination of TV and film that has helped me improve. Katherine, 27 from Surrey: I would love to see the return of classical languages as they help us understand grammar I would advocate any modern languages, but those linked to English (such as German) seem like the obvious choices. Many other languages pose a complexity to English-speakers that may put students off languages for good. What I would love to see is a return to teaching classical languages – they make a brilliant back-up to modern foreign language teaching. They are great because they reinforce grammar and vocabulary learning. I was fortunate enough to do A-levels in German and ancient Greek, as well as AS-level French. I love German-speaking countries and their cultures. I have spent my Erasmus year in Bavaria, and am now doing a PhD in a field related to German studies. Learning German has shaped much of my adult life. My German would not be half of what it is today had I not learned Latin and ancient Greek. Grammar is all the vogue in English teaching, but there's nothing like classics to impart an understanding. I cannot emphasise enough the value of these languages to my education. Ruby, 22, from London: We should teach a broader range of languages to young people Arabic should be taught at a GCSE level to all students, as an optional language, much like French, German, Spanish etc are provided. We have a very large Arabic population in Britain, particularly in West London. This is particularly true in the sixth form where I work. It would be fantastic to see that culture integrated into our education system, as so many of our students speak Arabic at home yet are not encouraged to learn it at school. I found that learning Spanish for seven years during school beneficial, especially in my personal life. However, I would love to see more modern languages introduced. Many schools do not encourage the learning of languages past year 8, which I also feel is a great shame. Luke, 17, from Glasgow: Languages should be taught depending on how helpful they will be for employment The languages that should be taught should be based on where jobs and industry are. This gives people the opportunity to move to a different country for their career. German is useful, for example, as there is a large economy in the automotive industry there. Mandarin is another good language because of China's booming trade and industry. Languages should also be of interest to students learning them. I despised French in all the years that I have been learning it, yet it was forced upon me. I had to take it at school as it was one of the only options. In some schools languages are enforced for the majority of students yet we are not given the option of what language is compulsory. My parents immigrated from Hong Kong to Scotland roughly 23 years ago. I grew up speaking both English and Cantonese. Cantonese has been useful when travelling to Hong Kong visiting family. I also went on an German Exchange trip where my German skill came into use which was helpful when communicating with others. What do you think and why? Share your views in the comments.

Southgate signs off with some warm good wishes for Sky's Nick Collins, and with that he and his two employer reps shuffle off. Understandably, more serious matters consumed a sizeable proportion of that conference, but Southgate set out his stall as much as he felt he could, stressing that Wayne Rooney was still his captain – even if he couldn't always be guaranteed a starting place – but that successor planning was needed, with the team needing to develop more leaders on the pitch. He has no break clause in his contract, a reflection of the FA's confidence in what they see in a 'long-term' project. His commitment to a possession-based pressing game was stressed, and he tried not to dwell too much on the issue of players' boozy high-jinks, unlike some of his questioners. And that's about that. Thanks for following, and stay on the site for more reports and reaction. Bye. Back on the abuse scandal, Martin Glenn is reminded that there have been calls about present-day experiences too. "This is a really serious issue for football and society, and with the FA taking the lead, opening ourselves up, laying bare the decisions we made, and ask for the same from clubs ... that's all that we can do but it's a big thing we can do and the right thing we can do." We must all take it seriously, he adds. Southgate says he wants his teams to have a lot of possession of the ball, but that can't be without a goal threat. I believe we have players who can play a high pressing game, which is the 'sort of mentality' we want to see in England. Asked by the BBC if "pride in the England team is at rock bottom?" Southgate doesn't, really, citing previous failures to even qualify for tournaments, but admits "there is a challenge for us as a team". He's confident in the players' desire, and with so many of the current squad playing Champions League football, it can help. Though he has concerns about players from the next age groups down getting relevant experience. Back to football, Southgate talks of his wider role. I know the things I do and the comments I make will be reported more widely, he says. "In this role there's a need to be a good coach and good teacher, a need to drive and analyse performance, but also to provide leadership." On the U21s, he says there's a group of players who can build on their success in Toulon, he says Marcus Rashford would benefit from tournament football 'but I'm also conscious of his age and physical workload.' Southgate is asked if he heard of abuse stories when he was playing back in the 90s, as the FA seek to move questions on "due to ongoing police enquiries". "I played with one of the players who's recently come forward aand tyhe reality is they haven't been able to speak about that until this moment. And with the benefit of hindsight, you ask what you could have seen. The world has changed from 20 years ago, and what we have now in terms of child protection is completely different, but we mustn't be complacent." Glenn insists the FA is being proactive, not reactive. "We have the power that once we hear of wrongdoing we will deal with it. As and when, and in combination with the police, we will get it done. We are being proactive and taking it seriously." Glenn adds that if there are restrictive contracts at clubs that prevent people talking about actual crimes, then these will be dealt with. The FA chief executive adds that the bravery of those who've come forward should be acknowledged but "can't say" whether there had been a cover-up in the game in the past. "I think within society there is a wider acceptance that it's unacceptable now than it was 20 years ago." Martin Glenn says he will look into the claims that clubs have paid what some call "hush money" to keep cases out of the public eye. "If there's been evidence of a breach of [rules]. subject to due process, we will apply the rules, from top to bottom, regardless of size of club. Football's in a different place today than 20 years ago, and applies child protection much more than it used to." He pledges the FA's 'total commitment' to getting to the bottom of things. If the FA has made errors, we will put our hands up, he says. A question about the abuse scandal now. "The first thing to say is the bravery of the players that have come forward is exceptional." The stories are "heartbreaking". The FA is now taking it extremely seriously, and Southgate is impressed with that. "It would be wrong to say nothing's been done over the years, we know what's happened in the past, and the important thing over the next few weeks is we still investigate what's happened, and as a parent I'm more confident in what we have now [in terms of child protection procedures] than a few years ago." We want to create a culture like the U21s where players are eager to play, he says, and we saw some of that against Scotland and Spain, he adds. Another question about 'socialising'. Did he feel betrayed? Southgate doesn't want to talk about it directly. "The important thing for me is now there's an opportunity to talk about environment and culture around the team ... I'm not disappointed, young people make decisions, I made plenty of poor decisions as a young player, but it's about how you react to that." On the contract, Glenn insists he is happy with it (though Southgate "is a tough negotiator, as it happens"), because "in the hypothetical event" that England flopped in Russia, he's part of a longer term project. Dan Ashworth is asked about the U21 situation, and says the FA 'will go through a process' but have only just confirmed the vacancy. Martin Glenn's up now, saying he's been seriously impressed with Southgate's approach. He's a thinker, he's a doer, but the way he's developed and nurtured the U21 squad has been impressive. "One of the things that doesn't come across is that Gareth has been a captain at every club he's played at so as well as the powers of analysis and thinking he has, he's a proven leader." We mustn't take qualification for granted, insists the new boss. "I've got experience as a player and coach of tournament football ... we need to perform in those pressure moments, and against the very best." Which is why the friendlies against top teams are important. On his contract, Southgate says there's no break clause dependent on qualifying or not. "There is big potential in the squad but a lot of hard work ahead. We have a group of players who over the next three or four years are going to develop a lot." Southgate says his vision is "in the most simple terms, I'd like an England team that excites the public ... and that we're proud of." Southgate says being an England player comes with additional responsibility to playing club football but I don't think laying down the law is necessary for this group of players. There has to be trust and clear guidelines, he says. Asked on Rooney's "socialising", he simply talks of the huge competition for places, and on the back of the four matches he's had he has an opportunity to review how things have gone. "Every aspect of our training has got to work towards having a world-class team" On Rooney: "Wayne Rooney is the England captain," he says firmly. "It's important we develop more leaders. When I played in 1996 there were captains throughout the team – developing leadership, developing resilience is one of the key areas over the next few years." On backroom staff, no announcements yet, but he hopes to name people "soon". Steve Holland's importance is alluded to though. On the subject of a role for Steven Gerrard, he merely says "the door to St George's Park is open". Former players always have a part to play, he says. We start with a Q &amp; A. Nick Collins from Sky asks what excites him most about the job. "It's a great honour, there's huge potential amongst the players, and great expectations come with it. To get the job is an honour and a great moment, but the hard work starts now." Are you ready for everything? "I've had a great insight in the last few weeks on what the job entails, I don't think any job is impossible ... it comes with great responsibility but I'm ready to embrace that." Here he comes, three and a half minutes late. Tsk. The water glasses are full, the energy drinks are placed on the table, the mics are on, the media people are assembled, we're ready to ramble ... While we're waiting for the big unveil, some reading for you: "If Southgate looks the safe choice, this is perhaps because he's also the right choice," reckons Barney Ronay. Read all here: Morning everyone. So here we go again then. Another unveiling. Hopes readjusted, targets recalibrated. What can Gareth Southgate tell us about his aims and dreams over the next four (apparently) years? He takes over with expectations lowered, chests decidedly unpuffed out, and a certain sense of public weariness with even getting enraged about the national team's historic failings. Southgate is a measured and likeable chap, mind, and cannot be as easily categorised/ridiculed as his immediate predecessors, and it is from this blank canvass that we can at least identify some positive things from England's performances under his interim stewardship – as well as the wholly predictable defensive lapses and surrendering of leads. "Getting the job is one thing," he said yesterday. "Now I want to do the job successfully. For me, the hard work starts now." Beginning with today's unveiling ritual. Updates will begin shortly.

Jane Bown is a legendary Observer photographer best-known for her portraits of icons from Beckett to Bjork. Her book Cats is a collection of 100 black and white pictures of felines which reveals the same sympathetic eye and wit as her portraits. She captures the cats sprawling, prowling, lolling, playing, feeding and lounging, with house cats, alley cats, show cats and kittens among her collection. We have ten copies of Jane Bown: Cats to give away and we'd like to see your best photos of felines. Whether they're playing or lounging, share your pictures and stories with us. The closing date for entries is 23:59 on 1 January 2017. Terms and conditions apply and can be found below. Please read: You can only enter ONE image, must be a UK resident and we need you to upload the highest possible resolution of your shot via GuardianWitness. You'll also need to provide a caption on where it was taken, what's happening in the shot, what inspired you to take it etc. You can share your photos by clicking on the blue 'Contribute' buttons. Or if you're out and about you can download the Guardian app and search for 'GuardianWitness assignments'. GuardianWitness is the home of readers' content on the Guardian. Contribute your video, pictures and stories, and browse news, reviews and creations submitted by others. Posts will be reviewed prior to publication on GuardianWitness, and the best pieces will feature on the Guardian site. Jane Bown: Cats is published by Guardian Faber. Click here to order a copy for £11.99 Jane Bown: Cats prize draw: terms and conditions The Jane Bown: Cats prize draw (the "Prize Draw") is open to residents of the UK aged 18 and over. The Prize Draw is not open to employees or agencies of Guardian News &amp; Media Limited ("GNM" or the "Promoter"), their group companies or family members, freelance contributors to GNM, or anyone else connected to the Prize Draw. Entrants into the Prize Draw shall be deemed to have accepted these Terms and Conditions. To enter the Prize Draw you must send in a photo of a cat or cats with a short description via GuardianWitness. You can do this by clicking on the 'Contribute' buttons in the callout or by going to theguardian.com/witness and contributing directly through the assignment page. No purchase is necessary. If you have any questions about how to enter or otherwise in connection with the Prize Draw, please email us at guardian.witness@theguardian.com with "Jane Bown: Cats" in the subject line. Only one entry per person. Entries on behalf of another person will not be accepted and joint submissions are not allowed. You are responsible for the cost (if any) of sending your Prize Draw entry to us. The winners shall be the owner of the GuardianWitness accounts from which the selected winning entries are sent. GNM accepts no responsibility for entries that are lost, delayed, misdirected or incomplete or cannot be delivered or entered for any technical or other reason. Proof of delivery of the entry is not proof of receipt by GNM. The Prize Draw opens at 11:45 on 1 December 2016 and closes at 23:59 on 1 January 2017. Entries received outside this time period will not be considered. There are 10 prizes to be won. Each of the winners will receive a copy of Jane Bown's book 'Jane Bown: Cats'. Only one winner per household. GNM accepts no responsibility for any costs associated with the prize that are not expressly included in the prize. The winners will be selected by way of a random draw from all entries received in accordance with these Terms and Conditions. The draw will take place on or after 1 January 2017. The winners will be notified by email within seven days of the closing date and given details of how to claim their prize. If a winner does not respond to GNM within 14 days of being notified of their win, the winner's prize will be forfeited and GNM shall be entitled to select another winner in accordance with the process described above (and that winner will have to respond to notification of their win within 14 days or else they will also forfeit their prize). If a winner rejects their prize or the entry is invalid or in breach of these terms, the winner's prize will be forfeited and GNM shall be entitled to select another winner. The prize will be sent to the winners within 14 days of receiving a response from the winners. The name and county of the winners can be obtained after 14 days after the closing date by sending a stamped addressed envelope to the following address: GuardianWitness, Guardian News &amp; Media Limited, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. The prize is non-exchangeable, non-transferable and not redeemable for cash or any other prize. GNM reserves the right to substitute the prize with an alternative prize of similar value in the event that the original prize offered is not available. The winners may be required to take part in promotional activity related to the Prize Draw and the winner shall participate in such activity on the Promoter's reasonable request. The winners consent to the use by the Promoter and its related companies, both before and after the closing date of the Prize Draw for an unlimited time, of the winner's voice, image, photograph and name for publicity purposes (in any medium, including still photographs and films, and on the internet, including any websites hosted by the Promoter and its related companies) and in advertising, marketing or promotional material without additional compensation or prior notice and, in entering the Prize Draw, all entrants consent to the same. The Promoter shall use and take care of any personal information you supply to it as described in its privacy policy, a copy of which can be seen at http://www.theguardian.com/help/privacy-policy, and in accordance with data protection legislation. By entering the Prize Draw, you agree to the collection, retention, usage and distribution of your personal information in order to process and contact you about your Prize Draw entry, and for the purposes outlined in paragraph 12 above. GNM accepts no responsibility for any damage, loss, liabilities, injury or disappointment incurred or suffered by you as a result of entering the Prize Draw or accepting the prize. GNM further disclaims liability for any injury or damage to your or any other person's computer relating to or resulting from participation in or downloading any materials in connection with the Prize Draw. Nothing in these Terms and Conditions shall exclude the liability of GNM under law for fraud or fraudulent misrepresentation, or for death or personal injury resulting from its negligence. GNM reserves the right at any time and from time to time to modify or discontinue, temporarily or permanently, this Prize Draw with or without prior notice due to reasons outside its reasonable control (including, without limitation, in the case of anticipated, suspected or actual fraud). The decision of GNM in all matters relating to the Prize Draw is final and no correspondence will be entered into. GNM shall not be liable for any failure to comply with its obligations relating to this Prize Draw where the failure is caused by something outside its reasonable control. Such circumstances shall include, but not be limited to, weather conditions, fire, flood, hurricane, strike, industrial dispute, war, hostilities, political unrest, riots, civil commotion, inevitable accidents, supervening legislation or any other circumstances amounting to force majeure. The Prize Draw and these Terms and Conditions will be governed by English law and entrants to the Prize Draw submit to the exclusive jurisdiction of the English courts. Promoter: Guardian News &amp; Media Limited, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London, N1 9GU.

Mauricio Pochettino has suggested that Harry Kane could become a club legend at Tottenham Hotspur like Steven Gerrard at Liverpool or John Terry at Chelsea after seeing him sign a new contract at the club until 2022 which will pay him, when the add-ons are factored in, more than £100,000-a-week. Tottenham have pressed on with their policy of rewarding the squad's key performers with longer and more lucrative deals, and the central defender, Jan Vertonghen, is poised to become the next of them to sign. The club are also keen to extend the terms of the goalkeeper and captain, Hugo Lloris. It is Kane's new contract that has lifted the mood, after a run of one win in ten matches in all competitions. Pochettino sees Kane as a symbol of the club, where he has risen up through the youth ranks, and he spoke with rare affection about how the 23-year-old had prioritised his love of Tottenham and his connection with the fans. Kane's third new deal since August 2014 has made him the best paid player in the club's history but nobody is in any doubt that he could have earned more at one of the rival clubs that covet him. It was put to Pochettino that it was rare for a modern footballer to put emotion and the sense of belonging before money. "It is true and, for that, Harry is very special," Pochettino said. "He is special on the pitch and special off it. The club recognised his value and I congratulate Daniel [Levy], the chairman, too, because it was very important for us to make this happen. If you ask Harry, he is sure that it is not about money. He loves Tottenham and he wants to stay here in this project." Gerrard and Terry were products of the Liverpool and Chelsea youth systems, respectively, and the latter has spent the entirety of his career at Stamford Bridge. Gerrard, too, is a one-club man in terms of English football, although he did bring down the curtain on his career at Los Angeles Galaxy. "One day, Harry could be like this type of player for us," Pochettino said, with reference to Gerrard and Terry. "In the two-and-a-half years that I have been at the club, he has shown his commitment every season. "He is one of the best strikers in the world; he has shown that, and teams, not only in England but in Europe, have seen him and they have followed him and thought there would be a possibility, one day, to take Harry. But he is very happy here and, one more time, he has shown his commitment to the club." Pochettino believes that Kane's affection for Tottenham, and his awareness of what the club means in London, has helped him to find an extra edge in derby matches. He has 18 goals in 23 capital city derbies in the Premier League – an extraordinary record. "I believe in energía universal," Pochettino said. "It is connected. Nothing happens for causality. It is always a consequence. Maybe, it is one of the reasons that Harry always scores in derbies. I believe in that energy. For me, it exists." Pochettino has seen a clutch of his players commit to longer contracts and, with Vertonghen set to extend, the manager was asked about Lloris – whose current deals runs until 2019. "Maybe, you need to ask Hugo and the chairman," Pochettino said. "Maybe, in the next few days, you will receive another [contract] news – but I think it is not Hugo. Hugo is a very ambitious player but he is very happy here. He wants success here and to stay here." Pochettino reported that Toby Alderweireld, who has been out since 15 October with a knee injury, had been involved in training during the week but he was still not at 100% while he was "a bit worried" about Erik Lamela's hip problem. "His evolution is not in the way we expect," Pochettino said.

Winning tip: Sri Lankan gothic Have tea, dinner or cocktails in Helga's Folly, a fabulously spooky gothic mansion in the midst of jungle flora with to-die-for views of the historic city of Kandy. Every inch is covered in paintings, photographs, mirrors and dripping candles. This is where Vivien Leigh, Laurence Olivier and Zandra Rhodes stayed and where the Stereophonics wrote an ode to its owner, Madame Helga. The eccentric proprietor, former model Helga de Silva Blow Perera, moves in circles of artists, politicians and intrigue, lives in the Folly and introduces herself personally to guests. Rooms may be a bit run-down and pricey, but the Alice-in-Wonderland-kitsch-meets-avant-garde gesamtkunstwerk style is not to be missed. Doubles from $120 B&amp;B, special rates for writers and artists, helgasfolly.com Elfmeterkina Temple of rock A half-hour bus ride from the coastal towns of Tangalle and Dikwella, the rock of Mulkirigala erupts 205 metres tall from the surrounding jungle. The temple complex features dagobas and caves adorned with reclining Buddhas and ancient paintings. Well off the tourist trail, Mulkirigala provides an authentic escape into Buddhist tranquillity, and isn't as busy as the famed Sigiriya and Dambulla rock fortresses. After climbing 533 rock-hewn steps, you are rewarded with a wonderful view and welcome breeze from the summit. jordanroshan Kites in the city Galle Face Green is an urban park in Colombo overlooking the Indian Ocean. During Ramadan, local Muslims gather in groups unpacking picnics, waiting for the sun to set over this bustling city. Children fly kites. Street vendors sell local snacks. Professionals exercise in business suits and trainers after work. Young couples hold hands and stroll along the beach. The choppy waters crash into the concrete wall creating a dramatic backdrop. But while sitting on a bench facing the ocean, one can see a different side to this city and can appreciate the rich diversity of religions and socioeconomics that make up Sri Lanka. buddingtraveler Cricket and street food To get a real feel of Sri Lanka, spend a day at the cricket in Galle if there's a match on. There are plenty of distractions as you sit on the grassy banks overlooking the old fort and watch the waves rolling in from the Indian Ocean while soaking up the sun. The local fishermen turn up in the afternoon to chat and grill their catches. Spectators can try street curries from vendors all around the ground. Tickets and food won't be more than £10 and you'll make a lot of friends. TheCapeCruiser Leopard country I spent an exhilarating day in Yala national park, a pristine 130,000-hectare wilderness on the south-eastern tip of Sri Lanka. The landscape here feels alien: a flat expanse of twisted, bleached-white trees and hunched rock formations that evoke images of a prehistoric time. The beaches are vast and wild, rising cliffs against grey sand and empty sky. Best of all though is the jeep safari: bouncing along sandy tracks, binoculars in hand, in joyful anticipation of glimpsing elephants, peacocks, monkeys, and saltwater crocodiles. And if you are very, very lucky you may even spot the elusive Sri Lankan leopard. Entry $25, jeep tour from $40, yalasrilanka.lk Shaz Rakhshan Best seat for short eats For a magical free view to rival that from Adam's Peak, take a trip from Haputale in the tea plantations out to the near 2,000-metre-high Lipton's Seat. Don't bother with the tuk tuks - the fun is in climbing up the mountain through the tea plantations, past schools and hospitals. Bright saris butterfly the tea bushes. At the very top is a panoramic view as far as the southern Sri Lankan coast and a tiny cafe selling magnificent short eats, tea and jaggery (cane sugar). Sit and survey the world just like Sir Thomas Lipton did more than 100 years ago. ID740934 Great B&amp;B in Trincomalee This summer my wife and I stayed off the usual tourist circuit in a secluded bay near the centre of Trincomalee, at a small B&amp;B called Dyke's Rest, right on the beach. The bay was deserted except for the occasional friendly fishermen coming and going. The water was clean, warm and safe and good snorkelling could be had by the rocks at the edge of the bay – an eco-conscious alternative to visiting the coral reef at Pigeon Island, which is suffering greatly because of unchecked tourism. You can watch the sun rise at breakfast and eat fresh fish barbecued on the beach at night. The hospitality was some of the best we have ever received and we cannot recommend this idyllic spot enough. Doubles from $35 B&amp;B, on Facebook Superb rotis Dewmini, a small family-owned roti cafe off the beaten track in Mirissa, is well worth the 10-minute walk inland from the beach for a tasty breakfast or lunch roti. A plethora of savoury and sweet flavours are available, so there's something for everyone. Mark Moorhead Tropical architectural guru Sri Lanka's celebrated architect, Geoffrey Bawa, coined a tropical modernism style based on Sri Lanka's multi-ethnic traditional and colonial influences. His buildings blend seamlessly with their surroundings – their interiors, too. A splendid way to learn about the man, his work and his art collection is to visit his house just off Bagatelle Road in Colombo. The style is unique and the tour by occupants of the house who knew Bawa before his death in 2003 is very personal and insightful. The guidebooks say visitors have to book in advance, but we just turned up and were welcomed. One of the best cultural experiences in Sri Lanka and you can also stay there though it is not run as a hotel. Entrance $7, geoffreybawa.com Lodersleben Cinnamon and tea A taxi driver advised us to visit Mackwoods Labookellie factory, about six miles from Nuwara Eliya. There, we enjoyed a freshly brewed cup of orange pekoe while looking out over emerald-green fields. On the way back, we stopped off at 100-metre-high Ramboda Falls, where visitors can walk along the top of the cascade toward its source. We also had a great trip to Cinnamon Island in the Madu Ganga wetlands an hour's drive north of Galle. You can only get there by boat, but this won't cost you more than $20. There, our little group was shown how cinnamon is made from the inner bark of certain trees; the bark looks like rolled up paper when they are done. EdytaRice Islands of the north While Jaffna is an interesting place to visit, the islands of the northern peninsula are the highlight of this area. We set off early from Jaffna, on scooters borrowed from our guesthouse, to Punkudutivu. From here, we took the free ferry, run by the Navy, to Delft (named after the Dutch town), on the northern tip of Sri Lanka. Wild ponies roam among the Palmyra palms on this sparsely populated island. After taking in the ruins of a 1,000-year-old temple, the Dutch colonial fort and the numerous coral walls, we headed back. We rode along the causeways connecting Punkudutivu, Kayts and Karainagar, as if aquaplaning on the shallow waters, against a backdrop of fishermen and cormorants in the setting sun. Within the islands, the quiet, well-maintained roads were shared with the solitary fisherman, farmers passing by in tractors, and the occasional (harmless!) snake making a dash to the other side. Our tranquil island road trip, traversing the Jaffna peninsula on our scooters, was the most memorable moment in my visit to this sometimes chaotic part of the world. Neil MacKay

The Guardian and The Mill have been recognised at this year's British Arrows Craft awards for '6x9: A virtual experience of solitary confinement' which won the gold award in the VR / 360 category. Produced in partnership with The Mill, 6x9 is the Guardian's first virtual reality project. The experience places viewers in a virtual segregation cell which they can explore and interact with and aims to highlight the psychological deterioration and sensory deprivation that can be the effects of long term solitary confinement for many of the people who have experienced it first hand around the world. The British Arrows Craft Awards celebrate the innovation, bravery and artistry of those who craft moving images. The full list of winners can be found here.

A quarter of London homes listed on Airbnb were rented for more than 90 days last year, many illegally and in breach of an act intended to stop landlords turning badly needed housing into unofficial hotels. The booming homesharing website admitted on Thursday that 4,938 of its "entire home" London listings – 23% of the total – were let out for for three months or more, despite a law requiring anyone doing so to apply for planning permission. The San Francisco-based website published an independent report into its activities by the thinktank IPPR that concluded: "It is likely there are many cases where planning permission for a change of use has not been obtained." The report warned that Airbnb and other homesharing sites are causing landlords to remove properties from the already stretched private rented sector and placing them into short-term lets in a trend that poses "potential future risks to housing supply in London". Airbnb announced on Thursday that from next spring it will ban hosts in London from renting out entire homes for more than 90 days a year without official consent. "The problem was that a website that was about people making a little money letting out rooms was being abused by professional landlords turning their properties into hotels by the back door," said Tom Copley, Labour's housing spokesman on the London assembly, who campaigned for the change. He said it adversely impacted on the already squeezed housing supply in the capital and affected local communities, with people in some areas complaining of Airbnb guests coming and going at all times. It was already against the law for property owners to let out their homes on short term, hotel-style lets without planning permission, if the total letting period was over 90 days per year. But, according to Copley, town halls did not have the resources or data to enforce it. Sarah Hayward, leader of the London Borough of Camden, welcomed the ban. "Swathes of properties in Camden had effectively been removed from the longer-term rental market, making it both more expensive and difficult to find a longer-term rental property in the borough for those working here," she said. "It was abundantly clear to all councils involved that many users of the site were flouting the 90-night limit, and the simplest way to stop that was for Airbnb to stop it at source." In a letter to hosts sent on Thursday, Airbnb said: "We want to help ensure that home-sharing grows responsibly and sustainably, and makes London's communities stronger. That is why we are introducing a change to our platform that will create new and automated limits to help ensure that entire home listings in London are not shared for more than 90 days a year, unless hosts confirm that they have permission to share their space more frequently. "The new measures will begin from 2017. If you want to host more often, you will need to certify that you have permission to do so or apply for the relevant permissions from your local council." In March, Airbnb said London was the third biggest city in terms of places to stay, with a little over 40,000 places, and that this was growing at a rate of 75% per year. "I welcome this move," Copley said. "Airbnb have engaged constructively since I raised this with the mayor a couple of months ago. I now call on other short-term letting websites to do the same." Airbnb, which has been valued at $25bn (£20bn) and helps let out 3m properties around the world, has faced a regulatory backlash in some cities where leaders have grown concerned about its impact on housing supply. Berlin levies a €100,000 (£85,000) fine for anyone renting out more than half of their home for less than two months without a permit, while hosts in San Francisco who do not register with the city authorities can be fined up to $1,000 per day. In New York there are strict laws against short lets in apartment blocks if hosts are not staying the apartments at the same time as their Airbnb guests. "While independent research shows that home-sharing has no significant impact on housing affordability in London, we believe it's important to take action against unwelcome commercial operators who have no place on our platform," Airbnb told hosts.

The Guardian has been awarded best news and politics podcast at the Online Radio Awards in the Online Talk Show category. Now in their third year, the Online Radio Awards celebrate the best in online radio from around the world. A full list of winners can be found here.

A year ago Channel 4 News commissioned a young woman in Aleppo, Wa'ad al-Kateab, to make a film about life inside the city. Her film about a teenager who was modelling the rebuilding of a dream Aleppo with cardboard, glue and bits of rubbish showed a rare scene of hope from within that shattered city. As the horror of Aleppo deepened earlier this year, we took the decision to take Wa'ad on as an exclusive film-maker for us and the results have been searing testaments to life under siege in the rebel held east of the country's largest city. All year Wa'ad has provided dozens of outstanding reports that have led and dominated our programme and have now been viewed hundreds of millions of times by people around the world. Her films can all be viewed at insidealeppo.com. Much of what Wa'ad provided was from the emergency room of the hospital where her doctor husband works, but it has not just been the screams of the injured and dying she has captured. She has done that most important thing in journalism: she humanised the victims, showed us whole families in their worst moments, chronicled their pain and showed the world the horror, without intruding, and with a skill it takes most decades to learn. Now with the tide turning against the rebels there are many questions as to what is happening to those the government are capturing, whether civilians or fighters. Wa'ad has been unable to leave the city for months, has a young child and is pregnant with another. Along with a quarter of a million other people, she is now at the mercy of the forces that surround her, but as a journalist and in the company of medical staff who have stayed simply to tend to the many injured and dying in Aleppo, we expect her, like everyone, to be extended the rights every citizen has. We expect that the government of Syria will protect the lives of civilians, especially non-combatants, medical staff, women and children, as it has repeatedly declared it will. This week Wa'ad won two Amnesty International awards, and in her absence sent these words to be read and shared. "Maybe this will be my last letter to you and to the world. I am in the most dangerous city in the world and only today 30 barrel bombs and 100 artillery shells fell on my neighbourhood (al-Sukkari). I wanted to be with you but the siege of the city prevented that. I am just one individual among the 270,000 people who live under this siege. The only thing that's available in this city is air, but this air, most of the time, is polluted with poisonous gases and chlorine. We are not the only city in Syria under siege and our salvation will not be achieved only by the lifting of this siege or halting the bombing, but with the fall of the Assad regime and getting our freedom and dignity as Syrians. I would have liked for my lens and my colleagues' lenses to give you the complete picture of Aleppo, but we are helpless in front of the horrors of annihilation that the Russians and the regime are enjoying in this ancient city. "This is a perished city called Aleppo. And all its people are asking you to remember your humanity."

Coutts, the taxpayer-owned bank, provided offshore services to controversial clients including a member of the Brunei royal family accused of stealing billions from his own country, and a banker charged with assisting the sons of Egypt's deposed president, Hosni Mubarak, in financial crime. Known as the Queen's bank after its most famous customer, Coutts is revealed to have managed secretive tax haven structures for the Sultan of Brunei's younger brother, Prince Jefri Bolkiah, and the investment banker Hassan Heikal. The information was uncovered in the Panama Papers, a database of 11.5m documents leaked from the archives of the offshore law firm Mossack Fonseca. Emails between Coutts and Mossack show the law firm regarded these individuals as presenting a high risk under criteria designed to combat money laundering: Jefri was ordered by a UK court to repay an estimated $15bn taken from the Brunei sovereign wealth fund, which he chaired; Heikal was charged in 2012 and is awaiting trial for facilitating insider trading, which he denies. Both were clients of Coutts &amp; Co Trustees in Jersey. Their offshore companies were active until at least the end of 2015. The bank would not confirm whether they remained on its books, saying it did not comment on individual cases. The revelations raise new concerns about controls at Coutts, which was fined just under £9m four years ago for major failures in its checks on high risk customers, including those with political connections. Regulators said at the time these led to an "unacceptable risk of Coutts handling the proceeds of crime". While it is entirely legal to offer banking services to what are known as politically exposed persons (PEP) – politicians, state officials and their families and associates – these individuals must be subject to enhanced checks, in particular on their source of funds. Between 1986 and 1998, Jefri served as finance minister of the oil-rich state and chairman of its sovereign wealth fund. In a breathtaking spending spree, cash from the Brunei Investment Agency was funnelled into more than 500 properties around the world. Jefri amassed thousands of luxury cars, antique paintings by Renoir, Manet and Degas, five boats, and nine aircraft including a private Boeing 747 reportedly customised to carry polo ponies. In a settlement agreed in 2000, Jefri undertook to return the money to Brunei. Years of litigation in various jurisdictions followed, with Jefri challenging the repayment agreement, saying he had only acted on his brother's orders, but the British courts upheld it. The legal battles ended in 2014 when Brunei accepted that the prince had honoured the original settlement. Records show Jefri remained a Coutts client throughout this period. Mossack Fonseca learned only last year that it was acting as registered agent for two British Virgin Islands companies of which Jefri was the ultimate beneficiary. Crescent Invest &amp; Trade was incorporated in 1998, the year the prince resigned as finance minister. Taurus Estates Limited was set up the following year. Crescent had held shares but became dormant, while Taurus held a bank account with Coutts Zurich, a commercial property and seven residential apartments in London, Coutts explained in emails to Mossack Fonseca. The UK property register shows Taurus owns six floors of a building in London's exclusive Dover Street, a stone's throw from the Ritz hotel, acquired in 1999. It is in turn owned by a trust, called PJ Settlement. Jefri's involvement was effectively masked, because Coutts and its sister companies supplied nominee directors and shareholders for Taurus and Crescent, and trustees to PJ Settlement. This is a common practice where offshore companies are concerned and is not illegal. When Mossack Fonseca learned of the prince's involvement, it immediately resigned as agent, telling Coutts his companies "present a high risk to us". "The proceedings between the Brunei Investment Agency and HRH Prince Jefri Bolkiah came to an end in 2014 when the Investment Agency acknowledged that he had complied with all the terms of the settlement agreement made in 2000," said Jefri's lawyer, David Sandy. Since 2008, BVI law has required company agents to supply information on owners to regulators "without delay". In order to comply, Mossack began a housekeeping exercise with Coutts &amp; Co Trustees in June 2014, writing to ask for a list of all its Jersey PEP clients with shell companies. The firm also wanted supporting information such as passport scans and proof of address. The email chain shows that thanks to delays on both sides, and a set of couriered documents that went astray, it took until September last year – a full 15 months after the initial request – for all the required information to be supplied. Coutts declared 11 PEP clients, including Hassan Heikal. Until 2013, he was co-chief executive of EFG-Hermes, one of the Arab world's largest investment banks. Heikal is currently awaiting trial alongside Mubarak's sons Gamal and Alaa. He is banned from leaving Egypt. In May 2012, following Mubarak's overthrow, his sons were indicted for insider dealing in a case involving EFG-Hermes. Heikal, along with two colleagues, was named as a co-defendant, accused of "assisting in committing the crime of profiting". Through its trusts division in Jersey, the channel islands tax haven, Coutts managed two BVI companies for Heikal – Mmoni Investments Limited and Eydon Limited, both of which had bank accounts in London in their name, at least one of them with Coutts. As with Prince Jefri's shell companies, Coutts also provided nominees to hold the shares and act as directors. After Mossack raised concerns about Heikal in 2015, Coutts replied: "We are aware of the adverse information and are monitoring the situation, details of which are available in the public domain. The group [Coutts] is in regular contact with the client [Heikal] and we are comfortable at the present time to continue to provide our services." Heikal, who resigned as co-chief executive of EFG-Hermes in October 2013, denies the charges against him. He is not accused of personally profiting from the alleged scheme. He forwarded a statement released in 2012 by EFG-Hermes, which asserted that its co-chief executives had "no personal dealings, interests or benefits in any transactions related to the trading on Al-Watany Bank of Egypt's shares". The Jersey trustees business was put up for sale by Coutts in October, and senior management of Coutts &amp; Co Jersey are negotiating to buy it. The bank said: "We take our responsibilities under anti-money laundering (AML) and anti-corruption regulations extremely seriously and have policies in place to ensure compliance with the regulations in the jurisdictions where we operate. Our guidelines on working with politically exposed individuals are in line with AML regulations and we take a proactive approach to these issues, which impact all banks." Eleanor Nichol, campaign leader at the anti-corruption group Global Witness, said: "It is startling that Mossack Fonseca – of all firms – immediately raised a red flag on its relationship with Prince Jefri but Coutts appeared comfortable with the level of risk. This is the Queen's bank, after all – the case raises questions as to whether UK banks are applying high enough standards for screening their customers before they take their money." Additional reporting by Mona Mahmoud and Juliette Garside

Throughout 2016, we have learnt a lot building and maintaining the various systems that power the Guardian. As Christmas nears, we thought that we would share some of that knowledge with the wider world. For the next twenty five days, as Christmas nears, and the days continue to draw in, we're going to be publishing one post a day on the developer blog. We'll write about compression algorithms, design, testing, machine learning, breaking the site, culture and more. Contributors come from all parts of our Digital Team. We hope you find it educational and entertaining. You can follow our progress here on the Developer Blog, or by following our Twitter handle: https://twitter.com/gdndevelopers.

Earlier this November, an NFL executive gave a fascinating, if bewildering, quote to Bleacher Report's Mike Freeman regarding the future of the nation's most popular sports league under Donald Trump. "Under President [Barack] Obama, the country was intellectual and looked at facts. I think that's why our ratings fell," said the anonymous executive. "People read a lot about our scandals or CTE and didn't like what they saw. Under Trump, the country will care less about truth or facts. It'll be [more raw] and brutal. Football will be more of an outlet. We'll go back to liking our violent sports." On the campaign trail, Trump spoke out about his distaste for the NFL's recent rule changes, made to prioritize safety and protect players from head injuries. In October, when a woman fainted at one of Trump's rallies but returned after receiving medical attention, Trump declared, "That woman was out cold and now she's coming back. See? We don't go by these new, and very much softer, NFL rules. Concussion. Oh no! Got a little ding on the head. No, no, you can't play for the rest of the season. Our people are tough." It echoed a sentiment from a Trump speech during primary season back in January. "So I'm watching the game yesterday. What used to be considered a great tackle, a violent, head-on, violent. If that was done by Dick Butkus, they'd say he's the greatest player ... if that was done by Lawrence Taylor, it WAS done by Lawrence Taylor and Dick Butkus! ... and Ray Nitschke, right? You used to see these tackles, and it was incredible to watch. Now they [effeminate voice] tackle ... head on head collision ... 15-yard penalty. The whole game is all screwed up!" For Trump, football served as a perfect example of why America needed to be Made Great Again. As Trump tells it, America is losing the toughness it had in the days of real men like Taylor, who is currently serving probation for pleading guilty to sexual misconduct. Trump's promise to restore that kind of toughness to a nation seen as gone soft was a major part of his appeal for many of the white men who supported him and made up by far his largest voting block. Natalia Petrzela, assistant professor of history at The New School, says this treatment of football has a grand tradition in America's political history. "Positioning football as under attack by meddling, effeminate liberals – rules about contact and violence, letting little girls play, insisting on repercussions for players who are violent off the field," Petrzela wrote via e-mail, "is a vivid way of making a broader point about the unfortunate feminization of American culture that has been a plank of American conservatism for decades. But it's important to note that this version of masculinity is not all about unrestrained savagery; football is also seen as encouraging hard work, sportsmanship, and discipline, other values seen to be under attack." The trick for politicians is to tie all these things together, for which football is uniquely suited. Populist presidents in particular have seized on football as a political tool. Teddy Roosevelt championed the game for its ability to ward off creeping feminization of America's youth in what he saw as a sedentary age. "The sports especially dear to a vigorous and manly nation are always those in which there is a certain slight element of risk," Roosevelt wrote in 1893 for Harper's Weekly. "It is mere unmanly folly to do away with the sport because the risk exists." Ronald Reagan, of course, was known for his performance as Notre Dame football coach George Gipp in the film Knute Rockne, All American before beginning his political career. He praised football for its ability to engender "clean hatred," telling the Washington Post: "It is the last thing left in civilization where two men can literally fling themselves bodily at each other in combat and not be at war. You hate the color of his jersey, but there's a mutual respect that develops while you're playing on the field." But perhaps no politician used football like Max Rafferty, a populist conservative in 1960s California state politics. Rafferty "passionately celebrated football as one of the few legitimate forms of campus activity that built moral and physical strength," Petrzela writes, "as opposed to the walkouts and demonstrations he denigrated as representing an opposite sensibility." Rafferty was not always a Trump-esque politician. For example, he initially fought for bilingual education in California schools. But in the late 1960s, as the culture wars reached their peaks, Rafferty came down squarely on the side of traditionalism – anti-communist, anti-immigrant, and pro-authority. He saw patriotism as an "emotional" duty and believed football and fraternities were the only true and positive forms of campus organization. And in response to the idea that programs such as Spanish classes were necessary for the Latino students in California's public schools, Rafferty took the position that education was there to perpetuate "the cultural heritage of the race". Or, you might say, Rafferty thought education was there to serve as a cultural wall. Football was part of that platform for Rafferty, a keystone in his cultural wall. The late 1960s saw football go through an injury crisis similar to today's after 36 high school kids died on the playing field in one horrific season in 1968. Despite those deaths, Rafferty espoused the values of the game in a speech in front of the 1969 California State Conference of Athletic Directors. He warned against the threat posed to football by leftist agitators. But he added, "I'm not too worried about the outcome. The love of clean, competitive sports is too deeply embedded in the American matrix, too much a part of the warp and woof of our free people, ever to surrender to the burning-eyed, bearded draft-card-burners who hate and envy the athlete because he is something they can never be – a man." As Petrzela writes: "It seems that especially in contentious moments, football is prized as a bastion of traditional, masculine, sensibilities that are themselves under threat." Whether that threat is real or perceived doesn't necessarily matter. "In Rafferty's generation, there was a kind of moral revulsion at what he called 'The Sick 60s' – boys wearing long hair, kids protesting the US government and walking out of school, and drug use. Today, we see Trump fanning similar disgust about campus politics: young people questioning the gender binary, demands for 'trigger warnings' and 'safe spaces' and the climate of political correctness that has moved out of educational contexts to the broader culture." Will our anonymous NFL executive's prediction of a football renaissance in Trump's America prove true? It's hard to say. With regards to concussions and CTE, Pandora's Box has already been opened. Growing numbers of American parents are saying they would not allow their children to play football, undoubtedly influenced by the steady stream of reports of CTE findings in deceased football players – youths and professionals alike. Trump can't stop that alone. But will the research into concussions, often funded with federal dollars, continue under his administration? And certainly any movement into ending youth football in public schools, as two University of Minnesota bioethicists have proposed, would struggle to gain traction in a government helmed by Trump. "If Trump's election taught us anything, it's that predictions about his ability to shape public consciousness are precarious," Petrzela writes. "I do think that it will be hard for him to push back on the safety regulations for younger players, since the science is persuasive and it is hard to convince parents, no matter their politics, that subjecting to their children to potential brain injury in service of building character is defensible, much less desirable. But in Trump's America, who knows?"

In team sports, even brilliant individuals need a helping hand. Michael Jordan needed Phil Jackson, Scottie Pippen, Horace Grant and Dennis Rodman. Lionel Messi requires the services of Luis Suárez, Neymar and Andrés Iniesta. And Sidney Crosby knows he would not have won another Stanley Cup for Pittsburgh had Evgeni Malkin not skated with him. But the one sport that should never overlook the "under-the-radar" parts of an elite squad is the NFL. And right now, the Dallas Cowboys offensive line is the prototypical example of that. In American football, the offensive linemen are usually last to receive the limelight, if it even comes their way at all. Besides the physical and mental challenges of their thankless task, O-linemen are the only players on the field destined to not have an individual stat. Even their defensive brethren have a chance at numbers glory. It's why Von Miller and JJ Watt can have endorsement deals to match those of Cam Newton and Aaron Rodgers. However, the day you see an offensive lineman get a national television commercial deal is the day Tom Brady invites Roger Goodell to Gisele's birthday. (Michael Oher got a movie made about him, admittedly, but that was more to do with his backstory than his skill as a player). And despite representing the essential toughness of a team, the offensive line is, in large part, the most expendable, least valued unit on the roster. Instead of being able to throw, catch, or run fast, all the linemen need to do is be big, strong and tough. And those aren't considered "skills" by the league. For this season, and probably many others in the past than most would acknowledge, an offensive line unit represents the most valuable players in the entire league. The Dallas Cowboys couldn't be a bigger stage and opportunity for offensive linemen to get their due. Instead, the same old narrative has been dredged up, with more accolades bestowed on the guys they protect. Dak Prescott and Ezekiel Elliott have had dream rookie seasons. Elliott, the Ohio State stud, was expected to be a force in the NFL right off the bat, picked by many as the clear favorite for rookie of the year, and projected to have a Hall of Fame career the minute he was a five-star recruit out of high school. Prescott's success, however, has been the surprise of the entire season. The Mississippi State alum was a good but not great quarterback in college, hampered by inconsistent accuracy and overall throwing talent. It's why he was selected all the way in the fourth round, passed by the Cowboys three times in the May draft. But Prescott has improved no end since the NFL Combine in February, supplanting Tony Romo to become the new face of the Cowboys – and arguably the new face of the entire league. Owner Jerry Jones knows he has his backfield for likely the next decade. But Prescott, Elliott and the rest of the Cowboys owe much of their success to an offensive line so great that comparisons have been drawn to the legendary "Great Wall of Dallas" O-line of the 1990s, which helped Troy Aikman, Emmitt Smith and Michael Irvin into the Hall of Fame. Needing to invest in protecting the injury-prone Romo, Jones, his son Stephen, coach Jason Garrett and the entire Cowboys organization placed an emphasis on having the key element that helped bring them three Super Bowls in a decade. Those investments have paid off handsomely: for the third year in a row the Cowboys have the best O-line in the NFL. If the world was fair, Tyron Smith, Travis Frederick, Zack Martin, Ronald Leary and veteran tackle Doug Free would be in the MVP discussion. Young first round draft picks (Smith, Frederick and Martin) combined with an undrafted, motivated free agent (Leary) and a decade's long team staple (Free) have formed the most important piece in the NFL right now. Without them, Prescott would likely resemble the usual mistake-prone rookie quarterback, while Elliott would not even threaten Eric Dickerson's rookie rushing record. They certainly would not be a part of the NFL's best record and be among the favorites for the league's most coveted individual prize in just their first seasons. A prize that should go instead to the offensive line, but that will never happen. They will just have to settle for the general public seeing them win a Super Bowl as their only visible award.

Reproductive rights advocates announced a significant slate of challenges to anti-abortion laws on Wednesday, taking aim at major restrictions in three states which advocates say are unconstitutional. Planned Parenthood, the American Civil Liberties Union, and the Center for Reproductive Rights, a legal advocacy group which argued a landmark abortion case earlier this year, filed three lawsuits in Alaska, Missouri and North Carolina. In Missouri, the groups will challenge a pair of abortion restrictions that have reduced the number of abortion providers to just one. They are taking aim at a similar clinic restriction in Alaska. In North Carolina, they will mount a challenge to a 20-week ban on abortion that has some of the nation's strictest exceptions. The two Missouri restrictions are highly similar to laws in Texas that the US supreme court struck down in June. They require abortions to be performed in expensive, hospital-like facilities and require abortion providers to have certain professional relationships with a local hospital. The supreme court ruled that such restrictions served no medical purpose and were unconstitutional. But similar restrictions remain on the books in several states. In Missouri, where 1.2 million women of reproductive age live, the laws have forced two Planned Parenthood clinics, in Columbia and Kansas City, to stop providing abortions in recent years. The only remaining clinic is located in St Louis, forcing many Missouri women seeking an abortion to travel long distances. "Because of laws like the ones we are challenging today, for too many women across our country the constitutional right to have an abortion is more theoretical than real," said Jennifer Dalven, the director of the ACLU's Reproductive Freedom Project. But it is the North Carolina challenge that may have the bigger impact on abortion rights nationwide. This is only the second time reproductive rights advocates have challenged a 20-week ban on abortion in federal court – potentially setting the table for these restrictions to go before the supreme court. North Carolina's law bans abortions after 20 weeks except in a medical emergency where a woman's condition is so grave that she requires an abortion immediately. That is stricter than other 20-week bans, which have health exceptions but don't require there to be a medical emergency. The bill defines medical emergency as a condition which "so complicates the medical condition of the pregnant woman as to necessitate the immediate abortion of her pregnancy to avert her death or for which a delay will create serious risk of substantial and irreversible physical impairment of a major bodily function" not including mental health. In their lawsuit, the ACLU, Planned Parenthood and the Center for Reproductive Rights argue that the language essentially forces women having an abortion for health reasons to wait until she becomes gravely ill. Laws banning abortion several weeks before a fetus is viable outside the womb are increasingly common. Across the country, more than a dozen states ban abortion two weeks before viability on the medically dubious grounds that the fetus can feel pain. But despite the fact that Roe v Wade prohibits states from banning abortion before the point of viability, most of those laws have not faced a legal challenge. Only Arizona's 20-week ban, passed in 2012 and struck down permanently over the next two years, was ever the subject of a legal battle in federal court. The challenge is especially significant now that Donald Trump has been elected president. Trump, in a wholesale embrace of the anti-abortion movement's top priorities, has promised to sign into law a nationwide ban on abortion at 20 weeks. One reason is that very few abortion providers have standing for such a challenge. "To challenge these laws, you would have to be actually doing abortions after 20 weeks," said Priscilla Smith, an abortion rights advocate and a senior fellow at Yale law school. "And there are just so few states where you can obtain abortions at that stage of pregnancy. Despite the anti-abortion world's focus on post-20-week abortions, they're very rare." But another reason may be that reproductive rights advocates have been hesitant to launch a lawsuit that could reach the supreme court. In the past several decades, many such legal challenges have resulted in the supreme court chipping away at abortion rights. That changed this summer, when the court ruled 5-to-3 to strike down a set of harsh Texas abortion restrictions. The ruling prohibited states from enacting abortion restrictions based on medically questionable arguments about protecting women's health. Justice Anthony Kennedy, who is often skeptical of abortion rights, joined the majority. With Trump potentially empowered to shift the balance of the court rightward, Smith said, reproductive rights advocates are probably facing the friendliest bench possible under the new president. Courts have struck down early bans on abortion before, including an Arkansas law banning abortion at 12 weeks and a North Dakota law banning abortion at six weeks – before many women realize they are pregnant. In defense of 20-week bans, abortion foes commonly argue that fetuses at that stage of development will feel pain during the procedure. But the evidence is slim. While select studies have found evidence for this, the most recent systematic review of studies on this topic concluded that the fetal nervous system is not developed enough to feel pain until the third trimester. Still, bans on abortion at 20 weeks occupy fraught emotional territory. Public support for abortion restrictions grows with gestational age, and a substantial portion of Americans are ambivalent or opposed to abortion rights in the second trimester. Anti-abortion activists place an emphasis on these cases, even though they account for only 1% to 2% of all abortions in the US. Abortion rights advocates argue that many women obtaining later abortions are doing so for health reasons or after discovering a severe or fatal fetal anomaly – although the evidence suggests these are not the majority of cases. On Wednesday, representatives for Planned Parenthood, the ACLU and the Center for Reproductive Rights said the three lawsuits were the beginning of a spate of legal challenges the groups would mount jointly. "We are going to fight back state by state and law by law until every person has the right to pursue the life they want," said Dr Raegan McDonald-Mosley, Planned Parenthood's chief medical officer.

Over the course of more than a decade, the US government spent in excess of $41bn (£33bn) on HIV prevention and treatment without investing in targeted prevention for adolescent girls and young women abroad. Adolescent girls were instead lumped in with adult women in prevention programmes such as prevention of mother to child transmission, which was a critical intervention but did not address the unique health needs and risk factors for girls. In parts of Africa, 90% of new infections in adolescents occur in girls, so this left an enormous gap. The US investment mainly supported life-saving antiretroviral treatment for 7.7 million men, women and children, as well as HIV testing and counselling for more than 14.2 million pregnant women (leading to 240,000 infants born HIV-free), and HIV testing and counselling for almost 58 million people. But when it came to young adults, pressure from conservative religious organisations and policymakers prompted the US to spend $1.4bn on abstinence-only and fidelity-in-marriage programmes. These initiatives have had no impact whatsoever on reducing new HIV infections, regardless of where they have been implemented. But in 2014, America turned a corner with the advent of a two-year programme for HIV prevention in adolescent girls and young women. The scheme prioritises social and educational tools in addition to biomedical interventions in 10 countries across sub-Saharan Africa. About $385m has been allocated for this programme through the Dreams partnership, a public-private collaboration with other aid organisations. Through the partnership, girls have access to adolescent-friendly reproductive health services and information about consistent use of male and female condoms, pre-exposure prophylaxis, HIV testing and counselling, and other contraceptive choices. As sexual violence is a contributor to the spread of HIV among girls and women, there is also a focus on learning about violence prevention and post-violence care, including post-exposure prophylactics that can prevent HIV infection after rape. The programme has put into use the Girl Roster, a new tool created by the Population Council to identify girls who are particularly at risk of HIV and hard to find, with prevention efforts focused accordingly. Dreams also provides girls and their families with access to financial literacy and savings education programmes. Implemented by medical providers, community-based organisations and schools, the scheme promises real progress for girls. But while it could have far-reaching effects in combating HIV, it cannot survive on private backing alone. Funding cuts to US foreign aid are not the only danger. The threatened reinstatement of the "global gag" rule – an executive order that restricts US foreign aid from supporting any organisation that provides abortion-related activities, even with non-US funds – could have potentially devastating consequences for the Dreams programme. If the policy is reinstated by the incoming Republican administration, funding could end for some of the most innovative and promising partners for adolescent girls, who need a variety of services to prevent HIV, including access to contraceptives and violence screening services. This only hurts the fight to combat HIV. While Donald Trump may not yet have a governing record on the health and rights of women and girls, vice-president-elect Mike Pence's record is long and vexing. Pence, the outgoing governor of Indiana and former Republican congressman who is heading up the Trump transition team, has an extensive record of championing policies that are hostile to women, science, and human rights. Pence is a fierce proponent of abstinence-only education as part of domestic and foreign HIV funding. As a member of Congress, Pence supported legislation to reinstate the gag rule and, as a governor, he spearheaded the closure of Planned Parenthood clinics in his state. These clinics did not perform abortions but did provide testing for sexually transmitted diseases such as HIV. Under his administration, Indiana experienced the largest documented outbreak of HIV infections in two decades. Other Trump hires seem similarly unpromising for women's health policy. As governor of South Carolina, Nikki Haley, who has been named ambassador to the UN, rejected state-level matched funds through the Affordable Care Act that would have contributed to HIV treatment for low-income people. This despite South Carolina's high rate of new HIV infections, which has had a devastating effect on African American women. Just last week, Michele Sidibé, the UNAids executive director, called for action in helping to prevent HIV infections among girls and young women in Africa. He said that thousands are still infected each week, making the UN target of reducing new infections to fewer than 100,000 a year by 2020 way off course. As we mark World Aids Day with a Trump-Pence administration looming, we must redouble our commitment to advancing the health and rights of women and girls. Advocates, donors and NGOs must work harder than ever to fight for continued investment in HIV prevention for adolescent girls and young women. Moreover, we must be vigilant in our fight against policies that pull the rug out from under women and girls and threaten global public health outcomes. The bottom line is that we can't turn the tide on HIV without women and girls.

British Gas has become the second leading energy supplier to freeze its standard prices this winter. The company, the UK's biggest energy firm, said the move would bring some peace of mind to more than 6 million customers. But consumer organisations said energy companies needed to do more than just freeze prices and warned that price rises of up to 10% were likely after the end of the winter. Two weeks ago SSE, one of Britain's "big six" energy suppliers, froze its standard tariffs, putting pressure on rivals to follow suit. Wholesale gas and electricity prices have risen sharply since June, prompting some smaller energy firms to raise their prices. Many bigger companies have already bought gas and electricity for delivery during the winter at lower prices. In a Christmas message, British Gas said it was keeping the price of its standard variable energy tariff unchanged through this winter. A spokeswoman said prices had been frozen until at least the end of March. The company has also launched a deal that allows households to fix their energy prices for three winters, until March 2019. Its standard variable energy tariff paid by direct debit is £1,044 – £40 more than its cheapest deal, a one-year fix at £1,004. Consumer organisations gave a guarded response. Citizens Advice welcomed the winter price freezes from British Gas and SEE, and called on other big energy firms to follow suit. Joe Malinowski, of TheEnergyShop.com, said: "That's not a big deal, it's only a few months. It's a nice gesture but, call me cynical, the already expensive standard tariffs are going to stay expensive for this winter." Gillian Guy, the chief executive of Citizens Advice, agreed, saying: "Energy customers on the standard tariff are already paying a premium – their bills are as much as £380 more than for those on cheaper fixed deals." Martin Lewis, the founder of MoneySavingExpert.com, said the huge increase in wholesale prices and the weaker pound would soon enough affect household bills. "Come the end of winter, expect to see hikes of up to 10% by many of the big six companies," he added. Consumer organisations urged energy companies and the government to take further action. Guy said: "It's also important that the government looks at a more permanent way to bring down costs for people on the standard tariff. One way to do this would be to automatically switch low-income customers who have been on the standard tariff for years to a cheaper deal." The chief executive of British Gas, Mark Hodges, sought to address concerns by making a "commitment that all British Gas customers will always get access to our best deals". He promised an annual health check for customers on the standard rate to ensure they are on the right tariff. There has been mounting criticism from politicians about the treatment of loyal customers by the large energy firms. When the business secretary, Greg Clark, met representatives from the industry earlier this month, he vowed to take action to ensure it treats customers properly. A recent report commissioned by industry lobby group Energy UK showed it cost the big six energy companies £844 to provide dual fuel this year. But the average household bill was more than £1,000, according to campaign group BigDeal.com. Theresa May used her Conservative party conference speech in October to criticise the high number of customers on standard contracts, saying: "It's just not right that two-thirds of energy customers are stuck on the most expensive tariffs." Alex Neill, the managing director of home and legal services at consumer group Which?, said: "While it's welcome that another big energy supplier is freezing its standard tariff prices, these are generally the most expensive deals on the market and customers should look to see if they can switch to a better deal."

The Greens have come to terms with the Turnbull government on the backpacker tax, securing an additional $100m for Landcare funding in the process. The legislation passed the Senate on Thursday night, ending a day of arm-twisting and backroom dealing on the measure which culminated in the Greens agreeing to support a nominal tax rate of 15%, and a drop in the clawback of super payments from 95% to 65%. Currently the government claims 95% of their compulsory superannuation contributions when backpackers leave Australia. "What we have seen today is common sense prevail," the Greens leader, Richard Di Natale, told reporters earlier in the day. "We are very, very pleased that we have been able to secure a commonsense outcome, to be the sensible voice in this Senate." Di Natale said the change in the super payments, combined with the 15% rate, meant the deal was effectively revenue neutral with a 13% headline rate. But the $100m spend for Landcare is a new government investment. Labor pointed out that the combined deal with the Greens was significantly more costly for the budget bottom line than it would have been to agree with the opposition and the crossbench on a 13% tax rate. Asked why the government would do a deal with the Greens when the budget impact was negative to the tune of $160m, and when it already had the numbers in the Senate to secure a 13% tax rate without the additional spend, the prime minister told reporters Landcare was a "great" investment. The Coalition has cut $300m from Landcare since 2013. The treasurer, Scott Morrison, said the agreement would see the government "achieve over 70% of the revenues that were set out in the budget". But the One Nation senator Malcolm Roberts expressed frustration at the turn of events, suggesting Pauline Hanson had supported the government throughout the imbroglio without asking for additional expenditure. The 11th-hour deal on the last parliamentary sitting day for 2016 followed a chaotic sequence on Thursday when the Turnbull government dug in behind a 15% rate, while a number of Senate crossbenchers, the ALP and, initially, the Greens, lined up to demand the government accept a 13% rate. The National Farmers' Federation, which had supported the 15% rate, on Thursday urged the government to accept the rate that parliament would deliver, rather than refuse to compromise and see the headline rate for the tax revert to 32.5%. The political standoff continued until just after question time on Thursday when the Greens involvement emerged. Di Natale explained the shift by his party from 13% to 15% over the course of Thursday as a desire to fix an issue that was creating significant problems for farming and horticultural communities. "We needed a circuit breaker because we risked this whole thing descending into a farce – a farce that would have impacted on people living in regional communities whose livelihood was affected," Di Natale said. The handshake between the Greens and the government cleared the way for the necessary legislation to pass through parliament before the chambers rose for the Christmas break. The deputy prime minister, Barnaby Joyce, took to Twitter to thank the Greens for cooperating with the Coalition. In the parliament, Morrison welcomed the decision by the Greens to support a 15% rate. The treasurer said the episode demonstrated the government could come to terms with One Nation senators, Nick Xenophon Team senators and, "once again, with the Greens". Morrison said the Senate had rebuffed Labor's "belligerence". "The government has been able to get this done in the 45th parliament," the treasurer said. But the shadow treasurer, Chris Bowen, said Morrison had failed to mention the fiscal impact of his deal with the Greens. "The treasurer has done a deal that involves a higher tax rate and less money for the budget," Bowen said on Thursday afternoon. Bowen said the deal with the Greens would cost the budget more than accepting a backpacker tax set at a rate of 13%. He said Morrison was so determined not to do a deal with Labor on the measure, he'd been prepared to spend more in order to come to terms with the Greens. Earlier in the day the prime minister used a series of media interviews to blast Labor for refusing to support a 15% rate. In an attempt to ratchet up political pressure, Turnbull declared the ALP wanted "white kids, rich, white kids from Europe, who come here on their holidays, to pay less tax than some of the Pacific Islanders from some of the poorest countries in the world".

The action is down to three cards this afternoon after Wincanton, to no-one's great surprise, succumbed to overnight frost following an inspection at the track this morning. Temperatures were down to -7C overnight and it was a similar story at Exeter, which is due to race on Friday. The meeting there, which is due to include the Harry Dutfield Novice Chase with a £22,500 prize fund, is also now subject to an early inspection. Not all is lost for David Bass, however, as the jockey will now make his rapid, and somewhat unexpected, return from injuries suffered in a fall at Ascot last month up at Leicester, where he rides Braw Angus and Pulling Power for Kim Bailey. He may be kept waiting for a winner, however, as the promising London Prize (1.05) and Moscato are likely to turn the opener at Leicester into a match, while Tullow Tonic (2.35) makes most appeal at the prices in a competitive handicap hurdle later on the card. The most competitive races of the day are on the all-weather at Chelmsford, where the two most valuable contests on the card have drawn fields of 14 and 16. Gold Club (5.15) is an interesting contender for the sprint handicap, as he attempts to reverse recent course-and-distance form with Pearl Spectre and Dutch Golden Age. Ed McMahon's runner finished fourth there, beaten two heads and a neck as Pearl Spectre recorded his second win in a row, but Gold Club was racing for the first time since May and is now 3lb better off with the winner. He has also been lightly-raced since an excellent second place in a good time, again over today's track and trip, back in April and makes much more appeal at around 8-1 than Pearl Spectre, the favourite, at 7-2. Loyalty (5.45) is a more speculative choice in the mile handicap that follows, and as a nine-year-old he is unlikely to show improved form today. However, you do not need to dig too far back into his form to find a run that would put him very much on the premises today, as his close second over this course and distance back in March was as good as anything he has produced in recent seasons. His two runs since, in October and November, have not shown as much promise but should have put an edge on his fitness, and at around 16-1, the uncertainties are built into the price. East Coast Lady (6.15) should also go well on the same card, while Chic Theatre (2.25) and Fled Or Pled (3.00) are the two that make most appeal on the jumps card at Market Rasen.

Sir Michael Wilshaw has called for a radical shakeup of education for those who do not go on to university, using his last speech as chief inspector of schools in England to warn of a skills gap threatening the country's prosperity. The inspector and former headteacher said further education was a "Cinderella" sector overlooked by policymakers, and queried whether class prejudice was the reason. "Is that because this is a sector that educates other people's children?" Wilshaw said. "Each year, around 100,000 16-year-olds enrol at a further education college to do technical or vocational courses. How many of them are the children of the powers that be, of national politicians and the commentariat?" Noting that £7bn was spent on further education each year, Wilshaw said: "We can no longer afford to accept mediocrity on such a grand scale. We cannot allow this state of affairs to continue. Things have got to change." He attacked the government's review of further education provision, which will see underperforming colleges merge in many parts of the country. "Merging two poor colleges to create one even larger college is unlikely to improve them and may well make them worse," he said. Asked if the poor quality of schooling contributed to the vote to leave the EU, Wilshaw said: "I'm sure people didn't go to the polling booth and think, my son or daughter goes to a terrible school, that's why I'm going to vote to leave the European Union. "But it leads to a sense that they are not getting a crack of the whip. People living in the north can read league tables as well as anyone else ... and they sense that somehow their children are not going to get as good a deal as youngsters in the south of England." Speaking at the launch of Ofsted's annual report on schools, Wilshaw said there had been a vast improvement overall since he began his career. "I taught in some terrible schools in the 1970s. There were schools that were shockingly bad, where there was pupil violence, disruption was the norm and the rest of it. Schools are far better places now," he said. "People were leaving in their droves in inner London in those decades. And I'm not sure that's the case now." But the former headteacher of Mossbourne academy in east London said some parents needed to be pushed to do more: "Good heads challenge those parents and say to them, directly, you are not supportive of your children, you are a bad parent, and that's why your children are failing." Wilshaw noted that 1.8 million more children were attending good or outstanding schools in England compared with August 2010, saying there had been significant improvements in many parts of the country. "In 2012 when I was appointed I criticised the poor performance of primary schools in Coventry, which was at the bottom of the primary league table which was published in my first report. "Thanks to the focus and hard work of the local authority and school leaders, the city has turned things around. The proportion of children attending a good or outstanding primary school in Coventry has now more than doubled, from 42% of pupils to 93%." The Local Government Association said Ofsted's latest statistics showed that councils still had a vital role to play in school improvement. "With 89% of all council-maintained schools rated as good or outstanding by Ofsted, it is now vital that government recognises councils as their education improvement partners," said Richard Watts, the chair of the LGA's children and young people board. Speaking to an audience of school leaders and educationalists in London, including the former education secretaries Nicky Morgan and Kenneth Baker, Wilshaw said stereotypes of state schools were "out of date and frankly wrong". "I don't think the many critics of our education system appreciate just how much has changed," Wilshaw said. "If they did, perhaps they wouldn't be so dismissive of a system that has delivered so much to so many over the last number of years. "Nor would they blithely advocate turning the clock back to a time when the top few percent went to grammar schools and the rest were left with a very threadbare education." Wilshaw said the government was failing in its duty to supply enough teachers: "Everywhere I go, headteachers – particularly secondary heads − tell me how difficult they are finding it to appoint high-calibre teachers." His comments came as the Department for Education admitted it was scrapping plans for a national teaching service to recruit teachers to struggling schools. A freedom of information request by the TES found that the scheme had placed just 24 teachers, having hoped to recruit 1,500 eventually. A DfE spokesperson confirmed the scheme had been shelved. Wilshaw also said too many parents were opting out of mainstream education for religious or cultural reasons, and called for local authorities to do more to monitor the proliferation of small private schools.

Care catering isn't seen as comparable with Michelin-starred gastronomy nor with the offerings in bars, restaurants and hotels around the country. But thanks to a pioneering new training programme, the face of food in the care industry could soon be given a much-needed makeover. "People think retirement home food is slop," says Gareth O'Hara, one of 12 students to complete the pilot course for a new NVQ qualification at north London's state-of-the-art training facility, Hospitality House. "That honestly couldn't be further from the truth." In his kitchen at Cardiff's Sunrise residential care home, O'Hara and his team are coming to the end of a busy lunch shift spent creating a three-course meal for 90 residents, each with varying dietary requirements. Dinner is also three courses, as is breakfast, and the kitchen provides a variety of snacks throughout the day and night. But despite the volume of food involved, every plate sent to the dining room is meticulously designed and beautifully presented. O'Hara came to Sunrise five years ago after cutting his teeth as a chef at a hotel in nearby Bridgend. "I started there as a dish washer, but I enjoyed spending time in the kitchen and was eager to learn more, so they trained me up. I remember feeling really satisfied when I mastered my first dish," he smiles. "Thai fish cakes with chilli jam." O'Hara learned by experience in his first job and it was no different at Sunrise. "In many respects, catering is catering regardless of the industry, but when it comes to care catering there's a whole world of additional considerations." Dysphagia, for example, is a condition that makes it difficult to swallow both solid and liquid food and affects 13.5% of the elderly population. "Even a glass of water can be a huge challenge to some residents," O'Hara explains. "Food needs to be pureed, but it also has to look attractive and appetising. Nobody wants to eat mush every day." Using various technical tricks, and a lot of moulds, O'Hara and his team are able to recreate almost any dish using texture modification. "The residents here are big fans of the fruit dishes we prepare, but sandwiches and even cooked breakfasts can be pureed and then presented as 'normal'." Residents with dementia present another challenge. "There's a huge amount of science involved here," says O'Hara. "These residents don't respond well to normal food or to regular crockery and cutlery, and this is something we have to be very mindful of when creating menus." The same goes for residents requiring nutritional fortification, or extra calories, due to reduced appetites or specific illness. "Here you have to find a balance between creating meals that contain the right calories and nutrients, but which aren't so filling they will put residents off eating for the rest of the day," says O'Hara. "It's a challenge." The NVQ level 2 diploma in professional cookery in health and social care catering – whose pilot scheme O'Hara completed – was launched in April last year, the result of a collaboration between the National Association of Care Catering (NACC), the Hospital Caterers Association and Barnet and Southgate College. O'Hara commuted the 160 miles to London and back again, every Monday – his day off – for the 20 weeks of the course, and was named Care Catering Hero at the NACC's annual awards this year. "If a chef could be cloned, it would be him," the judges agreed unanimously – and it's not hard to see why. But what motivates him most is challenging negative images of care catering – coming from both the public and colleagues in the hospitality industry – and increasing the profiles of those who work in the sector. "I'd like to see care homes accredited in the same way that restaurants are, with rosettes or Michelin stars," he says. "Chefs in traditional catering environments have to make food look and taste good, but we have a raft of other factors to take into account." The NACC says care catering has not received the high-profile recognition enjoyed by other sectors of the catering industry and, according to chair Neel Radia, "the care sector itself has not shouted loud enough". It is hoped that professional accreditation in the form of the new NVQ will provide a platform for talents such as O'Hara to be recognised. Join the Social Care Network to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare) and like us on Facebook to keep up with the latest social care news and views.

Italians are voting in a referendum on 4 December that is causing concern across Europe after the UK's vote to leave the EU and Donald Trump's US presidential election victory. The vote could lead to the resignation of Matteo Renzi, the prime minister. However, the fallout from a no vote on Sunday could be economic and financial as well as political. Why are financial markets worried about Sunday's referendum? Italy's vote is seen as the biggest threat to Europe since the UK's referendum on EU membership in June. The fear is that a vote against the government could trigger a chain of events that might see Italy – a member of the EU since its inception – spiral out of the single currency. But isn't the referendum on a narrow political issue? It is and it isn't. The referendum is about constitutional changes but is also seen as a vote of confidence in Renzi. The proposed changes to parliament are part of his attempts to modernise Italy, both politically and economically. Markets like Renzi's technocratic approach; they think he is needed to sort out the deep-seated problems of Italy's banks – the weakest in the eurozone – and are worried because he has pledged to quit if the referendum is lost. Markets fear that defeat for Renzi would trigger a general election that could result in power shifting to the Five Star Movement. An anti-establishment party formed by former standup comedian Beppe Grillo, it has suggested it would call a referendum on membership of the EU. "With a wave of elections in Europe in 2017, such a shift in sentiment would undermine political integration and increase demand for national sovereignty," said analysts at Jefferies. What's wrong with the economy? Pretty much everything. Italy has an unemployment rate of 11% and living standards have barely grown since the country became a founder member of the single currency 15 years ago. Nine years after the onset of the financial crisis in 2007, output remains 8% down on its pre-crash level. Shweta Singh, of Lombard Street Research, said Italy's weakness since the turn of the millennium was the result of three factors: a slow takeup of new information technology; the inability of the government to devalue the currency to restore competitiveness; and the challenge posed by China in many of the markets where Italy has traditionally been strong. "Italy's share of global exports has plummeted," Singh said. "Since the turn of the century, Italy has lost more market share than most developed countries, including those in the euro area." What's wrong with the banks? They are in "terrible shape", according to Kathleen Brooks, research director at City Index. The country's banking system is fragmented, with more branches than restaurants dotted across its high streets. They are weighed down by €360bn (£305bn) of bad debts. The industry took too long to tackle the mountain of bad debts and by the time the regulators wanted action a change in EU rules meant it was difficult to set up a "bad bank". Renzi is credited with helping devise a solution, creating a backstop fund – known as Atlante – for the industry. Banca Monte dei Paschi di Siena, the world's oldest bank, is also one of European weakest after stress tests imposed by the European Banking Authority in July showed its financial strength would be sapped if markets came under strain. A bailout plan is in train. So what will happen if there is a no vote? The anxiety is that the banks will crumble. Brooks said: "If [Renzi] loses the referendum and resigns, then the big question for traders will be if the bailout plan still stands. If not, then eight of Italy's lenders could be at risk of collapse. "Due to the interconnectedness of the global banking system, and the weakness of some other European lenders notably Deutsche Bank, a collapse in Italy's banking system could lead to intense pressure on global financial stocks in the aftermath of a no vote." Wouldn't the European Central Bank do something? Almost certainly. The ECB buys €80bn of eurozone bonds each month and in the short term would make buying Italian bonds a priority. That might limit the upward movement in bond yields – the interest paid on government debt. The European commission would also be under pressure to soften rules that put restrictions on individual governments bailing out their banks. If there is a yes vote does that mean it is a case of crisis over? Almost certainly not. There might be a relief rally and the shares of Unicredit and Banca Monte dei Paschi di Siena could bounce after recent selling, but the problems of the Italian economy and the country's banking system will remain. The key issue of whether Italy can live with the pressures of eurozone membership will be unresolved.

Growth in the UK's manufacturing sector has eased and the weak pound is further driving up firms' prices, according to an industry survey. The closely watched manufacturing purchasing managers' index fell to 53.4 in November from 54.2 in October, according to the latest monthly snapshot from Markit/CIPS. A reading above 50 signals expansion; a reading below points to contraction. The industry has been growing for four months, but growth has eased in output and new orders from the highs reached in September. Sterling, which has dropped sharply since the EU referendum in June, continues to push up manufacturers' costs, prompting them to raise their prices. Selling prices rose for the seventh month, and at a rate close to October's 64-month high. This is further evidence that consumers face higher prices for food and household goods in coming months. Rob Dobson, senior economist at IHS Markit, which compiles the survey, said overall manufacturing "remained in good health". "Although the recent growth spurt showed further signs of slowing, the pace of expansion is still solid and above its long-term trend. This should be sufficient to ensure manufacturing is a positive contributor to fourth quarter GDP," he said. He said the expansion was underpinned by rising consumer demand and spending by businesses, but noted that the trend in new orders for investment goods such as factory parts and machinery had eased sharply in the fourth quarter. The weaker pound has boosted export orders, he said, but added: "The concern is that higher costs may in time offset any positive effect of the weaker exchange rate, especially given that export order book growth has already waned markedly from September's five and a half year high." A recent survey from the Confederation of British Industry painted a similar picture. It showed order books were strong but warned that factory gate prices were rising at their fastest rate since early 2014.

The second series of First Contact, which aired over three days this week, took six notable Australians – including Natalie Imbruglia, Tom Ballard and David Oldfield – out of their comfort zones and into contact with Indigenous Australia. At the conclusion of the series on Thursday evening, this much was for sure: this is not a show for Aboriginal audiences. The series has already been widely canned by Indigenous writers and commentators on social media and beyond, and the nub of the critique is this: First Contact exploits the suffering and disadvantage of vulnerable First Nations people to manufacture white Australia "feels". It's that straightforward. From an Indigenous perspective, perhaps the most conflicting aspect of the series is that it was made by some of our own: Aboriginal-led company Blackfella Films. It was extremely difficult to watch five celebrity types and a squinty former political adviser perpetuate Aboriginal stereotypes and cultural falsehoods on a magical mystery tour of black Australia. There were, of course, the expected mild epiphanies: Tom Ballard at the West Kimberley regional prison; Nicki Wendt at Cootamundra's former girl's home; Ian "Dicko" Dickson in the far north township of Coen. But there were also significant moments when highly questionable statements went unchecked – such as when the former One Nation party strategist refused to acknowledge that the commonwealth constitution contained any racism. The ensuing dialogue between the peculiar Oldfield and the lefty comedian Ballard didn't come close to clarifying that when the founding document was enacted in 1901, section 127 specifically provided: "In reckoning the numbers of the people of the Commonwealth, or of a State or other part of the Commonwealth, aboriginal natives shall not be counted." Only after 66 years – a period greater than an average Aboriginal person's lifetime – was that racist provision amended. At the 1967 national referendum, Australian citizens voted overwhelmingly in favour of scrapping the article. Of course, merely broadcasting Oldfield's brand of post-truth wilful ignorance could have a dangerous normalising effect – but the most objectionable part of First Contact's second series is the absence of analytical rigour that follows it. We see it again when the group visits Kalan Enterprises' Dion Creek in the Cape of York town of Coen. Creek, a local community leader, champions the success of the town's Families Responsibilities Commission and its implementation of the Basics Card welfare control system. In the ensuing exchanges, no counterpoint is considered by the group or the show's editorial directors – yet authoritative Indigenous organisations including the National Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Legal Service have rejected the program. A 2014 report found the initiative did little to improve spending habits or living conditions within Indigenous communities when applied in prescribed contexts. It's a similar story when they head to Coen's local primary school – one under the umbrella of the influential Indigenous lawyer Noel Pearson's Cape York Academy – to hear of the virtues of the "direct instruction" teaching method. It is here that First Contact is at its most perilous: a reality show at risk of tilting into policy propaganda. The value of both Cape York Academy and "direct instruction" are still hotly contested within Indigenous public spheres. Since 2010, Pearson, a member of the prime minister's Indigenous Advisory Council, has received $37m in federal and state funding for his Good to Great Schools Australia organisation. A former executive principal who oversaw the Coen, Aurukun and Hopevale schools described the teaching program as "inappropriate". Chris Sarra, an Indigenous educator and founder of the Stronger Smarter Institute, called it an "ineffective" and "substandard" approach. Instead of delving into the complexity of these issues, the show returns – seemingly perpetually – to dotty Oldfield. Indigenous commentators Nayukka and Paul Gorrie have pointed out that Oldfield provides a diversion for arguably equally racist remarks delivered by others on the show – such as Renae Ayris, for instance, who at one point says: "I'm scared of Aboriginal people." Side by side with Oldfield, the misinformed racial profiling of other cast members becomes more palatable to a passive audience. Like a rodeo barrel-clown, Oldfield also distracts the critical attention of viewers, drawing audience contempt his way instead of towards the actual disadvantage that impacts upon Aboriginal families like "SW's" in the Northern Territory town of Elliot, and towards the institutional structures contributing to the perpetuation of those conditions, as the journalist Amy McQuire points out. If viewers genuinely wanted to better understand Indigenous Australia, they would have been better served by turning off the TV on Tuesday to watch a far more effective and ethically sound campaign that was unfolding on social media that same day. The #DefineAboriginal hashtag launched as a response to odious comments delivered by Oldfield's former boss, the far-right senator Pauline Hanson, who claimed "there's no definition to an Aboriginal". Like #IndigenousDads before it, #DefineAboriginal provided a more participatory – and therefore more accurate – expression of what being Aboriginal in this so-called commonwealth involves. The Indigenous media academic Bronwyn Carlson told me "the stress of constantly battling racism can be emotionally and physically traumatic". #DefineAboriginal provided a means for Indigenous Australians to deal with racial battle fatigue, she said, in a manner that maintained an integrity of agency. First Contact failed to do that, preferring to sate the voyeurism of non-Indigenous viewers instead. First Contact is available to watch on SBS On Demand

1) Tennis showboaters just love the "tweener" – the between-the-legs, back-to-net point-saver shot also known as the Gran Willy after pioneer Guillermo Vilas. It was on show again at the Davis Cup final – Juan Martín del Potro raising a cheer by humiliating Marin Cilic. Here's more to enjoy: ten tweener lobs, ten tweener passing-shots, and, a twist, the altogether more arrogant frontal tweener remix. 2) In the same spirit, here's rabona of the week: Roma's Diego Perotti chipping one in against Viktoria Plzen in the Europa League. Then he went and ruined it: "The truth is, I tried to cross this. But it's good that it went in, for the team, and for me." He'll now take his place in the next set of "world's best rabona" montages – but no-one has ever mastered the art as well as this nipper. 3) Here's football embracing the post-truth age: Toulouse manager Pascal Dupraz reacting to a paper dart brushing his head. Brutal. He said later: "There was a kind of impact on my head. I think I'm a nice guy, but apparently there's someone who has seen fit to throw something at my face." Other great dugout performances: Duisburg coach Norbert Meier tries a mini-Pards-headbutt in 2005 then goes down flailing; Alemannia Haibach's manager gets on the wrong end of a vulcan nerve pinch; and LVG makes his point. See also the essential LVG shapeshifting remix. 4) England's Elliot Daly didn't last long against Argentina – sent off after five minutes for taking out Leonardo Senatore in mid-air. But it was still a long day's work by some standards: back in 2003 Adrian Morley managed 12 seconds of Great Britain's rugby league defeat to Australia before making his long walk. 5) Meanwhile, confirming the old adage that backs have no idea what the forwards do in rugby union, here's Jonny May admirably, but awfully, getting stuck in at scrum-time against Argentina. 6) And finally, a classic well-worked, well-drilled free-kick routine. Puszcza Niepolomice's Polish Cup opponents knew something special was coming – they just didn't expect it to be this special. Some other classic set-pieces: another slick multi-player set-up; Cheltenham's series of mind-blowing dummies; more classic deception; and a scuff with bad repercussions. Highlights from last week's blog 1) If you are in any doubt as to whether Sacramento's Matt Barnes meant this three-pointer, just look at his face afterwards. 2) How to secure yourself a move to Anfield, as demonstrated by Graeme Souness. 3) One for the goalkeepers' union ... it's saves of the season. What's not to like? 4) The worst/best thing about this is that Kerem Bulut isn't actually offside. 5) Diego Maradona really wasn't a fan of knocking it sideways, was he? 6) Almost. Spotters' badges: TheCedarRoom, StuartRG, whobroughtoranges, Kapitza, BostonLager

For all his public diffidence about winning the Nobel prize in literature – he was criticised for being "impolite and arrogant" by a member of the Swedish Academy for not returning its calls – Bob Dylan really was pleased to get the award. The Rolling Stones played the Desert Trip festival in California with Dylan the weekend after he was awarded the Nobel prize, and told the Guardian he had seemed happy, but sheepish about it. "He kept calling me Sir Ronnie," Ronnie Wood said, in part of a Rolling Stones interview that will appear in this week's G2 Film&amp;Music, "and when Charlie walked in he said, 'And Sir Charlie, too! Everyone from England is a sir, right?' We said, 'Yeah Bob, but it's not like ... it's really good about your Nobel prize.' And he went, 'You think so? It's good, huh?' And we said, 'You deserve it.' And he said, 'That's great – thanks.' "He didn't really know how to accept it, but he thought he had done something pretty good," said Wood. Late in October, Dylan finally broke his silence when he called Sara Danius, the permanent secretary of the Swedish Academy, and said: "I appreciate the honour so much. The news about the Nobel prize left me speechless." He also told the Daily Telegraph he would attend the Nobel ceremony "if at all possible". It turned out not to be. In November, Dylan's management wrote to the academy saying "he wishes he could receive the prize personally, but other commitments make it unfortunately impossible". Dylan's arms-length attitude towards the prize was evident again last Thursday, when he did not attend President Barack Obama's reception at the White House for this year's US Nobel prize winners. White House spokesman Josh Earnest said at the Wednesday press briefing: "Unfortunately, for those of you wondering, Bob Dylan will not be at the White House today, so everybody can relax." Earnest said Dylan didn't give a reason, but he noted that Dylan and the president had met previously and "the president enjoyed meeting him". This report contains copy from the Associated Press



The Financial Times has passed another significant milestone by securing more revenues from digital than print. It means that it can claim to be the first mainstream UK newspaper to be able to describe itself as a truly "digital content business." The paper had previously reported that it earned more revenue from content than advertising. Content now accounts for 60% of the group's revenues. So the paywall is clearly paying off. Its total paid circulation, combining print and digital, stands at 843,000, up 75,000 (about 13%) year on year. Three quarters of those are digital-only subscribers. The news comes as the paper today (Thursday) celebrates the first anniversary of its takeover by the Japanese media company Nikkei. When I interviewed its chairman, Tsuneo Kita, 12 months ago he said there was no possibility of his interfering in the FT's newsroom affairs. Has he honoured his pledge? John Ridding, the FT chief executive, said firmly: "He has been true to his word. Our confidence in Nikkei has been fully vindicated." There has been no editorial involvement apart from secondments, with Nikkei journalists in the FT's office and FT staffers spending time in Nikkei's headquarters. Ridding has been to Tokyo at least eight times over the past year in order to forge the commercial links that have resulted in the formation of a combined advertising sales team in Asia, a burgeoning broadcasting partnership and joint technological innovation. These changes have come against a background of what Ridding describes as "an intense year of disruption and turbulence", meaning the vote for Brexit and the election of Donald Trump. The FT, which strongly favoured Britain remaining in the European Union, has benefitted from the vote to leave on 23 June. Since then, business people have been avidly seeking information and opinions on what will happen next. Ridding believes the boost in audience numbers, in both the UK and Europe, confirms the wisdom of the FT's core strategy in providing reliable quality journalism. Which takes us neatly to the hot topic of "fake news" and "post-truth politics." Ridding stresses that trust is the key to winning and retaining readers. Clearly, he says, Google and Facebook "do not want to be arbiters of truth" while we at the FT "take truth seriously... it's our responsibility, it's our business." But, given the digital numbers, will the FT remain faithful to newsprint? "Print is still profitable," says Ridding, "and our figures for the weekend FT are dynamic." He is keener still to point to the latest version of the FT's website, launched on 4 October, and reels off the user speeds: 1.5 seconds on desktop screens and 2.1 seconds on mobile devices. "This makes it one of the fastest news sites in the world," he says .

Players, staff and supporters of Atlético Nacional paid an emotional tribute to the victims of the Colombian plane crash that led to the death of 71 passengers, including members of the Brazilian club Chapecoense. Nacional were scheduled to face Chapecoense at their Atanasio Girardot stadium on Wednesday in the first leg of the Copa Sudamericana final but instead the venue was the scene of a great show of unity and grief. Nacional players gathered around the centre-circle holding white flowers while 45,000 spectators filled the stands holding white candles and chanting "please remember across the continent, we will never forget the champions Chapecoense". Federico Gutiérrez, the mayor of Medellín, also released 71 white doves to symbolise each of the casualties in Tuesday's tragedy. The words "Eternal Champions" was also written on the large screen at the Atanasio. The spectators then rose in ovation as the name of each victim was shown, holding up their candles that lit up the night sky. Nacional conceded the championship in the aftermath of the tragedy, meaning Chapecoense will be crowned Sudamerica Cup champions for the first time.

Leroy Smith is 48 and he has a story to tell. It's not one that makes easy reading, especially if you are unfamiliar with the south London estates in which he grew up or the prisons he came to know at Her Majesty's pleasure. Smith's life was a rampage of crime and guns, robberies and jailbreaks, drugs and women – until it all came to an end in the US in 1994 when he was arrested by an FBI Swat team. "The game and the party were finally over," he says. Now out of jail, he is trying to start again from nothing, knowing that the forces that drew him into a life of violence in the first place are – in some respects – even stronger than before. He believes he can resist them – but he can see the pressures that pushed him into a nihilistic life doing the same to a new generation of black kids. So he has written a book, Out of the Box, and he hopes to speak to community groups and schools about the mistakes he made, and how to avoid repeating them. But finding a new role is tough, and the message he has is as brutal as the life he once lived. As he says in his book: "That was my life – fast and very reckless – a road that I would not advise anyone to go down, because it is very addictive and it can only end badly. "It hurts me to see that after 20 years, a large majority of young black guys still think the road is paved with gold," he says. "Let me tell you brother, from the heart, you are only fooling yourself. These are not the words of a broken man, these are the words of a wise man." It is a wonder Smith is alive at all. His mother was murdered when he was two and by the age of 12 he was bunking off school, driving stolen cars, thieving and smoking weed. Things took a more serious turn after he started carrying a gun. "One one occasion I pulled it on somebody as a joke and I was totally surprised at the fear in the person and the power that I felt. This was a turning point in my mindset." Out of the Box describes in a matter-of-fact way his spiral into ever more serious crime. It is neither glamorous, or glamorised. The gun wasn't just a weapon, it was his everything: a tool for work, a passport into certain circles, the thing that kept him alive but constantly close to death. Smith had access to large amounts of cash from drug deals, so as long as he kept one step ahead of the law, and any rivals, he was succeeding after a fashion. But it couldn't last, and it didn't. On the run after shooting two police officers in Brixton's Coldharbour Lane in March 1994, he fled to Holland and then the US, where he was eventually arrested and brought back to the UK for an Old Bailey trial. The judge told him that "dreadful crimes must attract dreadful sentences" – and he was given 25 years. He now lives in west London, his home surrounded by CCTV cameras. He wants to get away from his old life, but there are people out there who'd still do him harm. "My friends from back then? They are all gone. They have either washed up dead, or they don't know themselves anymore. Yeah, I'm surprised I am still alive. I was a BAD man. Was it really worth it? It was not. I never sailed into the sunset." His message is directed at young black men who, like him, see themselves at a bottom of a pile and believe a shortcut to equality in an unfair society can come through crime. "I can stand in front of kids and tell them I learned the hard way. I have been through all these different situations, all these different scenarios, and it has taken its toll. "I did not get an education. I was too eager and willing to do things my way. I look at these street gangs in London and they are worse than ever. "I say to them, why are you killing your brother? Why are you killing him over a postcode? The white man is laughing at you, and at the end of it all, you are going to get killed. "Go to college. Live your life in a non-violent way. Don't get confused, don't get caught up in it. I say to people, empower yourself. Going down that route, you cannot win." Smith does not ask for sympathy, nor does he try to blame anyone for his predicament. The stories he tells of what goes on behind bars are remarkable; an ecosystem of criminality that the prison service cannot challenge because it has neither the resources nor the appetite. "Be shocked," says Smith. "It's shocking. I don't mind if you are disgusted. It's disturbing." What he wants is an opportunity to try again. "All I am doing is putting my life story out there in the hope that it prevents anybody else, especially underprivileged black young men, from taking the same path. "Because I am an observer of mankind, I am able to translate my life story into a book, so I can die as an author and not as a gunman, or criminal, with no redeeming features. I deserve another chance just like anybody else." Out of the Box is published on Kindle at £2.99

The Six Nations has for years resisted the bonus point system, citing various reasons including tradition and the possibility of a team winning the grand slam but not the championship, but next year's tournament will trial a system that is used in every major professional tournament in the world in a bid to encourage more open play. This year's Six Nations would not have been affected by bonus points, with England still going into the final round as champions, but its 15 matches produced an average of 4.7 tries. Take away the matches that involved Italy, and that average drops to 3.5. The average in this year's Rugby Championship (which has tweaked its system so that a team must score three more tries than the opposition to claim a tries bonus) was 5.8. Its 12 matches produced 70 tries compared to 71 in 15 in the Six Nations. There was no equivalent to Italy but the tournament did contain the most prolific side in Test rugby, New Zealand. Interestingly, given the current talks of a more aligned global calendar during which the Six Nations has been asked to consider starting the tournament later in the season, the February try average this year was 3.3 compared to 6.8 in March. The previous year the average was 3.0 over the first three rounds with the remaining six averaging 7.5. The ides of March do tend to cause Italy to collapse, but excluding their March games this year, the try average was still appreciably up on February at exactly five. Having resisted bonus points for so long, will the Six Nations stop insisting the tournament has to start at the beginning of February? Had bonus points been around in 2013 Stuart Lancaster's England, rather than Wales, would have won the Six Nations despite being trounced in their final game in Cardiff. Both teams finished on eight points with four victories, but Wales neither scored four tries in a match nor lost by seven points or fewer. Under next year's trial system, they would have finished on 16 points, one behind England who would have secured a bonus point in victory over Scotland (the only match in that year's tournament in which a team scored four tries). When matches involving tier one nations are considered, the current autumn series has produced more tries than in 2014: 6.2 compared to 4.4. It reflects the emphasis now placed on getting the ball away quickly from the breakdown and challenging teams in wider areas. Only one of the 10 countries has scored fewer tries this month than they did two years ago, Scotland down one from 11 in three, while Wales stayed the same on eight in four matches. Even though they won three of those games, a distinct improvement on previous Novembers, their coaching team has come under fire for a series of underwhelming performances. Like France, Wales are trying to return to a style of play associated with them in years past, based on cunning and running rather than gunning. It is taking time as players used to being bottle-fed learn to think for themselves, but England under Eddie Jones are showing the way having made significant progress in the past year. They have the opportunity, against the Australia side they whitewashed in the summer, to go through the year unbeaten. To compare them now with the first match under Jones in Scotland last February is to see two vastly different teams; in attitude rather than personnel. Jones gave a presentation to the Rugby Football Union before the autumn series in which he outlined his plan not only for the next month but through to the 2019 World Cup in Japan. He said the improvement in England had its roots in the relationship with the Premiership clubs and that it was based on a strong identity forged by the team leadership of Dylan Hartley, Owen Farrell, George Ford, Billy Vunipola and James Haskell, although the latter two will be absent through injury on Saturday. Jones said that in the next year he wanted to develop a second leadership group and oversee a team in which some 80% of the players had leadership qualities. He wanted, as Wales's Rob Howley does, his players to be self-reliant and robust, believing that they could beat anyone, anywhere, any way how. Coaching, he put it, should be adaptive, not prescriptive. A successful team was not just based on supreme conditioning – he pointed out that in the three Tests in Australia England had outscored their opponents in the final 20 minutes of each match – but individual responsibility. He wanted strong set-pieces and an improved maul to provide the foundation for expressive players. England, he said, were not the best team in the world but his intention was that they would be by 2019, building in the next two years before peaking in the last Six Nations before the World Cup and then winning the tournament. They had the talent and now their game had clarity. Jones has used the autumn series to assess his options. Injury has forced that to some extent and it will be interesting to see how England cope without Billy Vunipola on Saturday, a forward who has a central role in the way they play, rolling over defenders to provide quick ball for the half-backs and Farrell to exploit. It is a pity, for the neutral, that Australia lost their unbeaten tour record against Ireland last weekend, but even without a grand slam to aim for they have the spur of revenge for what happened against England in the summer. Jones has raised the temperature by bagging the Wallabies' scrum and the Australian media, confident his players no longer melt in the heat. England and Ireland have shown the Lions the way in the last month, two physical teams who can play and live off their wits; fixtures and fittings to go with the nuts and bolts. This is an extract taken from the Breakdown, the Guardian's weekly rugby union email. To subscribe just visit this page and follow the instructions.

An Aids memorial is being unveiled in New York City today. While it is fitting to have right here in Greenwich Village a grand Jenny Holzer-designed, Walt Whitman-inscribed memorial to the 35 million people who have died from Aids and the 37 million people currently living with HIV, there is little to celebrate locally or globally. Just across the street, St Vincent's hospital – an epicenter of the epidemic in its early years – has died, just as so many gay men did within its walls in the 1980s. It is being converted into luxury condos. That a hospital which served the most marginalized would be replaced by real estate for the super wealthy is a fitting metaphor in the age of a real estate developer-turned-president. Indeed, Donald Trump is set to preside over a newly harmful period in HIV history. HIV/Aids is no scourge of the past in the US. The Centers for Disease Control estimates that one in two black men who has sex with men will become HIV positive, despite having "fewer partners and lower rates of recreational drug use than other gay men". While the drug PrEP (which can greatly reduce the likelihood of becoming HIV positive) is often heralded as some kind of panacea, it cannot address some of the biggest epidemiological factors fanning modern HIV: access to employment, housing and healthcare. Indeed, in cities like Atlanta, half of HIV diagnoses have already progressed to Aids – precisely because people most likely to be exposed to HIV don't have healthcare. And this is why my mind drifts uptown to Trump Tower. It's not just that Trump literally doesn't mention HIV/Aids in his healthcare policy, nor that he's generally anti-science. It's not even just that every single Trump cabinet pick so far has some kind of anti-LGBT record. I am terrified that two of his most important picks – vice-president elect Mike Pence and Health and Human Services secretary nominee Tom Price – know exactly how to harm Americans (disproportionately black and/or LGBT Americans) by way of HIV/Aids. If Reagan was remembered for his inaction on the plague, Trump may be remembered for explicitly dismantling the Aids safety net and for enacting policies that will make the virus move more freely between people. As Carolyn Guild Johnson, director of prevention of services at St Louis Effort for Aids, recently told me: "I'm not only worried about our clients, but also the public health emergency that will result from the increased community viral load." After waging war on Planned Parenthood in congress, Pence presided over one of the fastest HIV outbreaks in US history as governor of Indiana. Pence believes in abstinence-only education, which is known to foster higher rates of sexually transmitted diseases. And Pence wrote in 2002 that "Congress should support the reauthorization of the Ryan White Care Act," the main federal support for combatting HIV/Aids, "only after completion of an audit to ensure that federal dollars were no longer being given to organizations that celebrate and encourage the types of behaviors that facilitate the spreading of the HIV virus." A large component of the important work organizations like Gay Men's Health Crisis and St Louis Effort for Aids do to tackle HIV precisely means combating homophobia and stigma. (Pence instead believed that "resources should be directed toward those institutions which provide assistance to those seeking to change their sexual behavior," for example dangerous so-called conversion therapy.) Meanwhile, Price, the potential HHS secretary, has supported a constitutional amendment against same-sex marriage and voted against hate crimes legislation. He also is also vehemently opposed to the Affordable Care Act. In guaranteeing coverage for people with pre-existing conditions such as HIV who had been locked out of insurance, covering HIV testing and funding prevention efforts, the ACA has earned its claim to be "one of the most important pieces of legislation in the fight against HIV/Aids in our history". When I reluctantly made the decision to vote for Hillary Clinton, I didn't want to focus on being anti-Trump, but to think of ways I could be excited about her despite my many reservations. The moment I picked was when she boldly denounced the criminalization of HIV, whereby individuals can be prosecuted for exposing someone else to the virus (while corporations and governments, which fan transmission on much larger scales through malfeasance and neglect, elude punishment). Her finest moment, to me, never registered in the media – and yet, she is calm, medically sensible and ethically admirable. What a contrast with Trump and his team. As we remember today the tens of millions who have died from Aids and who live with HIV, we must recommit ourselves to fighting a virus which will likely be allowed to flourish by a the incoming administration. Comments on this article will be premoderated

After five years in the job of chief inspector of schools, Sir Michael Wilshaw will deliver his final annual general report as head of Ofsted on Thursday morning – possibly to his own regret and almost certainly to the regret of education journalists, for whom life can sometimes be a little drab. The 70-year-old former headteacher, whose reputation was forged in the classrooms of some of the most challenging schools in the country, and who nicknamed himself Dirty Harry after the Clint Eastwood character, has been a colourful figure in the education world, unafraid to upset pupils, parents, teachers and government ministers. His final annual report is expected to focus on underperformance in further education colleges, a neglected part of the education system, because – as he pointed out with characteristic candidness on Channel 4 News during a visit to a college in east London – "most politicians don't send their youngsters to these sorts of places". The report is also expected to reiterate Wilshaw's concerns about the north-south divide in education, with secondary schools in the north and east Midlands still lagging behind those in London and the south. Back in 2011, Wilshaw was recommended for the top Ofsted job by then education secretary Michael Gove, who was bowled over by Wilshaw's record as head teacher at Mossbourne academy in Hackney, east London. It is famed for its strict discipline policy and impressive results and has been copied in schools across the country. Five years on and despite a major heart surgery, a bitter, public falling-out with the government and the so-called Trojan Horse controversy in Birmingham schools, Wilshaw is proud of his record at Ofsted. As the Department of Eduction frequently points out, 1.4 million more children now attend good and outstanding schools than in 2010. In his own words: "People who criticise us can't remember the dire state that schools were in the 70s and 80s. There's a long way to go but, without Ofsted being there, I've no doubt standards will fall and we would go backwards, not forwards." In his sometimes turbulent time at the inspectorate, he suggested parents should be fined if they do not turn up for parents' evening; he said teachers who leave at 3pm should be paid less; he has backed schools that ban "inappropriate wearing" of full-face veils and issued a call to arms for maverick school leaders who are "battlers, bruisers and battle-axes" who will not put up with mediocrity. Never boring, often controversial and always quotable, Wilshaw will be remembered for his courage in telling truth to power. He admits it has been the most difficult aspect of his job, but it has not deterred him from taking the government to task on issues including underperforming academy trusts and, most recently, plans to expand grammar schools to benefit the poor, which he dismissed as "palpable tosh and nonsense". Asked about his own view of his legacy, Wilshaw said he was most proud of the decision to scrap the "satisfactory" judgment in school inspections in favour of "requires improvement" – a move he says has improved the system. Though he has made enemies in his time at Ofsted, his passion for teaching and for improving the lives of the most disadvantaged in society is genuine and inspiring. In his recent Channel 4 interview, he described teaching as "the author of all professions". Russell Hobby, the general secretary of National Association of Head Teachers, welcomed the progress Ofsted made under Wilshaw and said he hoped Ofsted would continue to challenge the government under the new leadership of Wilshaw's successor, Amanda Spielman. "We stand at a turning point with Ofsted. The education system has been transformed since the inspectorate was created. The question now is whether Ofsted can keep pace," he said. "There have been encouraging changes in recent times, greater consistency between teams and a lighter burden for good schools. There is more work to do. Ofsted needs the courage to look beyond raw data and ask how the results have been achieved. "We cannot build sustainably good schools if leaders are always in fear of one bad year. An adversarial inspection system generates a lot of noise but less progress. Our system may be on the edge of great things. We need a different approach to inspection if we are to make that leap."

Nicolas Cage is to take the lead in a new sci-fi movie depicting a world ravaged by climate change. The film, called The Humanity Project, takes place in 2030, when much of the midwest of America has been rendered uninhabitable. The government agency of the title exiles people felt to be unproductive and banishes them to a colony, New Eden. Cage plays a caseworker seeking to appeal the exile of a single mother (Sarah Lind) and her son (Jakob Davies). The film has been scripted by Dave Schultz, will be directed by Rob King, and is due to start shooting in British Columbia next week. The eco-disaster movie dates back to the early 1970s, with Bruce Dern vehicle Silent Running. Other notables in the genre include Soylent Green (1973), Waterworld (1995), The Core (2003), The Day After Tomorrow (2004), Children of Men (2006), Wall-E (2008) and 2012 (2009). George Miller's Mad Max series is set in a post-apocalyptic wasteland whose inhabitants seek to defend themselves against drought; Christopher Nolan's Interstellar depicted an Earth no longer inhabitable, hence the need to explore other potential planets. However that film did not explicitly attribute the situation to global warming.

"My children both have a cooked meal at lunch because they have free school meals. My cupboard's full of tins," Kayleigh tells me from her two-bedroom house in Lancashire. The 30-year-old single mother is in a position no parent ever wants to face – working out how she will feed her young son and daughter for the next six weeks. Kayleigh used to have a good job as a stock taker for a large insurance company, but since having her children she has looked after them full-time: Lewis is eight and Olivia is five. For years, the three have got by with income support, housing benefit and child tax credits, but as of 19 November, Kayleigh was told to apply for universal credit: the system now rolling out nationwide that combines multiple benefits. A "built-in" delay in universal credit means claimants such as Kayleigh are forced to wait at least 42 days before receiving their first payment. That's six weeks without benefits. Kayleigh has to wait until 1 January for her first payment of universal credit. In the meantime, she has £34 a week of child benefit to live on. "I'm struggling to heat the house and when we go to the shops, I have to say no," she tells me. "Then the children wonder why Mum has not got money." It's a small mercy that child benefit isn't affected by the shift to universal credit. If it were, Kayleigh would now have no income at all. She is allowed one small advance of universal credit – around 50% of a monthly payment that she'll have to pay back – but is doing her best to hold off claiming it for a week or two. "I'm leaving it so we can have a Christmas," she says. "I want to be able to buy my children the odd present." The Equality Trust has warned that universal credit's built-in delay could push millions into debt. The thinktank found a staggering 7.5m households don't have enough savings to cover six weeks' worth of bills. That means jobseekers, disabled people and low-wage workers, among all those in the process of being transferred to universal credit, could now face getting through the Christmas period with payday lenders, food banks and rent arrears. Once on universal credit, the odds are stacked against families to find their way free of debt. Last week, the chancellor proudly stated the "taper rate" on universal credit (how quickly the benefit is withdrawn according to a claimant's earnings) will drop from 65% to 63% – effectively meaning the low waged can hold on to more of what they earn. But what he didn't say was that if a single parent such as Kayleigh worked 150 hours a month, that would be worth just an extra £26. To put that in the bigger picture, Kayleigh could find a job tomorrow, and after taxes and the withdrawal of universal credit, she would keep barely a third of her wages. Compare that to someone in the richest 1%, who according to the Equality Trust's calculations, keeps 53% of their additional earnings. As it is, Kayleigh has no choice. Because her daughter has now turned five, benefit rules mean she has to look for at least part-time work. If she doesn't, she'll have her universal credit sanctioned by up to £10.40 a day for three months. Benefit sanctions can, potentially, stretch to three years. For the last fortnight, she has completed the compulsory 35 hours of job searching each week: wading through anything she is qualified for that might fit the hours she needs. There aren't many jobs available when you've been out of work for nine years and there's no one to look after the children after 3pm. "I'm running out of options," she says. "I'm sending my CV to all the main supermarkets just on the off-chance they may have something in the future." That's what it is to be a so-called "benefit claimant" now: the government is free to withhold your money, but if you don't keep up your end of the bargain, they'll still punish you for it. Kayleigh is currently relying on a cold weather payment to cover her gas and electric, and her mother is buying the family bits of food: milk, bread, pasta, rice and some chicken nuggets as a treat for the kids. "But she's disabled so hasn't got much money herself," Kayleigh says. Kayleigh's grandma helps too. Liam is lactose-intolerant and his nan uses part of her pension to buy him milk and butter that won't make him ill. As another insight into the workings of universal credit, as Kayleigh waits for her money to come in, she doesn't even know how much is due: when she put in her claim, the system "forgot" to add her children and didn't calculate it properly. "It's hard, but we're in the same boat as most people," she says. She counts herself lucky that she and her children are having Christmas dinner with her mum.

A single dose of psilocybin, the active ingredient of magic mushrooms, can lift the anxiety and depression experienced by people with advanced cancer for six months or even longer, two new studies show. Researchers involved in the two trials in the United States say the results are remarkable. The volunteers had "profoundly meaningful and spiritual experiences" which made most of them rethink life and death, ended their despair and brought about lasting improvement in the quality of their lives. The results of the research are published in the Journal of Psychopharmacology together with no less than ten commentaries from leading scientists in the fields of psychiatry and palliative care, who all back further research. While the effects of magic mushrooms have been of interest to psychiatry since the 1950s, the classification of all psychedelics in the US as schedule 1 drugs in the 1970s, in the wake of the Vietnam war and the rise of recreational drug use in the hippy counter-culture, has erected daunting legal and financial obstacles to running trials. "I think it is a big deal both in terms of the findings and in terms of the history and what it represents. It was part of psychiatry and vanished and now it's been brought back," said Dr Stephen Ross, director of addiction psychiatry at NYU Langone Medical Center and lead investigator of the study that was based there. Around 40-50% of newly diagnosed cancer patients suffer some sort of depression or anxiety. Antidepressants have little effect, particularly on the "existential" depression that can lead some to feel their lives are meaningless and contemplate suicide. The main findings of the NYU study, which involved 29 patients, and the larger one from Johns Hopkins University with 51 patients, that a single dose of the medication can lead to immediate reduction in the depression and anxiety caused by cancer and that the effect can last up to eight months, "is unprecedented," said Ross. "We don't have anything like it." The results of the studies were very similar, with around 80% of the patients attributing moderately or greatly improved wellbeing or life satisfaction to a single high dose of the drug, given with psychotherapy support. Professor Roland Griffiths, of the departments of psychiatry and neuroscience who led the study at Johns Hopkins University school of medicine, said he did not expect the findings, which he described as remarkable. "I am bred as a sceptic. I was sceptical at the outset that this drug could produce long-lasting changes," he said. These were people "facing the deepest existential questions that humans can encounter - what is the nature of life and death, the meaning of life." But the results were similar to those they had found in earlier studies in healthy volunteers. "In spite of their unique vulnerability and the mood disruption that the illness and contemplation of their death has prompted, these participants have the same kind of experiences, that are deeply meaningful, spiritually significant and producing enduring positive changes in life and mood and behaviour," he said. Patients describe the experiences as "re-organisational", said Griffiths. Some in the field had used the term "mystical", which he thought was unfortunate. "It sounds unscientific. It sounds like we're postulating mechanisms other than neuroscience and I'm certainly not making that claim." Ross said psilocybin activates a sub-type of serotonin receptor in the brain. "Our brains are hard-wired to have these kinds of experiences - these alterations of consciousness. We have endogenous chemicals in our brain. We have a little system that, when you tickle it, it produces these altered states that have been described as spiritual states, mystical states in different religious branches. "They are defined by a sense of oneness – people feel that their separation between the personal ego and the outside world is sort of dissolved and they feel that they are part of some continuous energy or consciousness in the universe. Patients can feel sort of transported to a different dimension of reality, sort of like a waking dream." Some patients describe seeing images from their childhood and very commonly, scenes or images from a confrontation with cancer, he said. The doctors warn patients that it may happen and not to be scared, but to embrace it and pass through it, he said. The commentators writing in the journal include two past presidents of the American Psychiatric Association, the past president of the European College of Neuropsychopharmacology, a previous deputy director of the Office of USA National Drug Control Policy and a previous head of the UK Medicines and Healthcare Regulatory Authority. The journal editor, Professor David Nutt, was himself involved in a small trial of psilocybin in a dozen people with severe depression in the UK in May. The ten commentators in the journal, he writes in an editorial, "all essentially say the same thing: it's time to take psychedelic treatments in psychiatry and oncology seriously, as we did in the 1950s and 1960s." Much more research needs to be done, he writes. "But the key point is that all agree we are now in an exciting new phase of psychedelic psychopharmacology that needs to be encouraged not impeded." The studies were funded by the Heffter Research Institute in the USA. "These findings, the most profound to date in the medical use of psilocybin, indicate it could be more effective at treating serious psychiatric diseases than traditional pharmaceutical approaches, and without having to take a medication every day," said its medical director George Greer.

A roomful of three dozen young women sit in hushed concentration tap-tapping on their laptops, oblivious to the glint of the Pacific through the window of the eleventh floor office. On the walls motivational messages such as "Keep Calm and Code On" urge them to conquer their self-doubt and overcome the perception that tech is not for girls. From 9am to 6pm, including some evenings and weekends, they are taught Java Script, CSS3 and HTML5 for $10 a month. Laboratoria is a social enterprise giving young women in Peru a five-month fast-track course in coding, readying them for a job in the country's burgeoning tech sector where demand for their skills exceeds supply but fewer than 10% of professionals are women. "The tech sector is moving and growing and it desperately needs more talent," says Mariana Costa, co-founder and CEO of Laboratoria, a savvy 30-year-old Peruvian who studied at the London School of Economics and New York's Columbia University and has an impressive track record in social entrepreneurship. While working in website and software development, she realised there was a huge demand for developers, so she set up a social enterprise to train the talent from diverse backgrounds. "There's an increased awareness about the need to have diverse teams and also for women to take advantage of all the opportunities that tech represents," she says. Software development is Latin America's fastest growing career. By 2019 it is expected that IT will need 450,000 professionals. Although just 400 women have graduated from Laboratoria since it started in 2014 (with a job placement rate of 77% in companies such as Google and Microsoft, according Laboratoria's own research), the project has expanded to Peru's second city, Arequipa, and outside the country in Mexico City and Santiago in Chile. Next year a programme will open in Guadalajara, Mexico. "Everywhere that we operate we have more demand from companies than developers ready for work, which is a good problem to have," says Costa. The potential impact of the project has been noticed around the world. Costa has a place on the BBC 100 women 2016, a list of this year's influential women. Facebook founder Mark Zuckerberg mentioned her in a keynote address to the APEC summit in Lima in November. Barack Obama praised her social enterprise as "wonderful" at Stanford University's Global Entrepreneurship Summit this year. Costa, who comes from a privileged background, is motivated to give women from low-income backgrounds greater opportunities. "It's bad luck that you were born on that side of town. There are incredibly talented people there who just are never even aware of their talent and potential because they don't have the opportunity to discover it," she says. "Taking advantage of a field that's growing so fast and provides so many opportunities seemed a creative way to solve this social problem." The course was a lifeline For Ariadna Eyzaguirre, 19, who had to leave university after her parents separated and her tour guide mother could no longer afford her fees. It is a 5am wake-up and several bus rides from her home in San Martin de Porres district to Laboratoria in upmarket Miraflores, but she is excited about the future. Women aged 18 to 35 (there are some exceptions for over 35s) can apply to the training. "We offer a career in web development. Not just a course," the website advertises. After a six-month intensive boot camp, Laboratoria continues to provide 18 months of education around a job. Once the women are working, their continuing education is paid for through their salaries. Costa says she is working towards a model of self-sustainability for the programme, but they have received investment funding from the Inter-American Development Bank, Lenovo, AT&amp;T, Telefonica, the government of Chile, Citi Foundation, Microsoft, MIT and Peery Foundation. Costa plans to expand the programme by connecting graduates to job opportunities in the US. "Our vision is to train 10,000 developers in the next five years, and become the leading force of female tech talent from Latin America to the world, using tech as a powerful social transformation opportunity," she says. Laboratoria's current students are aware that if they weren't learning to code they'd be working low-paid, low-skilled jobs (or no job at all). Andrea Maucaylli, 25, supported herself and her younger medical student sister with an online shop after they moved to Lima. She says the teaching style at Laboratoria keeps her motivated: "Instead of being told what you got wrong, you're told how you can do it better and that motivates you to keep pushing forward. If we could replicate this way of teaching, there's nothing we couldn't do. There are so many kids out there whose talents are going to waste." The selection process is rigorous, says Costa, but it is tailored for the job market. "We try to spot talent where nobody else is looking for it," she says. "They don't only get a job and a better income, they get to also start a career. It's like the first step in a whole new world which really has endless opportunities." Peru has one of the fastest growing economies in Latin America but one in five young people in the county neither works nor studies. Of those, 66% are women. "Laboratoria at its heart is about empowerment and transformation. Coding is the means of how we get to the end," says Costa. "The end is to make sure that the women who come through the programme are able to build a future that they want for themselves." Join our community of development professionals and humanitarians. Follow @GuardianGDP on Twitter. Join the conversation with the hashtag #SheMatters.

The head of the schools watchdog has linked the Brexit vote to the failure to raise education standards in parts of England. Sir Michael Wilshaw, speaking before the publication of the Ofsted annual report on Thursday, highlighted the continuing geographical divide in education, with schools in the north and east Midlands continuing to lag behind those in London and the south. He told the BBC Radio 4 Today programme that the failure to improve schools in some areas may have contributed to the feeling of alienation and a sense of a "divided nation" that was exposed by the referendum vote to leave the EU earlier this year. He also made clear he believed that schools should not be used as a border control by the Home Office. Commenting on a report based on documents leaked to the BBC showing that the Home Office wanted to "deprioritise" the children of parents unlawfully in the UK for school places, Wilshaw said: "I'm amazed and shocked by it. Schools should not be used for border control." Wilshaw, whose term at the school inspectorate ends later this month, said standards were rising overall, with almost 90% of primary schools doing "phenomenally well" across the country. Some secondary schools were still struggling, however, and because of the geographical divide in educational standards, parents in Manchester, Liverpool and towns in the north of England were less likely to see their children get a good job or go on to university than those in London. One in three schools in Manchester and almost 50% in Liverpool were "not good", and he said the inequality of provision was "feeding into a wider malaise" and a "sense of alienation" that people were feeling in parts of the country. In an earlier interview with the BBC during a visit to Manchester, he said: "The situation is very, very serious. It's feeding into a sense that the people of Liverpool, Manchester and the north are not being treated fairly – that their children have less of a chance of educational success than people south of the Wash. "And that's feeding into a wider malaise that I sense with the Brexit vote, that actually this wasn't just about leaving Europe, it's about 'our needs being neglected, our children are not getting as good a deal as elsewhere'. "Parents want to see their children doing well; they want to see them going off to university; they want to see them getting a good job. Well, they have less of a chance of that in this city [Manchester], in Liverpool and elsewhere, and that feeds into this sense of discontent in the north and in the Midlands." Wilshaw also flagged up the crisis in teacher recruitment, saying it should be the first priority of the Department for Education to make sure there are enough teachers in classrooms and enough people training to become teachers. He also reiterated his opposition to government plans to extend grammar schools, saying that as a former headteacher he knew that had a grammar school opened up down the road, taking the top 15-20% of children, he would have been unable to raise standards for all children in his school. He said he was "totally against" the idea. Commenting on the Ofsted annual report, Brett Wigdortz, chief executive and founder of Teach First, said: "It's hugely welcome that standards are increasing overall, but we must not take our eye off the ball and see disadvantaged areas fall behind. "Teach First is committed to helping the areas with the greatest need – the north, Midlands and coastal areas – by recruiting many more great teachers to increase the attainment and unlock the aspirations of pupils from all backgrounds. "Schools, government and communities need to work together to ensure teaching remains an attractive, viable choice for top talent across the country."

When I took the upgrade from Windows 7 to Windows 10, I continued to use my local account to log on. When I had to replace my motherboard recently, I needed a 30-minute chat (and remote access) with a very helpful Microsoft tech to re-activate Win10. Hmmm. To avoid that in future, I would like to use a Microsoft account, but only to get my system details on file in case I replace another critical component. The problem is that I'm told I need to set-up a new local account after logging on with a Microsoft account. But I don't want to do that. I want to use my existing local account with the Microsoft one in reserve. I understand the functionality argument for using a Microsoft account, but I am happy without any extras. I do what I want online perfectly well at the moment. Graeme A motherboard change can look like a new PC, so you might well have needed to talk to Microsoft even if you had been using a Microsoft account. Either way, you should recognise that Windows 10 is fundamentally different from Windows 7 in at least two important ways. First, it's no longer a desktop operating system, it's a mobile operating system. Some major features – including Cortana, Notifications and apps – originated in the smartphone world. As with other mobile operating systems, everything is maintained from the cloud. Second, Windows 10 is just one part of Microsoft's cross-platform ecosystem, which includes smartphones, tablets, the Xbox One range of games consoles, cloud-based services such as OneDrive and Office 365, and dozens of Microsoft apps on Android and Apple iOS devices. Your Microsoft account (MSA) is your key to this ecosystem. It links your data, apps and settings across multiple personal computers, smartphones and tablets. This as a sort of Copernican revolution. In the old days, everything revolved around the PC. Today, everything revolves around the user, and users are identified by their MSAs, or their Gmail addresses, or their Apple IDs. This is the modern world: people are mobile and they use multiple devices. So, your Windows 10 PC is no longer authenticated locally, and all your credentials are stored online against your MSA. Your cloud profile also stores your apps, preferences and settings, so if you buy a new PC, you can have it set up just like your old one. Your MSA also synchronises bookmarks and other data across devices. For example, if you're using the OneNote app on your Windows 10 PC, you can carry on from the same place in the OneNote app on an Android/iOS/Windows tablet or smartphone – as long as you're using the same MSA. What is an MSA? The most common MSA is a Microsoft email address, which can be at Hotmail, Live, Outlook.com or some other Microsoft email service. If you don't have an MSA, you can easily create one. This does not involve giving Microsoft your real name or any other personal information. Of course, if you want to use two-factor authentication for extra security, you will have to provide a phone number, but this can be any dumbphone that can receive an SMS text. It is perfectly possible to create an MSA based on a Gmail or any other non-Microsoft email address. I don't recommend this. If you're not careful, you can end up with a Microsoft email account that can send emails "as from" Gmail etc. All these "single sign-ons" – MSA, Gmail, Apple, Facebook etc – have the same problem: being locked out of one service can lock you out of many others. The solution is to use services from several different suppliers, rather than putting all your eggs in one basket, and to keep backups of all your cloud data. Local accounts You can continue to use an old Windows 7 local account in Windows 10 – as you did – but it requires some care. For example, you need an MSA to use a cloud service, such as the Windows Store. You have to look for the line that says "Sign in to this App only" every time to avoid getting your MSA attached to all the other stuff as well. If you run a Windows Store app, you will be prompted to sign on to your PC with your MSA and you must click "Sign in to just use this app instead" rather than simply clicking Next. But, in reality, there's no benefit to signing in to every app and service separately if you're using the same MSA. It's just pointless extra work. Nonetheless, Microsoft has responded to complaints by making it much easier to use a local account in Windows 10 than it was in Windows 8. For example, you can now use Cortana and the mail, maps and music apps without an MSA, though you inevitably lose some functionality. You can't, for example, sync data or music across devices, or use the app you paid for on one device on a different device. The gap will continue to grow as online services become more powerful. Either way, using an MSA doesn't stop you from using any other online services – including Microsoft services – in your web browser. I regularly log on to several different Hotmail/Outlook.com/Gmail accounts using names and passwords that are different from the MSA that I use to log on to my Windows 10 machines. Using an MSA adds features: it doesn't take any away. A new local Windows 10 lets you convert Microsoft Accounts into local accounts, and vice versa. However, this means changing the features of a single account. When the MSA is created, the local account ceases to exist. Unlike Schrödinger's cat, a Windows account can't be both things at the same time. Like it or not, the only solution is to open a second Administrator account to use as your local account. To do this, run the Settings app and go to Accounts, pick "Family &amp; other people" and click "Add someone else to this PC". When asked how this person will sign in, say you don't know. When asked to create an account, select "Add a user without a Microsoft account". You can then enter a user name, password, and password hint in the usual way. I have one of these extra local accounts for back-up purposes, in case my MSA gets corrupted. When your new local account appears in Settings, click the button marked "Change account type" and change it from Standard to Administrator. Click OK and log on to your new account, which will start with the familiar Windows 10 welcome routine. Open File Explorer, go to This PC and open the Users folder. You will now see two accounts: the original Graeme and the new Graeme_Local. Open the folder owned by the MSA (Graeme), and click Continue when told you don't have permission. (Admins can do this.) Next, select a folder, such as Pictures, copy it (Ctrl-C), go back to Graeme_Local, and paste it in (Ctrl-V). Check that it worked. Repeat to taste. You may have some cleaning up to do, but you can probably copy the bulk of your stuff to the local account. And if it all goes pear-shaped, log off, go back to Settings in your MSA account, remove the Graeme_Local account and try again. Alternatively, you can copy data from your MSA account to an external hard drive and then copy it back to a new Graeme_Local account. Of course, the new Graeme_Local account will quickly go out of sync with the old Microsoft account, but I assume you won't care about that. In any case, one account isn't really backing up the other: if the hard drive fails, you'll lose data from both accounts at the same time. If this happens, you should be able to restore your stuff from an external back-up. If not, you might be sorry that you didn't enable your MSA to preserve more of your stuff in the cloud.... Have you got another question for Jack? Email it to Ask.Jack@theguardian.com

Theresa May wanted children of parents unlawfully in the UK to be dropped to the bottom of lists for school places, according to reports of leaked Cabinet Office letters. As home secretary, May's department suggested to the Department for Education that schools could withdraw children's places if their families did not have the right to remain in the UK, according to documents leaked to the BBC. Current laws mean all under-16s have the right to a school place, even if their parents entered the country illegally. Nicky Morgan, education secretary at the time, is understood to have blocked the move, writing to the then prime minister David Cameron with "profound concerns". "I have concerns about the practical and presentational issues of applying our strong position on illegal migrants to the emotive issue of children's education," the leaked letter read. "These cover deprioritising illegal migrants in the schools admissions process, and carrying out immigration checks through schools." Morgan is reported to have had concerns that the process would delay schools from being able to confirm places for British and legal migrants' children in good time before the start of the school year and would be "jeopardising our increasingly important focus on tackling both segregation and extremism, and with consequent impacts on the children of British nationals who attend the schools". A government spokesman said he would not comment on leaked documents. He said: "It is only right that any government looks at a range of options when considering policy options, but ultimately it is for ministers to decide which policies are taken forward. "We are building a system that works in the best interests of the British people and ensures that only those with a right to be in the UK can live and work here." Angela Rayner, Labour's shadow education secretary, said she was "deeply concerned" about the policy proposal. "It's a terrible idea. Denying innocent children the right to an education because of the circumstances of their parents is disgusting," she told BBC Radio 4's Today programme on Thursday. "It's not a British value that we have. It just shows that, rather than deal with the problems in her own department, Theresa May was trying to offload the failings of her department on to innocent children, trying to bring our teachers into border control. We know immigration is in a mess and it is under Theresa May's watch." Sir Michael Wilshaw, the head of the schools watchdog Ofsted, said he believed that schools should not be used as a border control by the Home Office. Speaking on the Today programme, he said: "I'm amazed and shocked by it. Schools should not be used for border control."

Steven Frank, 81, sits in a red leather button-back armchair, answering questions from schoolchildren. "What was the first thing that made you smile after the Holocaust?" A cup of tea made with sweetened condensed milk, says Frank; it was "nectar from the gods". Another asks: can you forgive? Frank says: "You will never, ever forget what they have done to you, but you have to start to forgive. Until you start to forgive and get that hatred out of your system, you will not live at peace with yourself." As well as answering a series of questions, Frank shows the children some small objects he has brought. They include a crucifix given to his Jewish mother by Catholic neighbours in Nazi-occupied Amsterdam more than 70 years earlier before the family was taken to the Theresienstadt concentration camp. But the extraordinary thing about this interaction is that Frank is not actually present. Instead, a lifesize 3D laser image of him is answering the children's questions in real time. This innovative technology, launching this week at the UK National Holocaust Centre and Museum, near Newark, Nottinghamshire, preserves the testimonies of Holocaust survivors for future generations. The Forever Project has filmed 10 survivors, now in their 70s and 80s, each answering up to 1,400 questions, compiled from those put by thousands of children over the past 21 years. The software instantly matches questions asked by a live audience with the pre-recorded answers, resulting in interactive conversations between children and survivors for years to come. "The individual dimension [of survivors' testimony] makes children's understanding of the Holocaust real and more meaningful," said Phil Lyons, the centre's chief executive. "Survivors are key to what we do, and the question we faced was how we go beyond the time when first-hand testimonies are no longer available to us?" The youngest Holocaust survivors were now in their 70s, he said. As well as inevitable deaths, some were finding it increasingly difficult to find the physical and mental reserves to take part in question-and-answer sessions. Such sessions, said Lyons, were emotionally engaging for both the survivors and the children. "Children ask all sorts of things, some totally insensitive, some fantastically insightful." After questioning Frank, Talor, 11, from Brookfields primary in Shirebrook, said: "It's a really good experience to talk to someone who's actually been to the Holocaust ... It looks like he's there in the room with you. He has lots of memories." Sarah, also 11, said the session had left her "a little bit sad because what he was going through was really horrible". Joan Salter, 76, was three months old when the Nazis invaded Belgium, where her Polish-Jewish parents had fled. Then called Fanny Zimmetbaum, she and her family made their way across France, aided by the resistance, heading for Spain before being captured in the Pyrenees and imprisoned. At the age of three, she was rescued by the US committee for the care of European children and adopted by an American couple. Several years after the war, her adoptive family discovered her birth parents had survived, and she spent the rest of her childhood unhappily shuttling between the US and the UK. Earlier this year, Salter spent five days being filmed for the Forever Project. "There's nothing that throws me," she said, having spent years giving testimony and answering questions. "It's like talking about a different child. They can ask me anything." The Holocaust centre was "a very uplifting place", Salter said. "The emphasis is as much on survival as victimhood. You can drag victimhood like an anchor through your life." About 25,000 school children pass through the centre each year. Its educators strive to link the horrors of the Holocaust to issues faced by communities today, such as migration, hate crime and extremism. "We try to help children understand that this is about you and me, families, communities, and how it has meaning today," said Lyons. For example, the children from Brookfields primary live in a place once dominated by coal mining and now by Sports Direct, whose workforce includes thousands of eastern Europeans. The area voted overwhelmingly for Brexit. There are also large Muslim communities in nearby cities such as Leicester and Rotherham. "We have lots of Muslim children coming through the centre who have clearly experienced heightened levels of animosity," said Lyons. The centre runs courses on hate crime, which are oversubscribed, he added. The centre hopes to eventually take the Forever Project on the road, mainly to visit schools. Other museums and heritage organisations have expressed interest in adapting the pioneering technology to preserve witness testimony. The project is open to school visits now, and members of the public will be able to book from the end of January.

Much has been written recently about the shocking conditions inside Britain's jails. Suicides are occurring on average once every three days, and prison inspectors said this week that conditions in HMP Hindley are among the worst they have ever seen. It's about time that prisons stopped being holiday camps. Or at least that is what the Daily Mail would encourage you to think. If you ask the average person on the street why someone would end up in prison, you are likely to get some version of: "Because they have chosen to break the law and have harmed someone else." And on prison's purpose? "They should be harsh places of punishment to set an example and act as a deterrent." I work in the criminal justice system and have committed a large proportion of my life to trying to support offenders to turn their lives around. So you might expect me to argue against that statement, to try to blame the wider socio-economic picture and present a social justice argument about how we are all to blame for the crimes committed by these men and women. However I completely agree that those who choose to commit crime should face incarceration. That prisons should be well run by the prison staff; who as society's representatives in prison should be setting the agenda, holding firm boundaries and delivering society's intention to both punish the offender and to minimise the chances of them choosing to break the law in the future. So on that level, I believe that the current situation in prisons is a travesty. Prisons are chronically understaffed and the inmates have far more power than ever before. Contraband is commonplace. Where there is contraband, there is trade and where there is trade, there are people who control that trade who have status and power that they will seek to maintain. We have allowed a situation to develop where prison becomes an environment where the very traits and tendencies that we would hope prison would diminish are in fact reinforced, as legitimate strategies for survival and for status. Staff shortages are now so acute that in many prisons, prisoners are spending 23 hours a day locked up – denied access to education and training, exercise and other activity proved to decrease the likelihood to reoffending. So even from that paradigm, of prisons being for people who have chosen to break the law, the situation in prisons is unacceptable. However in our experience of working with young men involved in the criminal justice system, the percentage of those who consciously chose to break the law or harm another is small. The others fall into two camps. The first are those who see the supply of drugs to the marketplace as a victimless activity and the best means of making a living they have available, as an unskilled young male with no qualifications. The second group are those so lacking in maturity that they end up committing crimes, not through an active, conscious choice but a failure of impulse control in the moment. It is easy to judge both of those groups and to believe them to be as deserving of punishment. I know I did. Before I had exposure to the reality of the lives they lived, I held strong views, typical of the middle-class culture in which I grew up. I judged drug dealers as preying on the weak in our society and was simply afraid of those who were so volatile and unpredictable. I wanted them taken away. I am now rather embarrassed to have held those views. Over the past decade working with offenders, I have had a number of realisations. The first is that young men do not fully mature psychologically until they are in their mid-20s – something that can be backed up by research and evidence. I now count myself as fortunate that my middle-class circumstances as a young man meant that my own behaviour through a lack of maturity did not bring me into contact with the criminal justice system. The second realisation builds on that theme of "there but for the winds of fate go I". I have heard some truly heart-breaking stories of neglect and abuse. I have worked with young men who have been victims of sexual abuse, who as small children witnessed terrible domestic violence in the home, even watching their mother being raped. I have had to ask myself whether if I'd had similar experiences, I would be where I am today. The answer is a resounding no. Emerging neuroscience supports this conclusion, especially for males. The tragedy is that putting these vulnerable young men into a toxic prison environment is likely to decrease their chances of building a successful life for themselves. Being exposed to further trauma, living in a dangerous environment (resulting in an almost constantly adrenalised state), where drugs are freely available and where positive role models are in short supply, are possibly the worst conditions in which to try to effect positive change. Is it any surprise that suicides happen so frequently? Things were bad enough. The advent of "spice" and other synthetic cannabis substances creates a huge additional challenge in the prison environment. An odourless drug that is difficult to detect and can cause psychosis – especially in people who have experienced early-years trauma. Prison staff and others in the system have described it as a game-changer. We the taxpayers are currently spending around £35,000 per prisoner per year to provide places in these institutions that on almost every level are failing. In 1993, the prison population was 44,000. It's now 80,000. The current system needs a radical rethink and a more nuanced approach to understand the reasons for offending and providing a sentence that is appropriate and has a chance of success. Until we start thinking in these terms and talking about "sentencing reform", rather than simply "prison reform", we are likely to retain a system that costs huge amounts of money, the lives of vulnerable people and the loss of human potential.

Behind Morrissey's hatred of the music industry, there lies a murderous desire for new Smiths releases, it seems. The legendary band are to release their first single since 1995's posthumous Sweet and Tender Hooligan, and their first led by an unreleased track since Girlfriend in a Coma preceded the Strangeways Here We Come album in August 1987. The Morrissey website True to You – usually a reliable source on matter Morrissey, with information from the man himself – reports that a vinyl single fronted by a demo version of The Boy With the Thorn in His Side is to be released on Warner UK. The B-side is a previously unissued version of Rubber Ring. The sleeve, designed by Morrissey, carries a vintage shot of the actor Albert Finney. No release date has been confirmed. It has been an eventful autumn for the former Smiths. Guitarist Johnny Marr had his autobiography published, to glowing reviews. While promoting the book, he revealed to the Guardian that he and Morrissey had met to discuss reuniting the Smiths, though nothing came of their conversation. Morrissey, meanwhile, had to cancel a series of shows recently after his keyboard player Gustavo Manzur was taken ill. In an interview with Walla in Israel earlier this year, Morrissey said treatment for the removal of cancerous cells had "slowed me down considerably, because doctors and hospitals and medications are actually very ageing in their way, and they can often exhaust you more than whatever medical problem you have. If I'm asked to give any more blood I think I'll crack up." The singer remains without a solo recording deal.

What the hell happened to 2016? If there's one question that sums up the dark and febrile politics of the past year, that's surely the one. First comes the shock but then the craving for something to explain the seemingly inexplicable, and, however unfairly, it's in that light that this year's crop of political books will inevitably be judged. Publishers can only provide so much insight in a world where events move this fast and furiously, but there are worse places to start than reading and reflecting. Bookshops will be overflowing this Christmas with rival inside stories of Brexit, from the Downing Street spin doctor Craig Oliver's campaign diaries to useful first-hand accounts from journalists Owen Bennett and Gary Gibbons. But the two I wouldn't have been without were Tim Shipman's authoritative All Out War: The Full Story of How Brexit Sank Britain's Political Class (William Collins), the insider's insider account, and its opposite, the Ukip donor Arron Banks's The Bad Boys of Brexit: Tales of Mischief, Mayhem &amp; Guerrilla Warfare in the EU Referendum Campaign (Biteback), billed as a campaign diary but in truth reconstructed after the event by the journalist Isabel Oakeshott (inconveniently, Banks didn't keep an actual diary). Shipman's book expended serious shoe leather, talking to everyone that mattered, and seeking impartial conclusions. Banks's is a lively but very partial tale of how a bunch of self-confessed clueless amateurs, seemingly pissed much of the time, cobbled together an unofficial "Out" movement that nonetheless generated some of the campaign's most memorable moments – from the relatively benign flotilla down the Thames to the inflammatory "Breaking Point" poster, about which, it transpires, even Nigel Farage was jittery. It's perhaps only in the spirit of festive goodwill that many Guardian readers could contemplate buying Banks's book. Still, every Remainer should steel themselves to read it, because the mindset that it captures – one they don't like or understand – is driving change on both sides of the Atlantic. Talking of change, it's been another convulsive year for Labour. Nothing I've read so far provides a definitive all‑round account of the Corbyn revolution, although Rosa Prince's otherwise slightly colour-by-numbers biography Comrade Corbyn: A Very Unlikely Coup (Biteback) has a terrific first-hand account of the 2015 Labour leadership contest, and dedicated Corbynites might enjoy finding Alex Nunns's fervently sympathetic The Candidate: Jeremy Corbyn's Improbable Path to Power (OR) in their Christmas stockings. (Warning: not for those curious as to why the glorious revolution seems to be stalling with the voters.) But the best take on what happened to the rest of the Labour party is probably Ed Balls's Speaking Out: Lessons in Life and Politics (Hutchinson). Mercifully short on the inside-the-beltway detail that fills most political autobiographies, and unusually expansive on the emotional aspects of politicians' relationship with the voters, it feels somehow timely. Doubtless he'll update it with a chapter on Strictly Come Dancing. The biography I was most looking forward to was Ken Clarke's Kind of Blue (Macmillan), but while it's an entertaining romp through his time in the Thatcher and Major governments, it becomes too self-satisfied for its own good once he enters modern times. Balls's greater willingness to confess self-doubt in print makes his one of the two standout autobiographies of a year that ought to have shaken conventional politicians' faith. The other, perhaps surprisingly, is Nick Clegg's Politics: Between the Extremes (Bodley Head). I was expecting just another self-justifying account of the coalition years, but this one melds a political life with wider reflections on the crisis facing liberals (and not just the overtly Lib Dem kind). In retrospect Cleggmania, fuelled by a pent-up hunger for change, was the benign early forerunner of what would become the Trump, Brexit and Corbyn movements, and Clegg's account of how unnerving it was to experience that from the inside is fascinating. His take on the futility of trying to reason with voters in the grip of powerful emotions, presumably written before it was obvious Donald Trump was going to win, feels prescient too. If you only have time for two political books this year, this and Banks's together catch the zeitgeist. For Westminster junkies, meanwhile, one of the most useful things I read all year was a dry tome by four academics on how social media interacts with politics to produce fast-growing but volatile grassroots movements. It's no Boxing Day page-turner, but Political Turbulence: How Social Media Shape Collective Action (Princeton), by Helen Margetts, Peter John, Scott Hale and Taha Yasseri, sheds interesting light on the year's great upheavals. What quickly becomes clear, sifting through the year's output, is how few political books are written either by or about women. One bucking both trends was the Labour MP Rachel Reeves's Alice in Westminster: The Political Life of Alice Bacon (IB Tauris), a portrait of one of those obscure female politicians you wonder why you've never heard of before. Bacon was a miner's daughter who rose against the odds to become a senior minister under Harold Wilson, helping push through the legalisation of abortion and homosexuality, and usher in comprehensive education. Reeves clearly wants to give a forgotten woman her due, and there's a quiet charm to this book after a year that saw competent female managers from Hillary Clinton to Angela Eagle leapfrogged by noisier men. And the book I really, really want from Santa this year? It's the one that hasn't been written yet, drawing together all the strands – Trump, Corbynmania, Brexit – and working out where dismayed soggy liberals go from here. Well, there's always 2017. Save at least 30% on this year's critics' choices when you buy at the Guardian Bookshop. Visit bookshop.theguardian.com or call 0330 333 6846. Support the Guardian and its journalism with every book you buy this Christmas. *Free UK p&amp;p for online orders over £10. Minimum £1.99 p&amp;p applies to telephone orders. Best book lists of 2016 Best fiction Best crime and thrillers Best science fiction and fantasy

An editor has demanded that a local council should stop producing its fortnightly newsletter because it competes unfairly with his newspaper. Keith Magnum, founder of the Hackney Citizen, says east London's Hackney council is luring away advertising revenue from the local press with its Hackney Today. The Citizen is a free monthly, with a print run of 10,000, while Hackney Today, also a free, has a print run of 108,000. Government guidelines state that publications run by local authorities should not be published more often than quarterly. In his open letter to Hackney's mayor, Philip Glanville, Magnum wrote: "We call on you to halt the sale of advertising in the council's fortnightly freesheet and on its website so that the borough's news publishers can at least operate in a similar commercial environment to those in the vast majority of other London boroughs." Magnum accepted that the council had a right to produce its own communications for residents, but regarded the selling of advertising space as "unfair competition." He argued that Hackney Today "would not be viable were it not subsidised by the taxpayer", adding: "It does not rely on advertising sales as its lifeblood. But local news publishers do." Glanville, in an email sent to the Hackney Citizen, countered that it would face a loss of between £100,000 to £150,000 if it did not sell display advertising for its newsletter. He wrote: "Hackney Today is still by far the most popular source of information in Hackney about the council, other local services and national policy changes, especially amongst older people and those on lower incomes. Given the amount of change around housing, education and welfare reform it is more important than ever that this information reaches everyone in the borough." He pointed out that most of its advertising revenue comes from the NHS, schools, colleges and housing associations. As for display ads, these are obtained "through a national network" and do not therefore involve local businesses. Magnum was unconvinced. "Three years ago I said I did not regard Hackney Today as a competitor," he said. But the commercial landscape newspapers "has changed significantly since then" with journalists are being laid off and newspapers folding. "If the challenges for local newspapers are exacerbated further by local councils, it will have dire consequences for democracy." Ted Jeory, the Independent's investigations editor who runs a blog covering the neighbouring borough of Tower Hamlets, backed Magnum. For years that council ran a weekly, East End Life, until government commissioners forced its closure. Now the council produces a quarterly, which complies with government guidelines. Jeory said: "Hackney Today seems to display the same attitude to transparency and accuracy on costs as the old East End Life. "On page 2 of every edition, it says: 'It [Hackney Today] has a print run of 108,000 copies and is delivered free to every home and business in the borough.' "It's simply not true that it is distributed free. The council (ie, taxpayers, its readers) pays Trinity Mirror to print the paper and a distributor to deliver these 108,000 copies." And Magnum has also secured the support of another local rival: Hackney Gazette editor Ramzy Alwakeel. He said: "I hope Hackney council agrees with me that the existence of a free press is an indispensable asset to public life in Hackney. "I believe the best way for the town hall to communicate with the people who live here is by working with papers like the Gazette and the Citizen, not competing with them."

George Brandis has used taxpayer dollars to buy several books about the downfall of Tony Abbott, including The Short and Excruciatingly Embarrassing Reign of Captain Abbott. The attorney general's parliamentary expenses, released by the Department of Finance on Thursday, show he bought the books in January and February, just as parliament returned from its summer recess. He also bought The Road to Ruin: How Tony Abbott and Peta Credlin Destroyed Their Own Government by Niki Savva and Credlin &amp; Co: How the Abbott Government Destroyed Itself by Aaron Patrick. Andrew P Street, the Fairfax columnist who wrote The Short and Excruciatingly Embarrassing Reign, said he was pleased to hear Brandis had bought the book (in which Brandis has a starring role). "I'm thinking of hitting him up for a review on Goodreads," Street told Guardian Australia. "He'd bring a good insider perspective to it." The parliamentary expenses also show the crossbench senators Ricky Muir and Nick Xenophon were the most frugal politicians in the six months before the election, with expenses less than a 10th of the high-flying foreign minister, Julie Bishop. The expenses considered include the travel allowance, overseas travel, domestic fares, charter costs, family travel and office administrative costs. The records show the biggest-spending ministers were those with international travel commitments, with Bishop racking up $839,810 in costs, the prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull, $612,099 and then-trade minister Andrew Robb $536,642. The expenses of the Opposition leader, Bill Shorten, cost the taxpayer $460,184 and those of the Greens leader, Richard Di Natale, cost $263,083. The most frugal of those who served for the whole period from 1 January to 30 June were: former senator Muir ($70,678), Xenophon ($81,018) and Labor's Carol Brown ($86,028). Muir, who had been ridiculed after his 2013 election with a record-low primary vote of 0.51%, gained a reputation for integrity and reasonableness by the time he lost his seat in the 2016 election, due partly to the Turnbull government's Senate reforms. Xenophon spent nothing on overseas travel, charter flights, or family travel. The deputy prime minister, Barnaby Joyce, spent the most on chartered travel, a total of $85,561, followed by Bob Katter ($53,513) and Darren Chester ($46,453). The health minister, Sussan Ley, Stuart Robert and Di Natale spent the most on family travel – more than $9,600 each.

On the verge of a return from a spell on the sidelines with injury, John Terry could see out his dotage in China, with the trio of Super League clubs Guangzhou Evergrande, Shanghai Shenhua and Shanghai SIPG all reported to be forming an orderly queue to snap up the Chelsea defender. The London Evening Standard reports that the 35-year-old is considering taking the Shenhua yuan come season's end. Despite signing a contract handcuffing him to Barcelona until 2021 in October, Neymar is wanted by Manchester United, according to Scotland's Daily Record. He'll cost them a few bob– the Brazilian's contract has an eye-watering buyout clause fixed at €200m (£178.2m) for its first year, €222m (£197.8m) for the second and €250m (£222.8m) for the remaining three years. Italian daily the Corriere dello Sport says Manchester City target Kasper Dolberg is also on the radar of Napoli and Juventus. The callow 19-year-old Dane made headlines in the Netherlands with a hat-trick inside 37 minutes against NEC Nijmegen last month that catapulted him to joint top place of the Eredivisie scoring charts with eight goals in 12 matches. Elsewhere in the Low Countries, teenage Genk defender Wilfred Ndidi is wanted by Leicester City. The Sun says Southampton are "resigned to losing" their impressive central defensive pairing of Virgil van Dijk and José Fonte over the next two transfer windows. Liverpool have been repeatedly linked with a move for the former, while Manchester United are reported to be after the latter. Reports from Scotland suggest Liverpool are also teeing up a bid for Celtic striker Moussa Dembélé, who has been banging them in for fun north of the border this season. Glasgow Live says Liverpool will offer £10m up front and the same amount in add-ons for the 20-year-old French striker who has already scored 17 goals for the Scottish champions since moving to Glasgow from Fulham in the summer. Manchester United's Argentinian defender Marcos Rojo could be off to Bayer Leverkusen, following in the footsteps of Mexican striker Javier Hernández, whose move from Old Trafford to the Bundesliga club was a great success. Rojo has made 13 appearances for United this season and started Wednesday night's League Cup quarter-final win over West Ham. Out of favour at Chelsea, Mikel John Obi could head for Valencia in January, although his agent says it's "50-50" whether he'll leave for a fee during the transfer window or see out the rest of his contract and move on for a free in the summer. And finally, the ongoing saga of Barcelona's search for a new right-back could end with the Spanish club signing Shakhtar Donetsk's Darijo Srna. The veteran former Croatia captain will be available on a free transfer in January and has been in talks with Barça club secretary Robert Fernández. The Catalan side are desperate to add more strength in depth to a position they've struggled to fill since the departure of Brazil's Dani Alves to Juventus after eight seasons, 21 goals and a staggering 71 assists.

Petrol prices in Britain are set to rise after the Saudi-led Opec cartel agreed its first production cut in eight years, sending the price of oil surging. This could push up petrol prices by as much as 9p a litre, adding almost £5 to the cost of filling up an average family car, according to motoring organisations. Higher oil prices could also push up household energy bills as wholesale gas prices tend to track the price of crude. Opec, whose 14 members pump a third of the world's oil, announced at a meeting in Vienna on Wednesday that it would trim production by 1.2m barrels a day to 32.5m from 1 January. Russia, the largest non-Opec producer, has also agreed to reduce its output gradually. The news sent Brent crude, the global benchmark, 8% higher to more than $50 a barrel. Brent rose a further 0.6% to $52.42 a barrel on Thursday, trading around a six-week high, while New York crude climbed over $50 a barrel for the first time since the end of October. The AA estimates that a rise in crude oil prices to $60 a barrel would push petrol prices including VAT up 9p a litre to about 123p a litre. That is £4.95 extra a tank and £18 extra a month for a family with two petrol cars – just as winter sets in and cars use more fuel to power heaters and lights. Luke Bosdet, a spokesman for the AA, said: "Not only is this the fourth jump to $50 a barrel so far this year, but it also comes at the wrong time. With winter motoring cars consume more fuel." Changes in oil prices feed through to petrol prices after 10 to 14 days. Bosdet deplored that oil prices were driven more by "feverish speculation" than actual changes to production. He added: "The only silver lining is that oil hasn't taken off massively." RAC fuel spokesman Simon Williams said oil prices would rise further in coming days and weeks, "likely pushing pump prices up in the short term, but it is what happens into 2017 that will be most important in determining if the days of relatively low prices of fuel that drivers have benefited from this year are coming to an end". Petrol prices dropped sharply in early 2016 to about 100p a litre when oil plummeted to below $27 a barrel, amid an oil glut. Iran ramped up production after international sanctions on the country were lifted. At present, fuel prices average 114.16p for unleaded and 116.36p for diesel, according to website PetrolPrices.com. Williams noted that the sterling-dollar exchange rate was also crucial – as oil is traded in dollars a weaker pound can push prices in the UK up, as has happened since the Brexit vote in late June.

Back in 1966, while England was celebrating winning the World Cup, I spent the summer on a more sobering mission, exploring the slums of our major cities. There I discovered another, less happy country: thousands of families packed into crumbling houses ; 30 or more people sharing one tap and one toilet; damp stripping the wallpaper from the walls and entrenching itself in clothing and bedding; hovels infested with mice and rats. I looked into the desperate and exhausted faces of young mothers trying to keep their families together in one overcrowded and unhealthy room. I saw kids, already world-weary, with no space to play, bedevilled by ill-health or, worse, driven to delinquency, as their lives were wrecked by conditions that made it impossible for them to thrive. What I was uncovering was the human face of shocking official statistics, notably that 3 million families were living in slums or grossly overcrowded conditions, and 1.4 million occupied houses were unfit for human habitation. In a report to my co-founders that became known as The Green Book, I exposed a national scandal and developed the plan for Shelter. We would, I wrote, declare "a national emergency" . We would be more than just a charity, not just raising funds to help the homeless, but campaigning, too, about the need for more investment in housing. Shelter was launched on 1 December 1966, a couple of weeks after the BBC had, coincidentally, screened Cathy Come Home. We quickly became the new face of charity, compassionate but angry. By the time I retired from Shelter in 1971 I had every reason to believe we had built the foundations for a better-housed country. Who would have believed that 50 years later – in 2016 – the words "national emergency" would apply once more? Once more we face a desperate need for affordable homes. Families are living in overcrowded and terrible conditions. Renters are unable to cover their costs and living in fear of eviction. The young have virtually no prospect of owning a home of their own. Once more, Shelter identifies a national emergency and calls for emphatic action.I hope the country will respond to its urgent rallying call with the same combination of anger and compassion with which it supported our work 50 years ago. Des Wilson was co-founder and first director of Shelter. Talk to us on Twitter via @Gdnvoluntary and join our community for your free Guardian Voluntary Sector monthly newsletter, with analysis and opinion sent direct to you on the first Thursday of the month.

The backpacker bills have moved to the Senate now. While Labor's Penny Wong is speaking against the Coalition-Greens compromise, the bills are set to pass with 30 Coalition votes and nine Green votes. The bills set the backpacker tax rate at 15% with a 65% superannuation tax rate on departure and $100m towards Landcare. The deal will save the government less than it had planned in the budget and less than the 13% rate would have delivered. But Landcare is the big winner. Richard Di Natale praised it as a good deal, Barnaby Joyce commended the Greens for their good works. Malcolm Turnbull praised the Greens, One Nation and Nick Xenophon for their good works. And we all shuffled off into a parallel universe. And the backpacker tax, in its various iterations, took up most of the day. At the beginning of the day, protestors hit the parliament for a second day in a peaceful protest, unfurling a banner on the front of the building. It spurred on the Speaker, Tony Smith, to pass the new security measures through the House. Thanks for everything, readers, to the brains trust Katharine Murphy, Paul Karp, Gareth Hutchens and Mike Bowers. See you next year – barring blow-ups – and Merry Christmas. Good night. Now the backpacker superannuation tax rate bill has passed the lower house at a rate of 65%. The two backpacker bills will now return to the Senate, amended and are expected to pass the Senate tonight – all things being equal. Labor senator is playing for LOLs in the senate. He says he really wants to like Richard Di Natale but he keeps making these deals with the Coalition. He doesn't blame the Coalition - they want the deal - but the Greens are supposed to be centre left. A feel like a burnt lover, Mr President. Richard Di Natale mentions this tweet and says the Greens are proud to have achieved a better deal. Penny Wong is teasing Liberal senater Jonathon Duniam and senator Nick McKim – both from Tasmania and not overly fond of each other. We could senator Duniam and senator McKim in a picture together maybe with a love heart around it – brothers in arms. Richard Di Natale supports the change in hours to get the backpacker tax bills through. George Brandis accuses Labor of delaying the Senate chamber because they are upset at the deal done on the backpacker tax. Labor are grumpy, he says. Penny Wong answers: It's probably his last sitting day, so he's probably feeling a little sensitive. The Coalition Senate leader, George Brandis, is now trying to vary the business of the Senate to allow for the backpacker bills. Christmas cheer. Maybe this isn't such a good idea... On the extra cost of Landcare, Malcolm Turnbull has a newfound love. It really is a great investment. It supports so many groups across the country, so many volunteer groups, and we're very pleased to be able to do that. Extremely pleased, actually. And as far as the overall – the deal on the tax – as you've heard from the treasurer, this is a saving, but of course it does preserve for all time that 15% rate. Dennis Atkin asks: Isn't it embarrassing to have the party of Black Jack McEwen rescued by inner-city Greens? Look, I think that, once more, politics is about getting things through and what I think is important for my people, for people in regional areas, is they're going to get their fruit picked, they are going to get cash coming in, that money is going to go into the towns. Scott Morrison is asked: you've given up on your savings? We'll achieve over 70% of the revenues that were set out in the budget. And in the 45th parliament, it's about getting things done, and you've heard me say often and the prime minister, that 80% of something is better than 100% of nothing. Well, today it's 70% of something rather than 100% of nothing. Thanks Crowey... Turnbull thanks Richard Di Natale and the Greens for their support and also the continuing support in the Senate of Pauline Hanson's One Nation, and, of course, the Nick Xenophon Team. Barnaby Joyce redoubles his theme from question time. Swarmy smile and I know swarmy, I know exactly what I'm saying, I'm not talking about a guru, I'm talking about Urban Dictionary. That swarmy smile, that conceit, that idea that they're approaching it for just one purpose – to be clever fellas and blow this up... I commend the Greens, I commend One Nation, I commend the Liberal Democratic party, I commend the work that has been done. Meanwhile, Malcolm Turnbull is "getting on with the job" down in his prime ministerial courtyard. We were lectured in question time by the Labor party, that we should compromise and come to a resolution, and we have done so, and I want to thank our Senate team and in particular senator Cormann for his negotiations with the Greens, in assisting all of us in ensuring that we can come to that resolution. We've come to a resolution and what is the Labor party doing? Using their best endeavours now to frustrate it. The Senate has passed a motion by senators Rodney Culleton and Jacqui Lambie about the information that was before the Senate when it agreed to refer Culleton's eligibility to the high court. Basically, Culleton has fished out one fact that wasn't before the Senate (that the judge in his larceny case was not able to sentence him to imprisonment because the conviction was in absentia). The motion notes the fact was not made known by attorney general George Brandis at the time, and asks him to explain why. It passed 35-28, meaning at least Labor and the Greens agreed. It's a very preliminary step in Culleton's bigger goal for the Senate to tear up the referral to the high court that could see him ejected from the Senate. Although Pauline Hanson and the other One Nation senators supported the referral, Culleton has claimed that Hanson will support him when she has the "full facts". But what did they do when Culleton and Lambie put up the motion? All three One Nation senators voted against it. So it doesn't look like they've had any change of heart about referring his eligibility and they're not impressed by his attempt to relitigate it. Full support with full facts? Not quite. Press conference with Malcolm Turnbull, Barnaby Joyce and Scott Morrison coming up. Joel Fitzgibbon is using the backpackers debate to talk about Joyce's decision to move the pesticides authority, APVMA. So the government wins the vote and the debate on the superannuation bill continues with Labor's Joel Fitzgibbon. Fitzgibbon makes these points: The headline rate is higher so it will still put backpackers off But the total package raises less money for revenue They will put $100m into Landcare, even though the Coalition has removed $300m from Landcare since 2013. Scott Morrison says the extra $100m for Landcare would be covered in the mid year economic and fiscal outlook on December 19. You will be familiar with Opposition's moving suspension of standing orders to disrupt the House, but in this case, the government – no less the treasurer, Scott Morrison – is moving one. He needs to cut in to business to put the backpacker superannuation tax rate bill at the new level of 65%. The House is starting the many tortured procedural votes to get through the backpacker superannuation tax and the headline 15% rate. One Nation is upset that it could not clinch the deal. Tony Burke is baiting the backbench and Tony Abbott, suggesting the former PM would know the implications of the deal just done with the Greens. Who knows who will be in that particular job at the next election. Tony Burke is objecting to the government trying to push through the backpacker superannuation tax bill when only one copy was brought into the chamber. Tony Burke says Scott Morrison has given Richard Di Natale his job. It never occurred to the treasurer that anyone else would want to look at the legislation ... They have no other chance for their backbenchers to know what their government has signed off on with the Greens. Scott Morrison is now introducing the new bill to change the superannuation tax rate for departing backpackers to 65%. Tony Burke and Labor want copies of the bill so the Speaker, Tony Smith, says there will be copies of the new bill. We might pause here and have some light conversation. Bob Katter wants one too. What? You want me to hand deliver it to you, do you? The bills are on the table, says Speaker Smith. The House is doing a series of votes to throw out the Senate's amendment of a 10.5% backpacker tax and add the Greens amendment. Let me just get something clear on the backpacker tax deal. The 15% headline rate and the 65% superannuation rate is broadly the same amount as the Hinch/Culleton/Lambie/Labor rate of 13% and 95% superannuation. Or revenue neutral, as they say in the classics. BUT: The spending commitment of an extra $100m to Landcare is ON TOP of the tax deal. So the Greens deal costs the government more than the Labor deal would have at 13%. The lower house is debating the backpacker tax now. As a result of the Greens-Coalition deal, the government has allowed the bill back into the lower house so they can send it back to the Senate. The lower house needs to deal with it because the Senate amended it to 10.5% last week. The lower house will get rid of the 10.5% amendment and put the agreed Greens amendments of 15%, 65% superannuation tax on departure and $100m for Landcare. The House is now voting on the backpacker bill. Richard Di Natale says negotiations only began with the government today. He was asked about the National Farmers Federation's position. I would love to claim credit for the National Farmers' Federation changing their position. I mean, really in the 21st century an organisation that denies the impact of the climate change when the people who will be most impacted will be people working on the land. The National Farmers' Federation on this issue were all over the shop. In the end what we have done is brokered an outcome by talking to farmers. Richard Di Natale: The important thing here is people right around the country didn't know whether their businesses were going to be viable. That is what we were facing. We had this ridiculous spectacle brought on by the government before an election, no consultation, blindsiding everybody, including farmers, saying we were going to claw all this money back from backpackers and the agricultural community said, "No, hang on, we need these people, they are vital". So what we then saw was the government during an election campaign not have the guts to take a policy to the people, pushing it off to the never never, and then here we are a minute to midnight with the government saying, "No, we are not going to accept 13%", and we were going to force some of these producers to the wall. The backpackers tax compromise has been announced by the Greens leader, Richard Di Natale, the treasury spokesman, Peter Whish-Wilson, and the agriculture spokeswoman, Janet Rice. It maintains the headline rate of 15% which is the same as the Pacific islands program. But it drops the backpacker 95% superannuation tax to 65%. The government have also committed to put $100m extra to Landcare. The change in superannuation rates means the total cost is the same as a 13% headline rate. We have seen the Greens clean up the mess that is of the government's own making. Peter Whish-Wilson says farmers wanted to see some of the money back-paid straight to government via backpackers' superannuation. Bill Shorten is speaking to a matter of public importance: The government's year that has harmed Australians. The Greens are doing a press conference in five minutes on their deal with the government for a 15% backpacker tax. He says a security overhaul will take place and he thanks the security guards who took part. The Speaker, Tony Smith, says everyone wants people to have access to the parliament but it is not fair for people to shout down elected representatives and frighten other members of the public, including school children. The Speaker is making a statement on the protest yesterday. He says he made the decision to suspend until protestors were removed because it prevented the business proceeding. Note the Greens have been, until now, the most consistent on the backpacker tax. They always plugged for the status quo – which they suggest is zero, given most backpackers were claiming resident status and therefore benefited from a tax-free threshold. As the votes continue, Joel Fitzgibbon shouts across the chamber at Barnaby Joyce: How much will a lamb roast cost if we go to 32.5%? Tony Burke is successfully shut down by the House. Joel Fitzgibbon rises to second the motion, yelling: This is Barnaby Joyce's greyhound ban. Pyne gags Fitzgibbon. Labor's Murray Watt has given a valedictory speech on attorney general George Brandis's behalf, the conceit being that he accepts rumours that Brandis will leave parliament if appointed to a plum job and wants to send him off in style. The valedictory is a timeline of Brandis highlights: 2004 Called John Howard a "lying rodent" 2006 Awarded Queen's Counsel, despite having been overlooked by the Bar Association when he last practised as a barrister six years before 2013 Repaid taxpayer expenses he claimed to attend a wedding 2014 Purchased expensive bookshelves 2014 Tried to amend section 18C of the Racial Discrimination Act and defended "the right to be a bigot" 2015 Couldn't explain metadata in Sky News interview 2015 Committed a "criminal offence, wearing that grey jumper, that crime against fashion" 2016 Seeking to control solicitor general's advice; "stacked the Administrative Appeals Tribunal with Liberal mates"; allegedly misled parliament over consulting the solicitor general (which Brandis denies). Now this is a suspension motion. Fashion police. The vote continues, by the way, for the last suspension of standing orders in the last question time for 2016. Pardon! They are voting on the gags before the suspension motion. Bipartisan friendship. Tanya Plibersek always gets an invite to the Nats' Christmas party FYI. Tony Burke's motion notes the different backpacker tax rates proposed since the 2015 budget change and that the government has been "unwilling to accept the sensible compromise put forward by the Labor party" and condemns the PM for preferring to hurt rural and regional Australia and the tourism industry with a 32.5% tax rate instead of accepting a sensible compromise. Labor has moved a suspension of standing orders on the backpacker tax. Labor to Scott Morrison: I refer to the treasurer's claim in question time that a 32.5% backpacker tax was introduced in the 2012 budget. If that is true, why was no revenue raised from backpacker tax in 2013, 2014 or 2015? Isn't it the real truth that this government introduced a 32.5% backpacker tax in the 2015 budget? Morrison: The non-resident tax rate which now applies was set by the member for Lilley and he claimed more than $80bn in revenue in that budget. Now, when this became clear, Mr Speaker, that this is what had transpired, the government sought to give certainty to these arrangements. A new Senate inquiry has been established to investigate the problem of employers underpaying or not paying their employees' compulsory super. Labor senator Katy Gallagher called for the inquiry. It will be due to report by 22 March 2017. The underpayment of compulsory super is a huge problem in Australia. A report from the Commonwealth auditor general last year found: The Australian Tax Office's internal risk assessment indicates that as many as 11% to 20% of employers could be non-compliant with their super guarantee contributions, and that non-compliance is "endemic", especially in small businesses and industries where a large number of cash transactions and contracting arrangements occur. Importantly this non-compliance primarily affects lower paid employees and those are most likely to rely on the age pension in later years. The Senate economics references committee will hold the inquiry. Labor to Barnaby Joyce: what will be the consequences for rural and regional Australia of a 32.5% backpacker tax? Joyce says the hours are counting down before the parliament can fix the backpacker tax: We have approximately two hours left to do it. Approximately two hours left to do it...we are looking into the heart of the Labor party to say, "Do you honestly believe in the Australian Labor party, the party of shearers, the party of farmers, do you honestly believe that it is morally right that a person from Paris is going to have a tax advantage over Australian workers? Do you honestly believe that? Or have you travelled that far, have you travelled that far from your base, is it that far in the past? The NFF continues to mop up. In reply to Sky's tweet: .@David_Speers reports the @NationalFarmers are urging the government to accept Labor's 13% backpacker tax proposal Labor to Turnbull: Since being elected PM, the PM has been willing to back down on everything he has ever believed in. Why doesn't he back down on the backpacker tax and fix this mess before parliament rises today? Turnbull flicks the question to Scott Morrison. Morrison notes that former treasurer Wayne Swan changed the tax rates for non-residents in 2012. He says Swan's rate lives "on and on". The NFF tweet Turnbull referred to: The beard between. Labor to Turnbull: Is the PM saying the following words were not said by the president of the NFF with in an interview with David Speers. "Do the deal today. Well, look, we don't want to leave here with 32.5. But I do need to be consistent in this and we've always called for 15." "Speers interrupted, "Yeah, yeah, but if it needs to be 15, just do it." The president of the NFF, "Do a deal, do a deal." Is the PM saying that that didn't happen? (We are in danger disappearing up our own tax schedules here.) Turnbull: What this shows is the utter inability of those opposite to tell the truth. I was talking earlier today about post-truth politics, this is what is called truthiness. It used to be a satirical term used by Stephen Colbert where people say things which are sort of true but not really true ... Opposition leader is doing is thoroughly misrepresenting the farmers of the union, of course we want a resolution, but this is what the leader said, "The president of the National Farmers' Federation has called on the government to adopt Labor's position on the backpacker tax", and in fact that's exactly what they're not doing. Senator Kimberley Kitching has asked the attorney general, George Brandis, why the prime minister won't rule out getting rid of him with a diplomatic or judicial appointment. Brandis then gets up and accuses the shadow attorney general, Mark Dreyfus, of "crying wolf" over the many times he has called him to resign or criticised his performance. The only thing Dreyfus's criticisms lacked was "any relevant facts", he said, before labelling Dreyfus's "obsession" with him "icky". Brandis then begins attacking Kitching over the referral of her for possible criminal prosecution by the trade union royal commission, and notes that Dreyfus had reportedly threatened to resign if Kitching were made a senator. Labor's Penny Wong objects on relevance numerous times, to no avail. Brandis accuses Kitching of wasting question time with "political gossip and tittle tattle" over reports Alexander Downer is annoyed at rumours Brandis could be posted to London. The National Farmers' Federation has just called me to say they do not support 13%. I reported on it earlier in the day based on an interview with the NFF president, Fiona Simson, by David Speers of Sky. This is the transcript of the exchange. Do the deal that it takes to get the deal done. If 13% is the rate that is going to fly today, well, look, we don't want to leave here with 32.5%. I need to be consistent in this and I have always called for 15%. Q: If it needs to be 13, just do it? Do the deal. The NFF says the NFF has never supported 13%. The NFF support 15%. Labor to Joyce: Is it seriously the government's position that it would rather inflict a 32.5% tax on rural and regional Australia rather than accept Labor's sensible 13% compromise offer? I want to quote exactly what the National Farmers' Federation said and then place it clearly before the leader of the Opposition and see if he wishes to correct the record after misleading the House. The National Farmers' Federation says, and I quote, "to be clear, we continue to support 15% as the best policy outcome". Independent Bob Katter asks energy minister about supporting ethanol in contrast to former National and LNP ministers. Part of the question from Katter: Minister [John] Anderson rejects biofuelling and now works for an oil and gas company. [Mark] Vaile works for an oil and gas companies. [Ian] McFarlane heads the Resources Council. To quote the AMA, atmospheric health [expert], Professor Carney, more people die from motor vehicle emissions than motor vehicle accidents...Minister, will you consider a health safe, cheap, reliable home-grown fuel supply, biofuels, or are you just another oil puppet? Frydenberg says the government does not support mandates but is absolutely committed to the biofuels industry. Labor to Scott Morrison: Last week the Treasurer declared there was no room for compromise on a backpacker tax of 19%. Today the Treasurer stated that 15% was the line in the sand? Is this the Treasurer's final position, or just his latest? Why doesn't the Government negotiate with the Senate the same way the PM negotiates with the hard right of his party room, and just give in? Scott Morrison goes through the history of the backpacker tax and says Labor is playing political games. Joyce answers a government question on backpackers tax and goes all stream of consciousness. Joyce yells at Shorten: He sits there with a Cheshire grin and the Member for Hunter [Joel Fitzgibbon], you are so clever with the damage you've done, you've so clever with the damage you've done. You don't care about Australian workers, you never have cared about Australian workers, you are so inside the belt way, that is all this is about. You are a disgrace about what has happened today, when you should have shown tomorrow turnaround, show some ticker, get that grin off your face, it is not funny at all. The whole point of what you are doing to the Australian horticultural industry is exactly what you did to the Australian live cattle industry. Labor to Turnbull: On the backpacker tax, the PM has gone from 0% to 32.5%, then to 19%, then threatened 32.5% again, then to 15%, then threatened 32.5% again and every time he said it was his final offer. When will the PM accept Labor's sensible compromise of 13%? PM, it's time to end the chaos. Turnbull says Bill Shorten is a representative of the foreign workers union. Foreign backpackers from some of the richest countries in the world pay less tax than Australians, and they even pay less tax than Pacific islanders working here as part of an aid exercise, designed to enable them to remit money to their families in their communities in some of the poorest countries in the world. The Labor party has no principles, it has no consistency, it has no values. Labor to Turnbull: Today the President of the National Farmers' Federation has called on the government to adopt Labor's position on the backpacker tax, stating, and I quote, "Do the deal today. Do what it takes to get the deal done. Do the deal. Do a deal!" Is the PM seriously going to inflict a 32.5% backpacker tax on rural and regional Australia because he is too arrogant to sign up to Labor's sensible compromise? Turnbull describes Labor's position as "sheer satire". Turnbull flicks the question to Barnaby Joyce, who says the government has come further than Labor. This is the sort of contemptuous approach of the Labor party and they talk about it as if it is all about a number and they say it must be a number, if you've moved from 10.5% to 13%. We've moved from 32.5% to 19% to 15%, and yet all the time all you do is destroy. You are a wrecker, you want to destroy... Well, the Australian people are watching you with your swarmy look, your swarmy little press conferences, your smile, it is all just a joke. It doesn't matter. It is just other people's jobs and at the heart of this, what is it? What does he stand behind? He stands behind having a worse rate, a worse rate for Australian workers, actually discriminated against. Question time is in two minutes. The backpacker tax debate limps. There are no landing points as yet. Labor has moved from 10.5% to 13%, as has the Greens, Jacqui Lambie and Rod Culleton. Hinch has moved from 19% to 13% but not 15%. The government is staying at 15%. Malcolm Turnbull and Bill Shorten have given their Christmas speeches. Turnbull shared some touching stories about the way certain people he met through the year had effected him, including the cancer and domestic violence survivors. Shorten ended with an uplifting reflection on the refugee cab driver who saved 11 people on the bus left burning after the terrible attack which killed the bus driver, 29-year-old Manmeet Alisher. Refugee protests have continued for a second day with two people to appear before court after scaling the front of the parliament to hang a sign urging justice for refugees in detention. This day can't get sillier. Now that the Greens' Nick McKim has confirmed they will back the 13% rate, we will have: Labor 25 Greens 9 Lambie 1 Culleton 1 Hinch 1 37 And on 15% Coalition 30 One Nation 3 Leyonhjelm 1 NXT 3 37 You can see we are at even stevens, noting that Bob Day is no longer in the Senate. The other thing to note is unless the government is prepared to bring the amendment to the House and back to the Senate, the opposing parties can do nothing. Just on the move by the NFF, the government will be furious. Fiona Simson, NFF president told Sky: Do the deal that it takes to get the deal done. If 13% is the rate that is going to fly today, well look we don't want to leave here with 32.5%. I need to be consistent in this and I have always called for 15%. Q: If it needs to be 13, just do it? Do the deal. [This post has been amended.] Two protestors have been summonsed appear in court after the protests this morning. The Greens have flagged they will consider a 13% backpacker tax. Labor agriculture shadow Joel Fitzgibbon says he has been receiving phone calls from farm representatives all morning all saying while they backed Labor on 10.5% "but if you can get 13%, please let's just do this". But the most significant call was one from Stuart Armitage. Stuart Armitage is the chair of the Queensland Farmers Federation, an arm of the National Farmers Federation, very, very interestingly. He said, 'Joel, I'm backing you at 10.5, but, mate, if you can't get 10.5, can you go 13?' I thought that was a significant contribution from him. Fitzgibbon has been critical of the NFF's role on the backpacker tax, saying he was getting different messages from the peak body to other state and representative bodies. Bill Shorten: We are prepared to support a 13% backpacker tax from every dollar earned by backpackers. We think it gets the balance right and I will get Chris to explain more about that in a moment. There is a solution on the table for Malcolm Turnbull. Our message to Malcolm Turnbull is grow up, swallow your pride, accept a solution. Derryn Hinch is speaking alone on the backpacker tax. He said the crossbenchers could not come to an agreement on the backpacker tax. I got into the chamber and realised the 15% could not pass. I just want to get a deal done ... I don't care what figure ... the figure doesn't fuss me. Labor now prepared to go to 13%. More of the freedom conversation, widening from Murph to Tim Wilson and cartoonist Fiona Katauskas. I did not get to this final reflection from Bill Shorten in his Christmas speech. On the 30th of October this year, in a moment of unthinkable horror, a Brisbane bus driver was set on fire and killed while still behind the wheel. As the flames spread, the fire trapped 11 of his passengers in the back of the bus – unable to access the front door. The smoke was getting thicker, panic was setting in. But a Brisbane cab driver, who'd just happened to pull over for a haircut, came to their aid. He did what we all hope we would do in that situation but we wonder if we could. Selflessly, heroically – he ran towards the burning bus, kicking in the rear door and helping those 11 frightened people to safety. That cabbie's name was Aguek Nyok –just over ten years ago, he came to Australia as a refugee from South Sudan. When he saw the flames that afternoon, when he ran towards the smoke and the screams ... He didn't stop to ask where the people on the bus were born. He didn't pause to question which god they were praying to for rescue. He saw his fellow human beings in mortal danger – and he saved their lives. How lucky are we, that he came to this country. How lucky are those 11 Australians and their families together this Christmas, that he came to this country. Aguek was born 13,000 kilometres from where we sit – but on that day he showed us all the spirit of Australia. The courage, the compassion, the sense of community we revere. No comment II. Quick recap prior to crossbench conference. The government's proposal for the backpacker tax is now 15%. Derryn Hinch, Rod Culleton and Jacqui Lambie are proposing 13% as a compromise between Labor/Lambie's 10.5% and the government's 15%. Rod Culleton, Jacqui Lambie and Derryn Hinch are holding a press conference – in answer to Scott Morrison's no deal presser earlier. No comment. The safety fence in question. Protestors are taken away. Police are waiting for the protestors. Protestors pack up the sign and come down. Police negotiate with protestors to pack up. With all the parliamentary protests, with the PM saying protests in parliament are an interruption of democracy, Katharine Murphy expressed her confusion on Twitter and got a reply from the former freedom commissioner and now Liberal MP Tim Wilson. Labor is trying to amend the VET bills in the house. The government is gagging Labor MPs who want to speak on the bill, including Kate Ellis and Anne Aly. That required two votes. Now the house is moving to the Labor amendments. In the lower house, Christopher Pyne is gagging Labor on the vocational education and training bills which seek to clean up some of the dodgy training colleges. The Senate is voting on the criminal code amendment that enables continuing detention for high risk terrorist offenders. Scott Morrison advises that growers should withhold 32.5% in tax from backpackers. The ABC rural reporter Anna Vidot asks: as the 32.5% rate hasn't come in yet, we've been contacted at ABC Rural who says that their bosses are already withholding the 32.5% because there is a lot of confusion out there. Morrison: My advice to them is they should, they should withhold at that rate because [backpackers] are non-residents for tax purposes and the compliance programs that will be implemented will be following things up. In other words, the tax office will chase 32.5% the tax down. Q: You say the tax rate hasn't come in yet, so... Legislating that specifically has not occurred and so the law will default to the common law position, and the common law position is 32.5. That's what it is right now. Scott Morrison is asked how he thinks farmers feel. In the answer, unlike Barnaby Joyce, he gives a nuanced reply that concedes it was a change in the 2015 budget that started this. Like me, [farmers] will be very disappointed. I will be very disappointed and they will be very disappointed. Let's just understand what the 32.5% rate is. The 32.5% rate has not been introduced by the government. The 32.5% rate is the non-resident tax rate which was set by Wayne Swan. Now, in the '15/16 Budget, we brought forward a measure that would have sought to legislate that 417 and 462 visa holders [taxed] at 32.5, the non-resident rate. In the absence of that legislation...this is what this legislation is all about -then the common law position of backpackers being treated as non-residents refers back to that rate at 32.5 cents. Scott Morrison on backpackers tax: But this is not a game. This is not a game of ping-pong on legislation and tax rates. That's not how sensible tax rates should be set in this country. We have been willing to engage in the spirit of reasonable compromise. Our position is 15%. Why not compromise? Because I think that would frankly make a farce of the whole process – 15% is based on the seasonal worker rate, it is a sensible rate. It has a basis that relates elsewhere in the tax system and that is the least administratively complex way to deal with it, with the agricultural sector, and if people are prepared to vote for it at 19, they could be prepared to vote for it at 15 in order to achieve an outcome. The 13% rate is arbitrary. Scott Morrison is speaking now on backpackers tax. He has met with the crossbenchers last night and this morning. He has seven but not eight crossbenchers needed to pass the 15% rate. In the Senate, all eyes will be on the backpackers tax. At the moment, the bill is listed for 12.45pm but all things liable to change without notice. Scott Morrison has a press conference coming up. There may be a resolution on the backpackers tax coming up. Bill Shorten also mentions people he has met, troops serving overseas and firefighters. He mentions Indigenous kids and remembers mourning for the LGBTI people murdered in Orlando. He also thanks all the parliamentary staff and his family. Nobody in this chamber needs to be told how hard this job is on our families. Those Saturday night goodbyes, trying to help with the homework from the other side of the country, the netball games, the plays, the concerts you miss, the re-emerging you do when you return from these long parliamentary sittings, and the re-acquaintance with your family. None of our parents or children asked for a parent in public life, but they live with it, they live with us, and we couldn't do it without them. Bill Shorten starts by revealing he and Malcolm Turnbull actually get on quite well behind the scenes. He thanks the Speaker and the prime minister. In fact, I recall one meeting where the prime minister actually asked me if there was some way we could be nicer about each other in public. I said we could swap jobs. I thought I was pretty agile, really. I did discover there is a little limit to Malcolm's commitment to innovation. The PM and I actually have more in common than people realise. We're both married to brilliant women, we've both battled the Member for Warringah. We have both grown up wanting to help run the AWU and join the Labor Party. The prime minister also thanks troops serving overseas, the parliamentary staff who "enable democracy", his team in Coalition, including Barnaby Joyce, the Nationals and his family. He also thanks the families of all MPs. We are the volunteers, but our families are the conscripts and we could not do this job without the support and love of our families. So I urge all honourable members that each time over the summer break that someone asks you to set the table or do the dishes, play another round of backyard cricket, mind kids while the other half heads out for the night, or spend the day with the grandkids, to ensure your ongoing ability to serve in this place, I urge you to comply each time and do so with a very big smile. Turnbull mentions Indigenous people he has met and the progress towards constitutional recognition of our First Australians. There are now five Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders in the parliament and I want to thank them all, as I know the leader of the opposition does, for their wisdom and support. And he goes to the usual "let's all be kinder" message in these speeches. Perhaps a more realistic goal is to vow to speak more plainly and with more candour to the Australian people. They are weary of the political games, the sense that politicians say one thing and could easily mean another, and that our promises are throw-away lines with a shelf life of a carton of milk. The Oxford dictionary has declared "post-truth" as the international word of the year. Mr Speaker, let's do all we can to ensure that post-truth politics has no place in Australia. If we promise to be bound by our words, we will be much more careful in choosing them. Turnbull talks about Lulu, a young cancer survivor he met while announcing another $20m for the Zero Childhood Cancer Initiative. I've been brought to tears a few times in this job and I admit there was some more that day. I'm wearing Lulu's bracelet and it reminds me, if I ever need reminding, that what we do here is about the future of our nation, about the future of people like Lulu, our children and grandchildren. The prime minister says it has been a privilege to meet so many people around the country. And with their stories, he says he hopes it makes him a better leader. He documents the story of a domestic violence victim whose children were murdered by their father, a woman who was suffering breast cancer, families of MH17 victims. One day we're here in the House debating legislation, the next I'm at the Birdsville Hotel on the edge of the Simpson Desert, chatting to locals alongside a wall of well worn Akubras, great company, cold beer, and a curried camel pie. And the next, representing our nation overseas gave me the chance to meet Australians having a go around the world, like Nick and Andy Stone whose new cafe is booming, bringing decent coffee to all New Yorkers. Malcolm Turnbull says he has learned the lessons from the elections elsewhere, including Brexit and the US election. This year saw elections in other countries, too, with Britain's decision to leave the European Union and the election of Donald Trump in the United States, both leaving pollsters and pundits red-faced. The forces at play in those countries and their political systems are, of course, very different to ours, but we must always be aware of what the public expects from its government, from its parliament, from its leaders. Many people are anxious about change or feel that their leaders are not listening, and we should not dismiss their concerns. Malcolm Turnbull begins his Christmas speech. He notes the election campaign. Over eight weeks political parties and candidates of every size and persuasion presented their vision for Australia to the people. Mr Harbourside Mansion was surely the epithet of the campaign. Of course, Bill desperately wanted the title for himself, but like all good Socialists he wanted a harbourside mansion paid for by the taxpayer. He talks about the state of the world, talking about Syria and Iraq. The campaign was hard-fought, but while our political battles can bebruising, we resolve our differences by casting and counting votes, not with guns and violence, and I know we all take great pride in the way the Australian people peacefully choose their government many I want to thank, Mr Speaker, the electors of Wentworth for reelecting me this year. Turnbull says the parliament is working: In their wisdom, the Australian people elected a parliament that requires us to work together to talk, to compromise. The decision is proving to be a very workable one. The 45th parliament is making and passing good legislation for the benefit of all. Since the election, we've passed 38 bills, including those that took us to the double dissolution election. Labor's backpacker motion is voted down. The Labor motion on backpackers currently being voted on: That the House: 1. Notes that: a) In the Budget, the government blindsided rural and regional Australia with an internationally uncompetitive 32.5% backpacker tax; b) The government dropped the rate of the backpacker tax to a still uncompetitive rate of 19%; c) The government again shifted the rate of the backpacker tax to 15% because of a desperate deal in the Senate; d) The government's desperate deal was rejected by the Senate which instead proposed a compromise of 10.5%; e) The government has refused to accept the Senate's sensible compromise, threatening to allow the backpacker tax to revert to its original internationally uncompetitive rate of 32.5% which will harm the tourism, hospitality and agricultural industries; f) Only this morning, the minister for finance said:"The deal that is on the table for the Senate is a 15% rate; if it's not 15% then it will be 32.5%"; g) Therefore, calls on the government to end the chaos and deal with the backpacker tax immediately by accepting the sensible compromise offered by the Senate; and 2. Therefore, suspends so much of the standing and sessional orders as would prevent Order of the day No. 3 relating to the Income Tax Rates Amendment (Working Holiday Maker Reform) Bill 2016 being called on immediately. Greens democracy spokeswoman Lee Rhiannon has appeared at the WACA protest, praising the activists and bringing them a gift of chocolates. Asked whether the action, including hanging from the edifice of parliament, is appropriate she said: "It's a non-violent protest" and "they should be here". The problem lies with the human rights abuses, the mental health problems, the anguish. We're breaking our international obligations ... that's where the laws are being broken. These people are courageous, they are showing what the parliament should do. Rhiannon said she only found out about the protest an hour ago, in effect denying any coordination between the Greens and protesters. Police have now taken a walk around the corner with some of the WACA organisers in fluoro vests, so we may have an update on how the protest will play out in a minute. A little bit more from LNP senator James McGrath: Anthony Albanese has a crack at the "chaotic government" and is shut down. Now the house is voting that the motion be put. Then they will vote on the substantive motion. The vote is proceeding in the lower house. Chris Bowen is successfully gagged 75-72. Agriculture shadow Joel Fitzgibbon gets up to second the backpacker motion and yells into the mike before Pyne gags him: This is Barnaby Joyce's greyhound ban. Barnaby Joyce and Fitzgibbon yell across the chamber at each other and the speaker tells them to shut it. (More politely) As it turns out, both leaders were in the house for Christmas valedictories and goodwill to all men and women. Christopher Pyne is gagging Chris Bowen. Now Chris Bowen is moving a motion – presumably leading to a suspension of standing orders – on the backpackers tax. Parliament security is the first issue of the day. Speaker Tony Smith is speaking about plans to improve security around and at parliament house. It will include new perimeter security, CCTV cameras and glassing off certain areas. Parliament has always been known as the people's house, says Smith But he says it has to be a balance to allow for safety. The world has changed since the original design brief. Smith says: The changes will not impede or change the way the public enter the building. The public will still be able to access the roof of the building. No one has been able to walk up the grass and over the top of the building for 11 years. LNP senator James McGrath is furious at the protestors. He told Sky's Kieran Gilbert: What a bunch of grubs. Parliament is the house for all Australians ... and we have these Kmart Castros out the front its all about them and their views and nobody else ... If they want their views to be heard run for parliament ... they should wake up to themselves and get a job. I promised to bring you some of the commentary on the detail of what passed in the radically amended Australian Building and Construction Commission (ABCC). Here is Judith Sloan from the Oz: Let's face it, Malcolm Turnbull hasn't the faintest clue about the rough and tumble of industrial relations. His business experience was limited to fancy deal-making and appearing in court rooms. So allowing himself to get involved in negotiating with populist, horse-trading crossbench senators about the details of the bill to re-establish the Australian Building and Construction Commission was a big public policy mistake. But just like the boy who has his heart set on a particular Christmas present, Malcolm really, really wanted the ABCC bill to pass the Senate, and he was prepared to do pretty much anything to get it. The net effect is an appalling mishmash of inconsistent and unworkable provisions that completely undermines any benefits that could flow from the restoration of the ABCC and the associated code for government-funded building projects. Turnbull was asked about this particular column this morning and he said it was all very well to be an armchair commentator but he was in the biz of getting things done. Whistleblowers Activists and Citizens Alliance (WACA) spokesman Phil Evans said today's action "continues the call for urgent action on refugees" including closing offshore detention camps and bringing all refugees and asylum seekers in them to Australia. Evans confirmed no charges were laid over yesterday's protest, nor were they given any paperwork banning them from the parliamentary precinct. Asked about their treatment by security yesterday he said it was "fine ... and pales in comparison to the treatment of people on Manus Island and Nauru" who are being "tortured raped and abused". Evans criticised Liberal MPs who turned their backs on the protest yesterday noting "protesters are part of democracy". Before I made it to the protest Nationals MP Andrew Broad commented to me in the hallway that protesters would be fined $5,000 if they did the same thing at the MCG. Parliament will sit at 9.30am. Richard di Natale has told Sky News as far as he knows, there is no involvement from Greens MPs and senators in the protests yesterday or today. Though there are reports that Greens senator Nick McKim may move a motion in the Senate congratulating the protestors. That Xenophon digit is aimed at Leyonhjelm due to a story by Tory Shepherd of the Adelaide Advertiser. Here is but a taste: A NSW Senator has compared South Australia to a stinky fat man who enjoys artificially flavoured cheesy snacks. In a sign other states are envious of the state for securing promises on shipbuilding and water, Liberal Democrat David Leyonhjelm said we should be stripped of some of our GST revenue and have our "bleatings" ignored. "If the South Australia Government was a person, it would be an obese 40-year-old man with awful body odour who lives with his mother, refuses to work, and plays Xbox all day," Senator Leyonhjelm told parliament on Wednesday. "He pauses only to demand more Cheezels and iced coffee, or to complain when the lights go out." The state's unemployment woes mean we're at risk of "becoming one big, barren, candlelit retirement village", he said, then outlined the concerns of one constituent who was hit by flooding that was exacerbated by environmental water releases in the Murray Darling Basin. Meanwhile... I've spoken to Zianna Fuad one of the organisers. Thursday's refugee protest at parliament is by the same group as Wednesday's disruption of question time – that is Whistleblowers Activists and Citizens Alliance (WACA). There are 13 protesters in the fountain, dyed red to symbolise blood. They are carrying signs singling out the Liberals as "world leaders in cruelty" and Labor for providing "no opposition to cruelty". Two professional climbers are hanging from the edifice of parliament with a "Close the bloody camps now #justiceforrefugees" sign. One of the climbers climbed the Melbourne arts spire as part of a similar protest earlier this year. Police are on scene but there has been no attempt to move the protesters on yet. There are lots of pictures coming now of the protest. Here are some from Greens senator Sarah Hanson-Young. The Greens supported the protestors by the government and Labor have been critical of the protests in the public gallery. Barnaby Joyce, deputy prime minister and Nationals leader, was critical of the Greens support including Greens leader Richard Di Natale, who hugged protestors yesterday. Q: What sort of questions do you hope are answered in an investigation that will now ensue? Did they have any affiliations with any groups? It was obviously organised so under what banner was it organised. I really question the Greens going down and congratulating them. Are you congratulating them for shutting down our nation's parliament? Have you completely and utterly lost the plot Richard Di Natale? Why would you do that? Now there is a security investigation of parliament today as more protests ensue. Mike Bowers is out the front of parliament. There are more protestors outside. They have hung the sign on the building and dyed the fountain red. People are standing in the water with signs. Good morning, Today, I am feeling lucky. It is the last day and I am almost done. You could say, I might get out scot-free. Because scot-free is the term of the day. And so it is with the PM, who had rather a turbulent day – punctuated by protestors in the public gallery. They were protesting against the asylum seeker policies on both sides. Turnbull told Kochie Sunrise they were interrupting democracy. I wasn't concerned for my personal safety but I was concerned that the parliament could be in trouble like that. The demonstrators, who rioted in the gallery, were interrupting the people's house. They were interrupting democracy. It's not for me to press charges, Kochie. That is a matter for the police. They let them off scot-free. The security needs to be looked at. But he baulked at trade minister Steve Ciobo's musings that perhaps, the public galleries should be glassed off. He was asked if he would look at closing the public gallery. We should never do that. This is the people's house ... Our forebears fought very hard over centuries to secure parliamentary democracy to have their elective representatives come together and speak their mind. Interrupting that, is a denial of democracy. Mind you, he did have a win on the Australian Building Construction Commission (ABCC), celebrated with an exuberant lung-crushing hug from the employment minister Michaelia Cash, caught by Mike Bowers. But commentators are not pleased. I will bring you some of their commentary in a moment. But he had a loss on the backpacker tax and this morning the National Farmers Federation have described the state of affairs as a disgrace. Derryn Hinch, having voted for 19%, and against 15%, is now proposing a 13% rate. Turnbull is out doing a lot of interviews this morning. He hopes to have the backpacker tax resolved today but is not prepared to compromise because he says the 15% rate is fair. He notes the rate for Australians – after the tax free threshold – is 19% and the rate for Pacific Island temporary workers is 15%. Labor want our rich kid from Germany, from Norway to be paying less tax than someone from one of the poorest countries in the world. I will start with that much breakfast news and crack on with this monster. Talk to me in the thread or on the Twits @gabriellechan or on Facebook.

Well, 2016 has been a heck of a year – so we're going to see it out in the best way possible: with a candid discussion about the best, worst and most interesting moments from the world of video games. On 15 December, the Guardian games section is holding its annual review of the year event at our London headquarters. Joining games editor Keith Stuart on stage will be Tomb Raider writer Rhianna Pratchett, comedian and broadcaster Ellie Gibson (from hit Dave show, Dara O Briain's Go 8 Bit), and designer and academic Phoenix Perry, as well as Alice Bell from games site VideoGamer and Guardian games contributors Simon Parkin and Jordan Erica Webber. We'll be looking at the lows and highs of the year, from the majestic Uncharted 4 to the now available Final Fantasy XV; from the promise of virtual reality to the ... unfulfilled promise of virtual reality; from the biggest commercial releases to the strangest, most beautiful little indie gems. We'll also be asking: what do the games of 2016 tell us about what we can expect in 2017 and beyond? Along with candid games chat, there will be home-cooked mince pies and lots of prizes on our now legendary raffle table. Companies such as Team 17, Activision, Rovio, Read Only Memory and many more have given us a lot of frankly amazing prizes to give away, including games, merchandise and books such as the beautiful Bitmap Brothers Universe. Not only that but the developer of the critically acclaimed PC game Fractured Space is providing a free digital copy of the Fractured Space: Commander Pack (worth £45) for every one who attends the event. So there is really no excuse – join us for lively debate and Christmas fun. Tickets are £15 and available from the Guardian Members website.

I'd been living in Amsterdam for eight years, working on the lighting for film sets. Photography was always around – I'd studied film-making in London – though it was never in the foreground. But when you reach your 30s you have a realisation: what do I really want to do? In my case, I bought a ticket to Cape Town. I'd never been to Africa. I just wanted to get far away. I got a job at a production company, and it was there that I met Ruthy Jones, who did the cooking and cleaning, commuting from Manenberg township. We became very good friends. She's an adorable woman who loves her family. When she was 14, she was raped at the local swimming pool by one of the employees. She wasn't even that aware of what was happening, because sex education was so poor. She only found out what had gone on when she became pregnant. The day I met her, I found out about her love for Jesus and religious music. After the rape, church became the most constant, steady thing in her life. Most churches there have a brigade, a band that parades around the area. Ruthy's Anglican brigade is the most professional: they have uniforms and all the kids play an instrument – there are so many boys on triangle! Ruthy plays everything, but she likes the flute the most. It gives them a bond, a group dynamic, and tells children there's more to life than the violence they see on the streets of Manenberg. Although it's not how she looks every day, this picture captures how Ruthy sees herself. During the week, she is the main breadwinner of the family: her son, her daughter, their children, an uncle. It's a full house. The weekends, meanwhile, are about cooking, going to church and doing community work. Her schedule is full, there's little time for pleasure, though we did once find time for a foot massage and a trip to the botanical gardens. It's so easy to get caught up in the drugs, gangs and violence in Manenberg. I had to hire equipment to shoot Ruthy and the Anglican brigade. When I said where I was going, the suppliers weren't too pleased. But they'd never been to Manenberg and seen it for themselves. I'm not denying its negative side, but there are also people like Ruthy living there. I followed this project with Rainbow Girls, a series about lesbian women in Khayelitsha township, which is infamous for "corrective rape". But there is another side to Khayelitsha. A lesbian beauty pageant is held there, with 10 women dressing in various outfits – school uniform, beachwear, night out. The doors are open, everyone is invited. While everyone I photograph is a victim, I don't portray them that way, and it's not how they see themselves. This portrait won a prize – my first ever – and I spent the money making a book for Ruthy to sell in her church. She used the proceeds to fix instruments and buy new uniforms. I get a kick out of that. It seems only fair. If I'd been in her shoes, I'm not sure I would have made it to the age of 45 as she has – and still been so kind and devoted and open. Julia Gunther's CV Born: Berlin, 1979. Trained: London College of Printing. Influences: Pieter Hugo, Brent Stirton, Ami Vitale, Otto Dix, Max Beckmann. High point: "My first solo exhibition, Ruthy Goes to Church." Low point: "When my friend Phillipa died of breast cancer. I really wanted her to see that exhibition. She always kicked my butt." Top tip: "Go out and shoot. It's more rewarding to look at a picture than to wonder about what work you might make." Julia Gunther's work is in the Taylor Wessing photographic portrait prize show at the National Portrait Gallery, London, until 26 February.

We live in an era in which humans have become the dominant force of change on the planet. First proclaimed at the turn of the millennium by the climate scientist Paul Crutzen, the Anthropocene asserts that since the Industrial Revolution, humans have altered the environment so extensively as to create a new geological epoch. It might seem an enormous subject to tackle with art, but in my projects I like to consider disciplines like physics from an artistic point of view, and to think about the larger context in which the Earth exists. Many of my works seek to merge the poetic and the scientific to delve into a field that's unknown to me. It is through this context that my current project, an exhibition called Crystalline, has been percolating over the past few years. In 2010, my direct experience of Eyjafjallajökull erupting in Iceland catapulted my practice as a painter into working directly with the primary materials of geology and physics. Working on site next to a volcano felt like travelling to the centre of the Earth. Looking at seismology charts to explore how an earthquake can inscribe itself into scientific records I started to visualise these dark fluctuations as patterns generated by the forces of nature. My drawings of the unseen world of the microscopic brought a new form of alchemy into my paintings. In 2013, I was offered a place at Parity Studios, University College Dublin (UCD) and I am currently working on a commission for the school of biology and environmental science, which aims to rediscover the many hidden and inspiring collections in the university. To be working in a studio in school of Biology and Environmental Science at University College Dublin has enabled my collaboration with scientists to broach subjects at the edges of current scientific knowledge. Meeting with Jenny McElwain, professor of palaeobiology, opened the the depths of space and time for me, and prompted my curiosity in the period of time just before climate change was identified around 1820. This was a time of polar exploration just preceding the Industrial Revolution when humans started to etch ourselves into geological history. For the exhibition I am making a work called Cyathea australis, using the early tools of photography reducing this medium to its bare essentials in a series of photogenic drawings that interrogate an era before the Anthropocene. Jenny has been using fossilised leaves to reconstruct the ancient atmospheric carbon dioxide record from 330 to 260 million years ago, when large rainforests expanded throughout the tropics, leaving as their signature the world's coal resources. In tandem with this scientific study, I set up a dark room in the atmospheric chambers to record the silhouettes of our earliest plants. Using silver nitrate and light I created a series of ghostly imprints generated by a 400-million-year-old atmosphere – an atmosphere so deadly that two inhalations would suffice to kill a person. This constricting and resonant environment calls to mind the fatal impact our collective activities have had on our planet. My research for this project was extended in 2015 when I found myself on a barkentine Arctic expedition in the same waters that had subsumed ships and Arctic explorers for hundreds of years. By 1823 the North American Arctic was still the last undiscovered ecosystem on the planet. It was a landscape so cold that it fractured everything it penetrated, including the stones. It was uncharted, unclaimed territory and Europeans had perished in it miserably. I was captivated by the story of the disappearance of the Franklin ships in 1845: the expedition of two vessels, HMS Terror and HMS Erebus, that vanished while searching for the Northwest Passage. I am retracing this territory by developing Unknown Landscapes, a series of oil paintings based on photographic plates from these expeditions. The cameras survived in the permafrost when the ships and crew disappeared into nothingness. The plates carry the melancholy and the magic of those frontier times. In September, the story of the 1845 Franklin Expedition hit the headlines again with the discovery of HMS Terror. I discovered that the doomed ship's captain was an Irishman with a keen interest in botany. Thanks to his interest, buried in the Antiquities Department of the National Botanic Gardens is a superb collection of Arctic pressings from the 1825 Franklin expedition that have never been on public view. Matthew Jebb, the director, graciously opened the collection to me over the summer to extract some 75 seeds from the pressings. These seeds that belong to another time are an important finding as they represent that moment just before the industrial revolution that we can't go back to. I am now developing a work, A Space And Time Outside, with the Millennium Seed Bank at Kew Gardens, to explore the potential life force of these seeds from the Arctic that have been around for close to 190 years. For the duration of the exhibition scientists will test the seeds as a live project. Another work related to the theme of the expedition stems from a collaboration with the European Space Agency (ESA) this summer. The piece is called Crystalline, which is also the overall title of the exhibition In this work, a series carbon works dominate the entrance of the exhibition hall. This work is a poetic response to the retreating Arctic glaciers that were mapped circa 1845, when the region was still a blank space. To make this installation, I am working with a material developed by scientists at an Irish company called Enbio. They have developed a revolutionary use for carbon, which is intriguing to me given that it is one of the most indestructible materials on the planet and essential to all forms of life on Earth. Each piece in my installation is coated with a pigment once used by early cave painters to coat the walls of their shelters. In spray painting the material, I am re-enacting the process used in space technology; engineers at Enbio will apply a contemporary version of the charcoal, made from carbon and burnt bone, to the outside of the European Space Agency's Solar Orbiter. The spacecraft is due to launch in 2018 and will study the sun at unprecedentedly close proximity. The pigment will be added to the outside of a spacecraft's titanium heat shield. The surfaces for Crystalline are also cured at high temperatures to create a motif of cracked and disjointed cartographies, which exude an air of shabby beauty. Their cracked surfaces seem both vulnerable and inveterate. A sound piece in the show is prompted by my experience of the Arctic shelf melting. On my Arctic research trip in 2015, I used a heliograph – a device that was historically used to record the sun. Tom McCormack, a physicist at UCD designed a version for me, which I attached to the binnacle of the expedition ship to create a response to the melting glaciers by recording a sound score of the sun's track at the summer solstice. I recorded messages and pulses as the sun moved through the sky on 21June 2015 to produce a series of notations for the score. The burn holes created are photographic in the strictest sense, as each mark is a small black sun, and each dot is a repeat pattern of the sun's image scaled down many million times on its journey to the Earth. In March 2017, an original music score by Irene Buckley, with recordings I made in the Arctic, will be beamed into space from by ESA. In art as in science, in the process of following an enquiry, many other enquiries emerge – my forthcoming exhibition in Paris is certainly a point of resolution of some of these, but many other stories have opened up, and the interconnectedness of the parts has been astonishing. I am realising the power of expression that visual art can bring in unleashing the potential infinity encapsulated in a given story. Crystalline, curated by Helen Carey, will open at the Centre Culturel Irlandais, Paris, on 26 January 2017 and will travel to the European Space Agency in April 2017. You can also hear Siobhan talking about her work in this broadcast for RTE Lyric FM and see previous work on her website Collaborative Partners: European Space Agency; The Millennium Seed Bank; Enbio; Born Na Mona; UCD Parity Studios, University College Dublin. Photographs of artworks taken by Vincent Hoban.

Sex and disability are rarely thought of in tandem, and when they are it's more often than not in the context of a heterosexual, long-term relationship. That's not me. I'm a gay man and have a fairly stereotypical lifestyle for someone in his mid-20s in central London. There is, however, one big difference between me and my fellow gay men. I have severe cerebral palsy. I use a wheelchair, I have jerky involuntary movements, I rely on assistants 24/7 and I have a speech impairment. At the same time I have a good sex life and really enjoy challenging men's conceptions of disability. My assistants can always tell by the sudden change in my movements that it's time for them to go on one of their walks. This is the euphemism which has been agreed for a very long time. I'm an active Grindr user and my assistants are now entirely used to me sitting there on the hook-up app while they feed me my dinner rather than feeling apprehensive around that infamous orange glow. The assistants always disappear one way or another before any encounter. I keep what I tell guys to a minimum. I know they are somewhat perplexed by the entire set-up; in any case, we both have something else on our minds. It doesn't help that I live in student accommodation and quite often the guys think my panic cord flushes the toilet. Not only does this set off a very loud alarm which sends my involuntary movements through the roof, but security are at the door within seconds. Guys my age often panic at my movements. People walk towards me and then turn back. When I check my phone I see that I've been blocked (even though I do emphasise the extent of my impairment many times before meeting). I know plenty of my non-disabled comrades also get blocked, but it took some time to get used to. I remind myself that it's just sex and nothing more. Though I date boys my own age, when it comes to Grindr I generally go for guys around 40 as they tend not to have any issues with my movements. I meet around three a week (if not more) and have rarely had a bad time. I often have a reality check when I go home to the much smaller city in the UK where I grew up to find that sex is not available on demand. This raises a few issues. I am unable to masturbate. I rely on others. Is this dignified? Luckily I have had many, many great experiences. I acknowledge that not everyone who has issues with masturbation may feel comfortable asking men on Grindr (especially if they are straight) to help them perform the deed and possibly go further, yet it would automatically, by definition, turn into sex work if I relied on paid support. I am not sure of the best solution. Medically speaking things could be improved: 56 Dean Street are fantastic with generic sexual health concerns, but – no surprises here – they don't have much experience with patients who have cerebral palsy. And yet my neurologist gives me the impression that she doesn't believe that any of her patients have sex lives so when I have questions I have no one to compare myself to. Physios, it seems, can be prudish. When I joined Grindr 18 months ago, I'd never even had an encounter with a man. I was certain of my sexuality for many years, but I'd convinced myself that sex would be off the cards unless it was in the context of a very stable relationship. Since getting Grindr, I have met around 60 men and have found the experience unbelievably rewarding and liberating. The health benefits have been enormous and there's no denying it's been a lot of fun. I don't forget how disabled I am and I often admire how open-minded these men are. It is a far cry from how I am often treated in public. I guess you could argue it's a case of equality between the sheets rather than in the streets.

Speed bumps should be redesigned, speed limits made variable on England's motorways, sometimes dropping as low as 50mph, and a congestion charge considered in more cities to cut air pollution and save lives, health experts have said. The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (Nice) released a series of recommendations on Thursday which it said would "promote a smoother driving style" and help keep emissions down. Health officials said vehicles created more emissions when they were speeding up and slowing down, as on congested motorways. To keep a more consistent speed, they said, the limit could be temporarily lowered to 50 or 60 mph when traffic is stop-start. That represented a "more sensible" approach than having lower fixed limits, Nice's Prof Mark Baker said. The officials added that some speed bumps encouraged people to speed up, then slow down. They recommended that, where this was the case, but where such measures were still needed to reduce road injuries, they be designed to "minimise their impact on air pollution". They also urged planners to consider using average speed technology on the roads to promote smoother driving. Figures released earlier this year by the RAC Foundation showed that cameras measuring average speeds were now monitoring drivers on more than 250 miles of Britain's roads. Sections covered range in length from a quarter of a mile on London's Tower Bridge to 99 miles on the A9 between Dunblane and Inverness in Scotland. On top of that, they want towns and cities with pollution problems to consider implementing clean air zones and look into the possibility of introducing congestion charging zones. The draft guidance for England also contains proposals for "no-idling" zones around schools to prevent parents leaving their cars running during school drop-offs. Air pollution is a contributory factor to about 25,000 deaths a year in England, almost 5% of all deaths, Nice said, and road traffic is estimated to contribute to about a third of air pollution in urban sites. Provisional figures show that road usage is at record levels, with an estimated 320bn vehicle miles travelled on Britain's roads in the year ending September 2016. Health campaigners welcomed the draft proposals, which were devised for local authority staff and are out for consultation, but environmental groups called for more stringent measures. The British Lung Foundation said it backed the plans because "air pollution contributes to tens of thousands of early deaths every year" and the British Heart Foundation called them a "step in the right direction". Jenny Bates, a Friends of the Earth air pollution campaigner, said the proposals were to be welcomed but that "we must deal with the real crux of the issue and reduce air pollution levels". She said: "Action is needed both to ensure vehicles on the road are clean and that there are fewer of them. Diesel vehicles, which are the most polluting, must be phased out and our transport and planning policy needs a radical overhaul." Nice officials called for a review of trees lining streets in urban areas. "In some cases, they restrict street ventilation, causing poorer air quality. In others they improve it". It also warns that solid barriers placed next to roads to mitigate noise can actually lead to a wider dispersal of pollution. Other suggestions by Nice included: Town planners should avoid putting cycle routes on heavily polluted roads but, where this was unavoidable, they should consider using foliage to screen cyclists from vehicles. . Local authorities may want to look into setting a standard for the types of cars used for taxis. Some areas should consider public awareness initiatives such as "car-free days". Those could be similar to measures sometimes used in Paris, which only allows drivers with a number plate ending in an odd or even number into the city on given days when pollution reaches high levels. House builders should place living rooms at the back of houses away from roads and hedgerows should be grown to protect cyclists using cycle paths. This article was amended on 5 December 2016. In earlier versions, the headline, photo caption and introduction stated that Nice was proposing the removal of speed bumps. The report does not make such a recommendation, rather it suggests designing them in such a way as to minimise their impact on air pollution. This has been corrected.

Laura Cumming got the year off to a luminous start with The Vanishing Man (Chatto &amp; Windus), which consists of two abbreviated life stories, entwined like a double helix. The first strand concerns Diego Velázquez, who painted life at the 17th-century Spanish court, culminating in the wonder that is Las Meninas. Alongside this elevated loveliness, Cumming runs the story of John Snare, a Victorian bookseller from Reading who becomes convinced that he has found a Velázquez portrait in a grubby country house, and then ruins his life trying to prove it. In shimmering prose fuelled by an intriguing mystery – if Snare's painting isn't by Velázquez then whose is it? – Cumming explores the nature of artistic obsession and desire. Another fine original biography appeared from Frances Wilson, whose Guilty Thing (Bloomsbury) matched its voice to that of its subject, the opium-eating Romantic author Thomas De Quincey. Wilson's prose has some of the same hallucinatory loveliness that De Quincey used in his verse and journalistic essays, and the result is thrillingly immersive. You might have expected Lyndal Roper's Martin Luther (Bodley Head) to be a more sober affair, but it turns out that the man who railed against the sinfulness of the established church had his own dark side. A swaggerer and a swearer, Luther tore through the world like a dark star, leaving Europe split in two. Roper's immaculate scholarship doesn't simply locate her subject in the complex religious and political context of the 16th century, but also gives a persuasive account of his inner life, without ever straying beyond what the evidence will allow. The best debut of the year was surely Keiron Pim's Jumpin' Jack Flash (Jonathan Cape), an account of the mesmerically ghastly David Litvinoff, an inspired chancer who scampered between the worlds of art, music and organised crime in the 1960s, creating nasty trouble. Pim's sturdy narrative is studded with interviews from raddled old survivors, many of them now confined to care homes with only their sociopathic tendencies to keep them warm. You'll worry at your hunger to keep on reading, but you won't be able to stop. One way of raising the tone might be to try Sarah Bakewell's At the Existentialist Café (Chatto &amp; Windus). Existentialism in its purest form isn't for people who want to be stroked and soothed. Yet by showing us Sartre and De Beauvoir sitting in a cafe swigging apricot cocktails while working out how to live, Bakewell makes us feel that we too might be able to use philosophy to elevate our humdrum existence to become something more considered. Charles Foster's Being a Beast (Profile), by contrast, encourages us to wallow in our own filth. In an eccentric but revelatory attempt at personal rewilding, Foster spends weeks living like a badger, snug in a hole and snacking on earthworms. Next, he is up above ground again, snuffling around dustbins in an attempt to pass as an East End fox. There are stints as an otter and a red deer, too. Into this visceral narrative, all grunts, smells and mad dashes, Foster braids a meditation on what it means to be a human animal. In The Return (Viking), Hisham Matar sets out to discover what really happened in 1990 when his father was kidnapped, thrown in an infamous Tripoli jail and never seen again. Matar has previously captured the fractured polity of Libya in two astonishingly accomplished novels. Here, though, the story becomes profoundly and painfully personal as he sifts through not only the monstrosities of Gadaffi's regime but also, in later years, the moral dereliction of the Blair government in looking determinedly the other way. Ian Buruma, meanwhile, tells the story of his family's migration. To be more precise, that migration has already happened by the time Their Promised Land (Atlantic) opens in 1915 and Buruma's future grandparents are safely berthed and assimilated as upper-middle-class Hampstead Jews. But when European war comes along, not once but twice during their long relationship, Win and Bun Schlesinger are obliged to confront their multiple identities as Britons, Jews and the children of Frankfurters. Using the hundreds of letters they wrote to each other while Bun was serving in the army, Buruma charts the way in which his grandparents dealt with antisemitism, both of the ferocious kind (close family perished in the Holocaust) and the genteel variety (Bun's medical career was stymied by "45" – the family's personal codeword for "being Jewish"). If Buruma uses family history to ask questions about belonging, Olivia Laing's remarkable memoir The Lonely City (Canongate) examines the state of being apart. Decamping to New York in her mid-30s after a failed relationship, Laing walks the city solo and ponders the nature of loneliness. Arming herself with biographical fragments from Warhol, Hopper and the janitor-painter Henry Darger, Laing considers the necessity of being alone as the precondition for producing art. And, then, what about the power of that art to connect us once again to the great continent of human experience? The Lonely City is the perfect book to have as your shield if you're about to head into the forced togetherness of the festive season feeling curiously detached from it all and suddenly desperate to get away. Save at least 30% on this year's critics' choices when you buy at the Guardian Bookshop. Visit bookshop.theguardian.com or call 0330 333 6846. Support the Guardian and its journalism with every book you buy this Christmas. *Free UK p&amp;p for online orders over £10. Minimum £1.99 p&amp;p applies to telephone orders. Best book lists of 2016 Best fiction Best crime and thrillers Best science fiction and fantasy

I have no tribe. I have no comfort blanket, no default button that enables me to join the prevailing hysteria and cry in unison, "Of course, it's all the fault of X." Meanwhile we everywhere see the familiar landscape clouding over. There are new partings of the ways, disoriented soldiers wandering the battlefield, licking wounds. The liberal centre cannot hold. It cries with Yeats, "What rough beast, its hour come round at last, / Slouches towards Bethlehem to be born?" I confess I find all this somehow exhilarating. Cliches of left and right have lost all meaning, and institutions their certainty. Even in France and Italy, European union is falling from grace. A rightwing US president wins an election by appealing to the left. In Britain, Ukip can plausibly claim to be supplanting Labour. A Tory prime minister attacks capitalism, while Labour supports Trident. Small wonder Castro gave up and died. Conventional wisdom holds that it is the "centre left" that has lost the plot. The howls that greeted Brexit, Donald Trump and Europe's new right are those of liberals tossed from the moral high ground they thought they owned. Worse, their evictors were not the familiar bogeys of wealth and privilege, but an oppressed underclass that had the effrontery to refer to a "liberal establishment elite". Paul Krugman, field-marshal of an American left, stood last week on his battered tank, the New York Times, and wailed of Trump's voters: "I don't fully understand this resentment." Why don't the poor blame the conservatives? He had to assume the answer lay in the new Great Explanation, the politics of "identity liberalism". He is right. It is 20 years since the philosopher Richard Rorty predicted that a Trump-like "strong man" would emerge to express how "badly educated Americans feel about having their manners dictated to them by college graduates". This prediction has now gone viral. Likewise, the historian Arthur Schlesinger warned that a rising campus intolerance, of "offence crimes" and "political correctness", would endanger America's national glue, its collective liberal consciousness. The latest guru on the "what Trump means" circuit is the US political psychologist Jonathan Haidt. Conversing with Nick Clegg at an Intelligence Squared event in London last week, he was asked over and again the Krugman question: "Why did poor people vote rightwing?" The answer was simple. There is no longer a "right wing", or a left. There are nations and there are tribes within nations, both growing ever more assertive. To Haidt, Trump's appeal is to groups alienated by competing groups. Identity liberalism elevated the "sacred victim", uncriticisable ethnic minorities, women, gay people and migrants, to whom Hillary Clinton explicitly deferred in every speech. Thus to favour one group is to exclude another, in this case the so-called "left-behinders", identified as the "pale, stale, male – and failed". In America, as in Europe, older, white men are the only group that liberals can abuse and exclude with impunity. It is a group clearly dominant in small towns and rust belts, gazing out at far-off cities, globalised, digitised, college-educated and "correctly" liberal. The poorest place in America with a non-Hispanic white majority, Clay County in Kentucky, voted 87% for Trump. For Clinton's liberals, ignoring these people was a category error, one that could change the course of western politics. Last week, the US academic Mark Lilla joined the why-Trump? circuit with an analysis of identity liberalism as "a kind of moral panic about racial, gender and sexual identity". It granted selective rights and privileges, but never duties. "Expressive, not persuasive ... it distorted liberalism's message and prevented it from becoming a unifying force." Lilla is scathing of the "whitelash" excuse, which licenses liberals to abuse those voting for Trump and Brexit as racists, and political correctness as yet another rightwing conspiracy. To him, these voters are poor people who fear for the integrity of their communities and see globalism as a mis-selling scam. They may be wrong, but they're not evil. Across the Atlantic, this onset of electoral realpolitik has created a discourse. Trump may indeed be a nightmare, but what shall we do about it? In Britain, liberalism shows no such intellectual robustness, rather a denial clothed in hysteria. The attempt by the remain tribe to undo June's Brexit vote is ludicrous, a sign not of bad losers but of stupid ones. They should fight for soft-Brexit, not no-Brexit. For myself, I cheer as people protest that it no longer "means" anything to be left or right, liberal or conservative. If the left is so lacking in confidence it needs to launder itself as "progressive", that is fine by me. But I just want to kick over the tables, rip up the rule books, get on with the debate. I want to re-enact the glorious revolution of 1832. As for the future, commentators such as Haidt and Lilla seek a "post-identity" liberalism, built round a restoration of the nation state as repository of agreed values. This may mean accepting such majority concerns as the pace of immigration. It is one thing to ask a small community to take in two Syrian families, but impose 200 and liberalism will have an eternally uphill struggle. There is always a balance to be struck in any community, between its right to order its own identity and a wider obligation to welcome strangers, particularly refugees. Even Poland's Europhile Donald Tusk admitted this year that the EU had been wrong to pursue an unqualified belief in "a utopia of a Europe without nation states". British liberals, of whatever party, have spent the past six months fleeing one trauma after another, hurling insults over their shoulders. But as John Stuart Mill said: "He who knows only his own side of a case, knows little of that." The apostles of identity liberalism have fallen into Mill's trap. They see authoritarianism in others, but not in themselves. They see discrimination in others, but not their own. In guarding their chosen tribes, they fail democracy's ultimate test, of tolerance for the concerns of those with whom they disagree. Someone else is always to blame. Such tunnel vision has jeopardised the progress made by the cause of European liberalism over the past half-century. It has been given a bloody nose, and there are more on the way.

For those of us smitten with their saline charms, oysters are one of few foodstuffs immediately evocative of celebration. Whether borne aloft through a noisy restaurant on a silver platter, or slurped from the shell on a pebbly beach, they scream special occasion – yet even among their many fans, they remain an occasional treat in Britain, despite the fact our waters contain some of the finest bivalves in the world. A survey conducted by Morrisons, which put them on sale at 25p each earlier this year, found that a quarter of people were put off oysters by the perception they were expensive (generally they tend to come in between 50–80p a pop), and I suspect worries about food poisoning must deter a few more (although, in truth, as long as they're tightly closed, and you keep them somewhere cool, with a damp tea towel over the top until you're ready to eat them, it's pretty low-risk stuff). It's hard to beat them on the half shell, perhaps with a dash of Tabasco or shallot vinaigrette if you must but, for a luxurious Christmas treat for a select group of friends (because, even at 50p each, four oysters are definitely better than one), I can't think of a better upgrade than oysters Rockefeller, a New Orleans classic so named, according to its creator Jules Alciatore of Antoine's restaurant, "because I know no other name rich enough for their richness". Simon Hopkinson describes these gratinated green shellfish as "the best hot oyster dish I know. Period." That's tha, then. The original recipe is a closely guarded secret, however – and one which many have tried to replicate. Including, of course, me. The oysters In New Orleans, they would use Gulf oysters, meaty and sweet, without the keen briney snap of cold-water varieties, but, as it's a case of the fresher the better when it comes to oysters, I'd recommend going for whatever's best in your locale. That said, it would seem a crime to do anything to our delicate native oyster before savouring its subtly lovely flavour – even a squeeze of lemon feels like sacrilege. The more assertive rock variety, however, is fair game, and its deeper shell is also a better shape for grilling, allowing the animal itself to stay almost raw while the topping melts and bubbles on top. (Folklore has it that the recipe was developed as a substitute for escargots, which proved less abundant on the Louisiana coast than oysters, so if anyone knows of a bivalve with a peculiarly muddy, vegetal flavour, it might be worth a try.) The greens The most striking thing about oysters rockefeller is its vibrant colour – often achieved, as in chefs Simon Hopkinson, Richard Corrigan, Pierre Franey and Bon Appétit magazine's recipes, with pureed spinach, although purists insist this is not authentic. Indeed, food writer Malcolm Hebert, the son of New Orleans restauranteurs, claimed "I was told by Bernard Guste of Antoine's that the original recipe does not have spinach in it". Instead, Jane Eddington, an early-20th-century journalist who, after visiting Antoine's in 1912 (and not greatly enjoying the experience by the sound of it, given her response: "to dine at Antoine's is, after all, to learn by contrast that you would rather have simpler things, but that a name means a great deal when it comes to foods") published the recipe supplied on a souvenir pamphlet, which claims to have been given by Monsieur Jules himself while "sipping on a cognac after luncheon" and uses only parsley and tarragon to give the dish its distinctive hue. My old mucker Chuck Taggart of the Gumbo Pages site – which proved so invaluable in the matter of jambalaya – has a formula that purports to be very close to the original and "rather than using bunches of spinach ... has lots of herbs plus celery leaves, which is true to the rumour that Jules created the dish out of what happened to be lying around the kitchen, including scraps. It seems to me that the secret of this dish is the herbs – tarragon, of course, and chervil." Looking at the photos of Antoine's oysters Rockefeller, it seems more than likely that no spinach is involved – the topping is more the hue of grilled mushy peas (NB should the Louisiana tourist board like to send me to try it for myself, I'd be more than happy to). That's the thing about recipes, though: even if you can pinpoint an "original" version, it's not always the best, and testers come down emphatically on the side of the greener, more vegetal versions, which, they say, not only look more enticing, but work better with the saltiness of the oyster beneath. That said, herbs have a part to play: aniseedy tarragon and grassy parsley both help to add a bit of zing to the bland sweetness of the spinach, and I'm also rather taken with the spicy mineral flavour of Bon Appétit's watercress, a classic pairing with oysters. Celery leaves, or indeed Hopkinson's chopped stalks, prove too savoury for the panel, competing, they say, with the bivalve itself, which seems to have suffered too much to be overshadowed by a mere vegetable. Hopkinson and Franey are the only ones to cook their greens before use, but, though doing so sacrifices some of their vivid colour, it also rids them of much of their moisture content, giving the topping a better texture. Alliums Eddington and Hopkinson both use shallots to flavour their toppings, while Gumbo Pages, Bon Appétit and Franey favour spring onions, with the last two also adding garlic for good measure. This is classically rich French-style cooking, however, thus sweet, winey shallots, softened in butter, feel more appropriate. Flavourings According to Howard Mitcham's book, Creole Gumbo and All That Jazz, Rockefeller would originally have been made with a drop of absinthe, but these days, an anise liqueur such as pastis is more popular – which makes sense given that Alciatore's father retired to Marseilles, home of the aperitif, suggesting the family had connections there. And with pastis and tarragon, there seems little need for Bon Appétit's fennel seeds as well. More local is the Tabasco often added to the mixture, too, which cuts through the rich creaminess of the butter and bivalve nicely. Less necessary, in our opinion, is the salty anchovy or parmesan cheese favoured by Franey and Bon Appétit – cheese, in particular ,seems an unhappy partner for an oyster. I am quite taken, however, with Franey's notion of adding the oyster liquor – so often discarded before cooking – to the butter itself as seasoning, adding a pleasing briny quality, and saving on salt, too. Two birds, etcetera. Fat and crumbs Most Rockefeller recipes are based on a kind of compound butter, but Franey uses a roux finished with double cream, which, looking at pictures of the Antoine's version seems truer to the original, which is clearly piped on top of the oyster. The cream dulls the other flavours, however, so butter seems preferable – although I'll be using less than usual because oysters are rich enough on their own, especially if coming before dinner. Eddington's recipe includes walnuts, which I can find no mention of in more modern accounts. The walnut butter itself is delicious, but, in combination with an oyster, proves unpleasantly rich. Breadcrumbs Some recipes mix breadcrumbs into the compound butter, but I think they're better sprinkled on top, as Hopkinson suggests, so they brown and crisp under the grill. The cooking And it will be a grill – although baking is more common, with times varying from 3 to 25 minutes (Franey clearly liked his oysters very well cooked), testers overwhelmingly prefer versions, like the one from Gumbo Pages, which are grilled very briefly, just so the topping bubbles and browns, while the oyster beneath remains silky cool. If you'd like them cooked more, however, 8-10 minutes in a 220C oven, as Hopkinson suggests, should do the trick. Serve with good bread for mopping up all the delicious juices ... and maybe a sazerac for good measure. The perfect oysters Rockefeller Makes 12 12 rock oysters 150g spinach 100g watercress (or 100g more spinach) 75g butter, at room temperature 1 small shallot, finely chopped 2 tbsp pastis Leaves from 4 sprigs of tarragon 10g parsley Tabasco Rock salt, to serve 5 tbsp dried breadcrumbs Carefully shuck the oysters and pour the liquor into a jug. Blanch the spinach and watercress in boiling water for 1 minute then rinse under cold water and squeeze out well. Melt 1 tbsp of the butter in a small pan and soften the shallots until golden. Add the pastis and half the oyster liquor (passed through a sieve) and bubble until reduced by half. Allow to cool a little. Puree the squeezed-out greens, shallot mixture and herbs with a food processor or a hand blender, then add the remaining butter and a good shake of Tabasco and pulse to combine. Taste and add more hot sauce if necessary. Heat the grill and arrange the oysters on a heatproof platter covered in rock salt (this will keep them steady). Top each with a spoonful of the butter and flatten down to coat. Sprinkle with breadcrumbs and then grill for about 3-4 minutes, watching all the time, until the breadcrumbs are golden and the butter is bubbling. Oysters Rockefeller – New Awlins decadence at its best, or a shameful waste of an innocent bivalve? And, for someone just coming round to cooked oysters (i.e. me), which other recipes would you recommend?

Donald Trump has heaped praise on Pakistan, traditionally a troublesome US ally, saying it is a "fantastic country, fantastic place of fantastic people" according to an official statement released by Islamabad. The US president-elect made his effusive comments in a phone conversation on Wednesday with Nawaz Sharif, prime minister of the nuclear-armed state, whom Trump hailed as a "terrific guy". The statement by the government's Press Information Department quoted Trump saying: "As I am talking to you prime minister, I feel I am talking to a person I have known for long. Your country is amazing with tremendous opportunities. Pakistanis are one of the most intelligent people." It is unlikely to be a verbatim transcript, with some of the phrasing sounding like the style of a Pakistani notetaker, or possibly prime minister Sharif himself, who is regularly teased for his style of English by the Friday Times, a weekly newspaper. Some observers were surprised by the apparent tone of the conversation. Although there have been worries that Trump's business interests might lead him to favour India whilst in office, the property magnate said he had nothing but respect for Pakistanis. He said: "Please convey to the Pakistani people that they are amazing and all Pakistanis I have known are exceptional people." Trump also reportedly said he would "love" to visit Pakistan, a country that has not been on the itinerary of a US president since 2006, when George W Bush visited amid extraordinary security precautions. It is unlikely Sharif was expecting such a torrent of praise when he phoned Trump to congratulate him on his election victory. Relations between the two countries have been fraught for years, with the Obama administration despairing at Pakistan's harbouring of the Afghan Taliban and the Haqqani Network, two insurgent groups that have used Pakistan soil to launch attacks on US and Nato troops in Afghanistan for more than 15 years. Current rows between the two countries include US demands for the release from prison of Shakil Afridi, a doctor who helped lead the CIA to the hiding place of former al-Qaida leader Osama bin Laden; the withholding of $300m in "reimbursements" to the Pakistani army; and the holding up of a financing deal that would have allowed Islamabad to by US F16 fighter jets. But none of those issues appeared to weigh on Trump, who reportedly told Sharif: "You are doing amazing work which is visible in every way." Pakistan will be cock-a-hoop over Trump's apparent enthusiasm for engaging with a country that has few firm international allies. "I am ready and willing to play any role that you want me to play to address and find solutions to the outstanding problems," Trump was reported as saying. Narendra Modi, prime minister of India, is currently campaigning to diplomatically isolate Pakistan following a serious flare-up of hostilities in Kashmir, the contested Himalayan region the two countries have fought over three times since 1947. Earlier this year Modi succeeded in persuading Afghanistan, Bangladesh and Bhuta to pull out of a regional summit that was due to be held in Islamabad in protest at Pakistan's alleged support for militant groups. Whilst India is strongly opposed to third-party mediation of the Kashmir dispute, Pakistan desperately hopes to "internationalise" the issue. This article was amended on 1 December. It originally said the last US president to visit Pakistan was Bill Clinton in 2000. This has been corrected.

At least seven people have died and dozens have been hospitalized in wildfires in Tennessee that have ravaged a popular tourist town and forced thousands from their homes. Fires in the Great Smoky Mountains tore through Gatlinburg in eastern Tennessee starting Monday. Rain began moving through the area on Wednesday, providing some relief, while fires still raged in other parts. A Tennessee emergency management agency spokesman, Dean Flener, said any rain will help, but the fires are still an "ongoing situation". Search-and-rescue missions continued on Wednesday, and Mayor Larry Waters of Sevier County said they had found three people who had been trapped since the fires started spreading wildly in high winds on Monday night. The mayor said the three were OK. "That is some good, positive news for a change," he said. The mayor said authorities are still working to identify the dead and did not release any details about how they were killed. State law enforcement officials set up a hotline for people to report missing friends and family. Officials have not said how many people may be missing. By Tuesday evening, almost nothing remained of the Castle, perhaps the largest and most distinctive home overlooking Gatlinburg. Entire churches disappeared. So did the Cupid's Chapel of Love wedding venue, though its managers promised to move scheduled weddings to a sister venue, Chapel at the Park. "I'm just astonished this is my town," Marci Claude, a spokeswoman for the city and for Gatlinburg Convention and Visitors Bureau, told the Associated Press as she saw the destruction for the first time on a media tour on Tuesday. The wildfires were helped by almost hurricane-force winds on Monday evening and severely dry conditions caused by an ongoing drought. More than 14,000 residents and tourists were forced to evacuate the tourist city in the mountains, where some hotspots persisted and a curfew was in effect overnight Tuesday. The fire has spanned more than 15,000 acres destroying 150 buildings, according to the National Park Service (NPS). Investigators are still examining what caused the fire but NPS spokeswoman Dana Soehn said the fire was "human caused", according to outlet WREG, without elaborating further. There were fires in Georgia and North Carolina last week as the region is also experiencing a crippling drought, making it ripe for wildfires. Tennessee governor Bill Haslam said the fires were the worst the state has seen in a century. A somber reality set in for Gatlinburg, a city of just 3,944 residents that draws more than 11 million visitors a year. But even Gatlinburg's mayor, Mike Werner, who lost his home in the fire, remained steadfast that the city will recover. "It's a devastating time for us and for Gatlinburg," Werner said at a news conference on Tuesday. "As I said earlier this morning, we're strong. We're resilient. And we're going to make it. We're going to pull it together and continue to make Gatlinburg the premier resort that it is." The Dollywood theme park, named after the country music singer Dolly Parton, is also in the area but it remained intact. Parton released a statement of support on Tuesday. "I am praying for all the families affected by the fire and the firefighters who are working so hard to keep everyone safe," she said. "There was fire everywhere. It was like we were in hell," said Linda Monholland, who was working at Park View Inn in Gatlinburg when she and five other people fled on foot. "Walking through hell, that's what it was. I can't believe it. I never want to see something like that again in my life, ever." The Associated Press contributed to this report

Manchester United swept into the EFL Cup semi-finals with the kind of buccaneering display missing from their recent history. This was fast and ruthless and surely had José Mourinho beaming. The Portuguese's side were unstoppable and at United the hope will be this proves the moment it all clicked for him and his players on an evening when the tone was set from the opening moment. The feelgood factor was continued when United were drawn to play third-bottom Hull City in January's two-legged semi-final. Mourinho, who watched the match from a secret location inside Old Trafford after he accepted a one-match ban for his antics in the fixture between these two clubs three days earlier, said his side's display had given him a feeling of "real happiness". "I think we are in the right direction, we played very well and that makes me happy," said United's manager. "One of the things I proposed to myself was to come to a club like Manchester United and play the kind of football that people want. It's Man U tradition. "I'm happy with the victory and to give a semi-final to Old Trafford. Let's try to go back to Wembley. I want this beautiful team to win more matches. We've got very good attacking players who are not getting selected. It hurts me leaving Young and Depay at home. Last week I left out Martial. It's good for me, bad for them." At last United had the kind of flying start they had allowed West Ham here on Sunday and previously granted Fenerbahce and Chelsea, as they gained the lead within two minutes of kick-off. Rooney and Henrikh Mkhitaryan were the creators as the captain fashioned a slick swivel-and-pass to the Armenian, who then played a sweet left-foot back-heel into Zlatan Ibrahimovic's path and the Swede dinked over the onrushing Adrián. The goalkeeper cleaned the No9 out as he scored, though within a few moments the 35-year-old was on his feet. The Hammers were fortunate to avoid going two behind after a similar United move. Rooney again drifted deep and took over. This time the pass that sliced the visitors open found Ibrahimovic: twice he blazed at Adrián and twice it was repelled, and when the ball came to Anthony Martial he overcomplicated things. Next up during the breathless opening Ibrahimovic wheeled along the right and hit a cross that Winston Reid deflected for a corner. To cries of "Rooney, Rooney" – the first such heard in the stadium for a while – the 31-year-old trotted to the right quadrant and delivered the dead ball. From this West Ham broke, but Sofiane Feghouli needed too much time and was dispossessed. Mourinho's men continued to come at West Ham in a red blur, with Rooney leading the charge. A corner from Slaven Bilic's team became a United attack as Antonio Valencia raced upfield and fed Martial. He careered at Pedro Obiang, propelled by a frightening intent, and the midfielder was forced to flatten the Frenchman but Mike Jones adjudged the offence to have taken place outside the area. From the resulting free-kick Rooney went close to goal No249 for United and equalling Sir Bobby Charlton's club record with a dipping shot that had Adrián scrambling before steering it away. Mkhitaryan, Martial, Rooney and Ibrahimovic were terrorising the visiting rearguard and Michael Carrick prodded and probed behind. The Rooney-Ibrahimovic partnership, in particular, was performing in the manner Mourinho will have dreamed off when recruiting the Swede in the summer. West Ham were rocking and the only way they might equalise appeared via a mistake. So it proved, as Dimitri Payet's shot was spilled by David de Gea and in came Ashley Fletcher for an unlikely strike. The centre-forward departed Old Trafford for east London in the summer and so the travelling fans gleefully informed their opposite numbers that he had done so because they are not very good – though the language employed was industrial. Each manager had made five changes from Sunday's 1-1 draw. For United out went Matteo Darmian, Paul Pogba, Juan Mata, Jesse Lingard and Marcus Rashford. In their place were Luke Shaw, Carrick, Mkhitaryan, Rooney and Martial. Bilic swapped Darren Randolph, James Collins, Mark Noble, Manuel Lanzini and Diafra Sakho for Adrián, Reid, Edimilson Fernandes, Feghouli and Fletcher. The poser for United as the second half began was whether they could turn their dominance into a win, after failing to do so against Arsenal, Burnley , Stoke City and Wednesday night's opposition at the weekend. An answer came, within three minutes. Antonio Valencia, who is rejuvenated under Mourinho, cleverly found Mkhitaryan and he showed intelligence to pick out Martial, who rocketed the ball into the roof of the net. Rooney collected a fifth domestic booking of the season, which rules him out of Sunday's trip to Everton, before Martial scored again to raise his season's return to three. Valencia claimed the assist. The rest of the tie was played largely in an atmosphere of relaxed conviviality, though Rooney received a Reid boot to the face in the area that left him bleeding, and screaming for a penalty that should have been forthcoming. Even Bastian Schweinsteiger was given a first appearance under Mourinho. That was greeted by ironic cheers around Old Trafford but there was nothing comical at all about United, as Ibrahimovic's second in stoppage time proved. Bilic was certainly not amused by his side's performance: "I'm disappointed, you can't make a slow start here," said the West Ham manager. "At half-time when we were back in the game I said we cannot make the same mistake again, but we did. Exactly the same start to the half. "It's hard to come back twice. You can't expect anything here if you start both halves slowly, Manchester United have fast, direct players who can punish you."

Arsène Wenger berated his Arsenal players for a lack of urgency and incision after they conceded two "cheap goals" in suffering a first defeat since the opening weekend of the season in the League Cup quarter-finals against Southampton. They left the pitch at the end of both halves to a chorus of boos from the home support. The hosts made 10 changes to the team who defeated Bournemouth on Sunday, and lost Mohamed Elneny to illness before the interval, as Southampton reached their first semi-final in this competition for 30 years. Goals from Jordy Clasie and Ryan Bertrand secured a two-legged tie with Liverpool in the new year, and Claude Puel's team were dominant throughout. "I'm disappointed," said Wenger, who hopes to have Olivier Giroud available for Saturday's trip to West Ham after a groin problem. "We had a disappointing performance, particularly in the first half. I think we were not good enough defensively and gave cheap goals away. " It was better in the second, but it was one of those nights where you look like you could play two hours without scoring a goal. We didn't have enough urgency in the first half and were weak in some departments. We paid for that. "We were not incisive enough and they were sharper than us and fitter. If you give someone a handicap of two goals, against a Premier League side it's difficult. We had players out there who are used to top-level competition, but we didn't have the right urgency." Asked about the supporters' reaction, Wenger said: "The fans never expect too much. It's down to us to give them what they want. It is a fact. We have to live with that. But, of the players who featured today, Gabriel played on Saturday, Carl Jenkinson has been in the team recently, and Kieran Gibbs has played a lot recently. " On the night we were just not at our best. That's an explanation more than an excuse because there are no excuses. But I can only say 'well done' to Southampton. They were better than us tonight."

History shows that cities have tended to embrace international opportunities in waves and cycles. They rarely break out into global activity by themselves. Cities participate in collective movements or networks to take advantage of new conditions, and often their demise or withdrawal from a global orientation is also experienced jointly with other cities as circumstances change, affecting many at once. The world's first great market-driven cities were established more than 4,000 years ago in the early bronze age, and their rich history is only now beginning to be understood. An urban revolution was taking place, with most residents of what is today southern Iraq living in cities, and this process of urbanisation was accompanied by trade on a new scale. Farther east, the cities of Mohenjo-daro and Harappa, in modern-day Pakistan along the Indus River valley, were among the first cities with diversified economies and societies. They were located on trade routes that specialised in gemstones and spanned the whole of central Asia. These cities formed the epicentre of a vast trade network based on a common cultural and linguistic community, and built infrastructure to provide good standards of living for residents. With their deep-rooted cultures and external orientation, they exhibited many of the hallmarks of what are now considered to be global cities. One important lesson to be drawn from the early waves of urbanisation and the long distance activities of cities is that prized assets and luxury possessions have often been drivers of interconnection and collaboration. As China began to expand its horizons, the trade in horses, silk, bamboo, rice and wine was vigorous and often used in diplomacy to guarantee peace between empires and cities. Silk even became an international currency. Within a few hundred years, the world had been effectively shrunk by the growing sophistication of the trade network. As historian Peter Frankopan, author of The Silk Roads, notes: "We think of globalisation as a uniquely modern phenomenon, yet 2,000 years ago it was a fact of life – one that presented opportunities, created problems, and prompted technological advance." The first European city to develop networks akin to those of a modern global city was Rome. Its empire came to consist of a federation of cities – stretching from Spain and Scotland in the west, to the Euphrates river in the east – each of which had a territory attached. Rome provided the administration, the stability, the monetary regime, and the tax structure for cities to thrive amid a huge spike in population mobility and mercantile activity. By the mid-Roman era, most contemporaneous historians perceived the world to have been globalised. Polybius in his Histories remarked that "from this point onwards history becomes an organic whole: the affairs of Italy and Africa are connected with those of Asia and of Greece, and all events bear a relationship and contribute to a single end." Among the lasting features of this wave of globalisation of trading cities was a much larger and more diverse trading of goods across continents. This trade fuelled a new commercial zone in the Indian Ocean and direct trade with India. The Roman urban network also helped spread religion, and cities in the Roman system later became centres of Christian authority. This era was perhaps the first time that one city's power and influence became the fundamental driver of intercontinental trade. But while the rise and fall of Rome as a global city is well documented, others have resumed global roles whenever the geopolitical opportunity has presented itself. Istanbul, for example, has experienced many cycles of global exchange over the last two millennia because of its unique strategic location as a bridge between Europe and Asia. Formerly named Byzantium, the city was transformed by Emperor Constantine in the fourth century AD and renamed Constantinople because it was close to Rome's economic and political interests in the eastern empire. Roman leaders needed an open city located close to Rome's supply market along the Silk Roads, across the Black Sea, through rich Anatolia and into the wheat producing areas of the Nile. As a result, Constantinople assumed command and control functions, and drew ambitious Roman citizens and traders from around the world. As a cultural melting pot, Constantinople facilitated the spread of Christianity across the Roman Empire. Despite the collapse of the western Roman empire, Constantinople later resumed its role as a vibrant trade hub in the eighth and ninth centuries. Under a tight system of state control over factories, workshops, wages and tariffs, the city processed trade from Russia, India, China and Africa, with merchants attracted by its gold and silk commodities. It transported goods to and from Venice, Pisa, Genoa and all over Europe, and at one point is said to have been home to 60,000 Italians. Much later, under the Ottomans, Constantinople became Istanbul. Its leaders grasped the new opportunities of European trade and actively invited the intelligentsia of the Islamic world. While Istanbul's influence has waxed and waned, its strategic position has repeatedly proved an asset to outward-looking leaders, and has created an enduring appeal to immigrant entrepreneurs and innovators. Europe's commercial wave A new wave of cities developing international roles took place in the 11th and 12th centuries, as part of what is sometimes called the "commercial revolution". As population and urbanisation grew, a two-pronged system of cities emerged: the lucrative trade in the Baltic Sea and the North Sea of Europe was gathering pace in some, while many Italian city-states were becoming prosperous through shipping, commerce and banking. This was a time when many systems of rule and governance coexisted. As cities grew, they became independent or semi-autonomous entities with their own military capability. This wave of globalisation was also characterised by a powerful merchant class that dominated the market economy and had an active role in city leadership. Italian cities took advantage of geopolitical opportunity during the Crusades to expand their trading and banking services for the military campaigns. Venice in particular gained privileges in the Byzantine empire and extended relations with the pope. With Italian success came influence. By the late 1200s, Florence and Genoa were minting gold coins, and Florence's own currency became dominant in European commercial and financial markets. This wave marked the first time that so many regions and religions had come into sustained contact. In her book Before European Hegemony, sociologist Janet Abu-Lughod identified eight regional circuits in operation, stretching from north-western Europe all the way to modern-day Malaysia and Philippines. It was also a time in which cities achieved great cultural, artistic and intellectual advances, spawning both trade and knowledge exchange. The circuits Abu-Lughod described thus fostered interregional contact through cultural gateway cities such as Venice in the west and Malacca in the east. In between, the geopolitical opportunity for peace after the 13th-century Mongol invasions was also a catalyst for ports and caravan cities in the Middle East to develop and globalise. One example was Tabriz, in modern-day Iran, which attracted a large number of European merchants and was described as the most cosmopolitan city in the world in the 13th century. It specialised in gold and silk cloth-weaving, and in trade in precious stones. Five hundred years later, the city was still noted for its independent merchant class. The Black Death devastated many of the leading cities in this wave, but the advanced network of the Hanseatic League and the globalising cities in southern Europe endured into the 15th century, brought together by a shared desire to conduct free trade. This wave is thus often seen as vital to the later spread and success of modern capitalism. The post-Columbus wave Beginning in around 1500, cities that had globalised in the previous wave began experiencing multiple and long-lasting setbacks. Agriculture was earning diminishing returns, and religious warfare gripped many cities. Italian and Iberian cities began to experience deindustrialisation, uncompetitive wages, and loss of market share to cities in the east. A shift in favour of northern European cities began to take place. Globalisation had taken on new characteristics, with new roles for cities in a system where sovereign states were stamping their authority. Advances in map-making and ship-building helped improve communications and reduce transaction costs for cities. One change was in the nature of consumption: a new class of consumers appeared with a shared goal to signal position and status, driving major growth in production and retail sectors. Gradually a much better connectivity emerged, characterised by an enlarged and integrated global market, new notions of a single world, and a sense of cosmopolitan identity. Northern European cities profited the most from this wave of globalisation. At this point, the beginnings of what became known as the "great divergence" between Europe and Asia appeared. Many arguments have been put forward to explain it. One factor was that merchants and bankers in northern European cities were able to protect their investments by legal means and to separate their capital from personal risk, which was not possible in Asian cities. A higher pace of urban growth, greater self-government for cities, and a strong trade focus in urban public policy have all also been suggested as key factors explaining the divergence. European cities are often described as the globalising cities of this era, but Islamic conquests were also enabling a new group of cities to go global. From the early 1500s, northern Indian cities in particular were brought into a vast Muslim sphere of influence under the Mughal empire. The unification of commercial practices, common customs and beliefs allowed cities such as Delhi to become tightly integrated into Eurasian trade routes, especially for the export of textiles. Ahmedabad and Agra also thrived, aided by factory investment from the English East India Company – and, along with Delhi, reached a peak population of 400,000 people. Meanwhile Surat, nearly 200 miles north of Mumbai, became possibly the world's largest port, home to 150,000 people and at one point the richest city in India. Many assessments place these Indian cities' output at least on a par with leading European centres of the time – of which Antwerp and Amsterdam stand out as the two foremost world cities in continental Europe during this wave of globalisation. Antwerp rose to prominence by cannily exploiting its gateway location at the heart of a rapidly expanding Habsburg empire. The fall of Constantinople in 1453 had weakened Venice and Genoa, and the Scheldt river made the city a gateway to navigable inland waterways reaching far into western Europe. When nearby Bruges' own port silted up, Antwerp's merchants made incremental gains in the wool and fabric trade, and Portuguese spices from the East Indies started passing through the port. By the mid-15th century, Antwerp had become a preferred trading hub between the Baltic, the North Sea, northern Italy, France, and the Holy Roman empire. A few decades later, the city's stock exchange and banking sector had become the largest in Europe. Antwerp benefited from geopolitical advantage when it was absorbed into the Spanish Hapsburg Empire. This gave the city privileged access to a large unified market, and it became an entry point for silver and other precious goods shipped from Spanish American possessions. At its height, 40% of the world's trade was channelled through Antwerp. It was Europe's truly global city, with an ambitious and enlightened merchant class. The phenomenal wealth generated saw urbanisation in the region reach 30%. The city's population peaked at 100,000 by the 1560s, but then the city suffered from Spanish insistence that Atlantic trade go through Seville – a way of diverting wealth to Spain. Entanglement in the Dutch revolt and religious conflicts saw the city sacked and repeatedly besieged. While it retained a merchant ethos, it never recovered its mantle as a global city, although its port is today resurgent. Amsterdam took over the mantle from Antwerp and Genoa as Europe's major commercial city during the 1600s, and it developed many of the technologies that underpin today's global cities. The overthrow of the Spanish elite, which had hampered the interests of powerful local merchants, granted more freedom to Dutch traders. Soon after, the blockade of Spanish Antwerp triggered a flight of capital and talented entrepreneurs to Amsterdam. The protestant city became prized for its safe port, political stability and access to inland waterways. It maximised its appeal by guaranteeing equal protection to all merchants, wherever they came from, while developing standardised institutional norms. A relaxed attitude toward interest-bearing loans spurred the development of modern finance in Amsterdam, including maritime insurance, making the city both the logistical hub and the trade financier of Europe. The establishment of the Dutch East India Company and a powerful navy helped Amsterdam secure control over trade routes and outposts as far away as Japan, Indonesia, India and the Americas. The city's shipbuilders pioneered new materials and produced cheap cargo vessels, which considerably lowered transport costs. Amsterdam gained sufficient leverage over supply chains to wage price wars, prioritising volumes over margins to eliminate weak competition and secure a monopoly over pepper, tea and sugar imports. The impact of European wars and the rise of British naval supremacy in the 18th century meant that London eventually took Amsterdam's mantle. However, much of the know-how and assets acquired during Amsterdam's era of supremacy remain relevant today. The industrial wave For many observers of urban history, the modern era of globalisation began with industrialisation, whose effects occurred at a pace and on a scale not previously seen. Although the globalisation of traded goods long preceded the industrial era, industrialisation really reshaped whole societies, not just the tastes of upper-income groups. By this point in history, national governments had become much more effective at managing global trade and reducing the dangers involved in carrying it out, while transport was becoming ever more reliable. These were the preconditions for successive waves of cities to become substantially more global in their traded specialisations, to diversify their populations, and to increase their capacity for commercial innovation. A turning point in globalisation occurred in the late 18th century owing to a confluence of geopolitics and technological innovation. The victory of Britain in the Seven Years' War enhanced British power in India, and a more comprehensive system of colonial government was installed. This situation favoured British industrial development, and in 1771 the first water-powered cotton spinning model was invented. At the same time, colonial disputes in North and Central America intensified. As a result, a new wave of cities globalised as part of the British Empire. The slave trade, managed from London, was undoubtedly critical in financing British imperialism and industrialisation, and cities such as Bridgetown, Barbados and Kingston, Jamaica became subject to the empire's needs. As the empire extended its reach east, Cape Town, Calcutta and Hong Kong all became globally engaged cities, with Calcutta (now Kolkata) subject to a system of mercantilism, while Hong Kong became an instrument for promoting free trade. In east Africa, Mombasa grew into an important trade entrepôt with strong maritime business links to India and the Arabian Peninsula, as well as the long-distance caravan trade across east Africa. Another city that became open to global flows was Canton. The British empire likely had a greater impact on global cities than any of its rivals, and many of the cities enrolled in the imperial project remain highly influential actors on the global stage today. London, New York, Hong Kong, Singapore, Sydney, Mumbai, Shanghai, Toronto, Cape Town and Boston each developed their global roles and reach within the British Empire. Infrastructure connectivity was often the catalyst. One of the clearest examples of this was in New York. In 1825, a growth coalition between New York's city leaders and businesses began the construction of the Erie Canal, connecting the city to the Great Lakes and the US midwest. The availability of this water route resulted in a phenomenal surge in local manufacturing and trade and new financial and insurance industries supplying the growth of a young America. New York moved ahead of Philadelphia in financial power as a result of its enhanced connectivity. In Britain itself, cities such as Liverpool, Bristol and Birmingham prospered from having access to imperial markets and from the global reach they afforded. Manchester emerged as the world's first global industrial city, while London, the city at the centre of it all, surpassed Beijing's all-time population record, reaching two million by 1840. Across Europe, a wave of cities benefited from unprecedented urban growth and industrial expansion. The European cities that globalised in this wave had in common a specific set of assets: historical trading knowledge, locations on major rivers or seas, and the ready availability of natural resources such as coal, iron and water. Drawing on this asset base, places such as Bilbao, Bremen, Leipzig, Sheffield and Turin were able to build exceptional manufacturing economies, specialising in engineering, machine tools, ships and other industrial areas. They attracted a huge manufacturing labour force, and became pioneering cities in terms of their public services, education and civic institutions. Economic globalisation expanded massively in the decades leading up to the first world war. One of the main groups of cities to globalise in this wave was in the United States. American cities became substantially differentiated and specialised at this time, with their own mix of industrial enterprises and the "second wave" of immigration giving them very different social and cultural characters. New York specialised in advanced services and consumer products, Chicago became a centre for heavy industrial plants, while Los Angeles moved into oil and the creative industries. Diverse and entrepreneurial populations played an indispensable role: New York was the main US gateway for immigrant labor. Tens of millions of immigrants, mainly Europeans, came to the city, and many settled there in search of a better life, making New York a cosmopolitan city on a scale never previously seen. Infrastructure was a critical enabler for this wave of American city globalisation. The installation of canals, railroads, water systems, highways and sewerage systems helped to provide the conditions for a half-century of extraordinary growth. The postwar wave A major wave of cities taking on global roles unfolded in the aftermath of the second world war. Changing geopolitics and American investment support provided opportunities for many commercially minded cities to become highly specialised. Often benefiting from sound city leadership, cities in this wave of globalisation were successful in restoration and in planning ahead to avoid the worst in congestion. Munich, Toronto and Tokyo are all prominent examples of cities in this wave. These cities were able to achieve intensive clustering and organisational modernisation in a supportive political environment among higher tiers of government. For this wave, it was key for corporate proficiency to partner with a strong knowledge platform in order to develop successful products for export. Cities in this wave of globalisation were prominent well into the mid-1970s, by which time they had acquired many of the core assets that make them competitive today. Although these cities have experienced slowdowns and setbacks in the last 25 years, they have successfully preserved a culture of knowledge and innovation to support specialisations with global reach. Perhaps the most remarkable example during this wave was Singapore, the only global city also to be a fully autonomous city-state. Prior to independence in 1965, Singapore's economic prospects were uncertain. Its traditional entrepôt trade industries had declined, manufacturing was stagnant, and housing and roads were in urgent need of modernization. But its first prime minister, Lee Kuan Yew, was not deterred by geographic limitations and immediately pursued a labour-intensive industrialisation policy that was open to overseas capital. Emphasis was placed on tax incentives for industrial investors, improved labour discipline, technical education and foreign expertise, in order to specialise in industrial technologies. Singapore immediately tried to build trade and connectivity roles by leveraging its position as a multilingual city, with links to east and west, and a strong western legal model. Since achieving global status, Singapore has continued to adapt to the global marketplace through state-led policies and programmes that encourage light manufacturing and high-tech research investment. Its economic development board and housing development board, in particular, have been able to leverage the scale of large public institutions to create effective systems at a citywide scale. The postwar wave of globalisation was also striking for the process of decolonisation, which saw many cities lose their imperial roles. In the past, many global cities fell along with the empires that spawned them. Indeed, for London, this period coincided with a challenging postwar process of deindustrialisation, port decline and outdated regulation in its stock exchange, banking and insurance sectors. Although London attracted immigrants from the Commonwealth diaspora, the city continued to lose population until the mid-1980s, when it resumed the journey toward becoming a quintessential global city. The IT-powered wave The decade after the 1973 oil crisis and the subsequent global slowdown was a period of great flux in the global economy. Older models became discredited and new ideas and solutions came to the fore. By the mid-1980s, a new wave of globalisation was under way, led initially by a small group of cities but with an increasing number of smaller cities also becoming globally engaged and globally oriented for the first time. For a small, elite group of financial centres, the mid-1980s started a wave of resurgence when these cities began to re-attract people, business and capital. London and New York began to reverse their population decline, and in London the 1986 "Big Bang" in financial services marked the start of a new generation of international banks and surrounding business services firms setting up shop. For Asian members of this group, such as Tokyo and Singapore, this wave was characterised by a more selective and tactical globalisation. It promoted internationalisation of financial and business sectors through liberalisation reforms, while also protecting against over-exposure to western cultural influences. In this wave of globalisation, cities also re-established themselves as information and media capitals in their respective regions. This period was notable for significant governance changes in some cities – such as the abolition and then the recreation of a metropolitan government system in London; the new "one country, two systems" policy in Hong Kong, which sought to guarantee that it would maintain a capitalist system for 50 years after the 1997 British handover to China; and the increasing withdrawal of federal government from its role in New York City. At the same time, the new wave of globalisation was showcasing a set of cities that until then had not been globally oriented. The global geopolitical context had changed considerably as a result of the fall of communism in Europe, the unification of Germany, the opening up of China beginning in 1980, and the Oslo peace accords, part of the Arab-Israeli peace process, in 1993. The agreements of new trade arrangements – such as the European Economic Area and the North American Free Trade Association, and the establishment of the World Trade Organisation in 1995 – ushered in an era of multilateralism that allowed many countries and cities to globalise. These factors created a climate of opportunity for the growth of leading cities in the Brics (Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa) and the smaller Mints (Mexico, Indonesia, Nigeria, Turkey) economies, as well as in eastern Europe, the Middle East and Australasia. Among the most notable cities coming to global prominence in this wave were Bangalore, Barcelona, Cape Town, Sydney, and Tel Aviv. New tradable specialisations associated with the information and communications technology revolution precipitated the unexpected globalisation of many cities. Bangalore is one of the most striking examples: its electronics specialisation took off in 1985 after the arrival of Texas Instruments. This prompted other multinational firms to relocate and boosted the local software design environment, laying the platform for successive climbs up the value chain. Another striking example of innovation driving a city's globalisation in this wave comes from Tel Aviv. This young city's spirit of commerce and entrepreneurial capitalism translated into an open and horizontal concentration of skills in finance, optics, communications, information systems, medicine, and software. This strong technological base was reinforced by the Israeli military's investment in the city's advanced defence industries, which produced a regular flow of highly proficient talent. With its tech cluster benefiting from a supportive early stage investor arrangement and a positive attitude to risk, Tel Aviv is noted for its numerous tech inventions. The city's leadership has since sought to reinforce this global potential by emphasising Tel Aviv's pluralism, tolerance and investment readiness. This wave of globalisation was distinctive for a more intentional approach by city governments and the rise of strategic planning for globalising cities. For cities like Barcelona and Tel Aviv, city governments designed strategic approaches to infrastructure, quality of life, and architecture in order to build a profile that would attract global talent. Many also converted their commercial land into use by more innovation-led activity. In nearly all cases, these cities witnessed an unprecedented wave of population diversification, fuelled by immigration and mobile talent. By the climax of this wave in 2007-8, these cities had a totally different global proposition – and new problems that had appeared alongside growth. The current wave The most recent cycle of globalisation has seen the start of a new wave of distinctive, specialised and globally aspirational cities. Many of them are higher-income cities within their respective regions and seek to leverage their efficient infrastructure, improved quality of life, and better security and environmental performance compared to the larger megacities. Cities in this wave are less likely to have major political or institutional functions. Rather, they are competing in more dynamic and fast-moving global industries where opportunities have arisen for greater market share. Among this group are Brisbane, San Diego, Shenzhen, Santiago de Chile and Stockholm. In the aftermath of the global financial crisis and its impact on public sector finances, the ability of cities to find new sources and tools for investment has been a key enabler for globalising cities since 2008. Brisbane is an example of a city that has been able to globalise with the help of a large and financially astute city government, which has used the surplus from its recent commodities boom to erect a more international model of economic development. The Brisbane city council has pursued a wide range of joint ventures, sponsored business conventions and sporting events, and convinced its state government to prioritise Brisbane for road and rail infrastructure funding. It has also experimented with public-private partnerships and toll roads, with some success. Much of the city's investment attractiveness owes to its reputation in Asia, where its ambassadors programme has boosted expatriate investment connections and reached out much more successfully to Chinese, Japanese and Malaysian commodities firms. The ability to attract a new generation of immigrants and entrepreneurs has been central to many cities' success in this wave. The ability to convey opportunity and appeal to the world, whether to talent, investors, or visitors, has also been very important. London is an example of a city that has been successful in this area since 2008. Through a unified organisation, London &amp; Partners, it has delivered a consistent message to the world that it is open for business and investment and has made substantial strides in becoming a city that welcomes new technology and science industries. In medicine, media, and digital industries, the ingredients of leading sector innovations, combined with an open city with deep labour markets and cosmopolitan liveability, have created a winning formula. The city's advocacy organisations have helped maintain its appeal by successfully lobbying for a competitive business and tax climate. Lessons for future cities A comparison of the waves of globalisation in the last two centuries with the earlier waves shows clearly that the duration of each wave is becoming shorter. Where waves once lasted a century or more, they now appear to run their course in as little as 15-to-20 years, and in the future this duration may be even shorter. As the global economy becomes ever more integrated, globalising city waves increasingly come to resemble global economic cycles, and the windows of opportunity for cities to participate close quickly. Although there are vast differences between the networks of cities along the ancient Silk Roads and the 21st-century system of global value chains and competitive advantage, there are also striking parallels. Today's cities can learn much from how those in previous waves built and sustained their competitive attributes, and how to avoid becoming locked into unsustainable or unproductive cycles of development. Not all of today's leading cities were destined to play key roles in the global economy. Many started out from an unpromising or uncompetitive situation because of either internal weaknesses or external disadvantages. Sometimes cities have endured long periods of global isolation, and begin to internationalise only when geopolitical changes occur and foreign investment arrives. This was certainly the case in the 20th century, and in the 21st century it is visible in many other cities outside the established west. Equally, the ebb and flow of cities' fortunes means that some cities we take for granted today as global will likely be much less globally oriented in future. History shows this is a risk if cities lose competitiveness in traded sectors, fail to embrace innovation or to project influence, are closed to immigration and entrepreneurship, or are unable to adapt to a changing geopolitical or geoeconomic centre of gravity. The ingredients of today's most successful cities are sometimes hard for other cities to emulate directly, and so alternative strategies and pathways to global engagement have arisen. Over time, these alternative pathways result in very different kinds of global cities. This extract was reprinted with permission from Global Cities: A Short History by Greg Clark (Brookings Institution Press, 2016). Clark is a city advisor, mentor and senior fellow at the Brookings Institution Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter and Facebook and join the discussion

Under £15 Five go on a strategy away day – from the new series, Enid Blyton for Grown Ups, the Famous Five have a new mystery to solve – one involving marketing jargon and team-building games. At only £6.99, it's the perfect stocking filler. Cocktails for eating – Smith &amp; Sinclair originally ran fun dating nights, with a candy bar serving edible cocktails. The grown-up sweets took off – choose between the gin, whisky, vodka, rum or mixed sweet selections from £9.99, per box of six. The fragrance queen – Jo Malone has released her long-awaited autobiography this year, documenting her 21 years in retail from her beginnings as a teenager with no qualifications, struggling with dyslexia. For the tech entrepreneur – this recycled circuit board notebook also features 100% recycled paper and is available for £12.99. Foot selfies mandatory – the colourful ChattyFeet socks feature characters such as Prof Brian Sox, Albert Einstoe and Yoko Mono. Priced from £7.50. Future vision – one of the big advances in technology this year has been the prominence of virtual reality (VR), and it's only set to get bigger in 2017. Get your entrepreneur up to speed with this Aukey headset. At £14.99 it's a reasonably priced entry point into the often expensive world of VR. Under £50 The cyclist's handy gadget – make flitting between meetings disaster-free with this lightweight multitool for frequent cyclers. Featuring allen keys, screwdrivers, wrenches and a chain tool, it can be easily slipped in a saddle bag or basket. You can buy it for £22.86 from Wiggle. On a roll – keep your ideas flowing with the Self Journal (£26), with a daily action plan, three-month goals and inspirational quotes to keep your entrepreneur on track in 2017. Take a sip – this stainless steel thermal mug (£29.99) cleverly automatically seals between sips so there's no spills. Using vacuum technology, it's guaranteed to keep hot drinks warm for five hours – perfect for those rushing out the door with their coffee in the mornings. The care package – a box with lots of goodies to remind your small business owner to take some time for herself, including chocolate brownies, green tea, a glossy magazine and scarf. It's £27.50 from Don't Buy Her Flowers, and there's a package for men, featuring socks, gourmet nuts, craft beer and more from £30. Under £100 Time to relax – many entrepreneurs find it difficult to switch off, even at Christmas. Remind them to take time out, with a massage voucher from Urban Massage, available for £65 with therapists in London, Manchester, Birmingham, Glasgow and Edinburgh. Laser show – this laser keyboard works on any flat surface and also operates as a portable phone charger, mouse and speaker. At £99.99, it's perfect for the gadget lover in your household. Luxury nightwear – one for the women entrepreneurs who enjoy winding down after a long day at work. Yawn is a small business that sells pyjamas made from 100% cotton sateen and designed to be super comfy, starting at £89 a pair. A doorstep treat – whether film buff, foodie or typography obsessive, this independent magazine subscription from Stack magazines should pique any entrepreneur's interest. They'll receive a different title each month – it could spark a new business or product idea. For a 12-issue subscription you'll pay £70. Health kick – juicing was a big trend in 2016, but a quick nutrients fix is always beneficial for busy business owners. The Nutribullet is a favourite among health food fans. It pulverises fruit, veg and seeds in seconds, but can also be used for soups, desserts and ice creams. The juicers start from £69.99. Under £200 Time flies – Shore Projects' range of customisable watches start from £115 and are waterproof to 100 metres. The straps are inter-changeable – with prices starting from £20 – making it easy to change the colour scheme or look. Music is my life – these noise-cancelling headphones come in five colours, are wireless and have 20-hours of battery life. They could be the antidote to a buzzing co-working space or stressful commute. They're available from £169.99 from Amazon. Reach for the stars – your entrepreneur has already reached the dizzy heights of the business world, but this trial flying lesson with PTT Aviation will see them literally take to the skies. Prices start from £125, with flights available from Leeds Bradford, Newcastle or Durham Tees Valley airports. Robot helper – science fiction comes into the home, or office, with this voice-controlled hands-free speaker that can also Google on demand. If your entrepreneur likes to be up-to-date with their gadgets, the Amazon Echo will be on their wishlist (check it's not already on their coffee table) and will set you back £149.99. Blow the budget Project this – for the gadget-savvy entrepreneur, this 2-inch mobile projector has 90 minutes of battery life, is compatible with HDMI devices and comes with a tripod to keep the picture steady. Use it at home, in the office, or anywhere with a wall that can be turned into a 120-inch screen. Available from £269.95. Smell the coffee – the De'Longhi bean to cup coffee machine includes a bean grinder (creating a fresher taste for your caffeine fiend), a milk frother with adjustable steam, and shuts off automatically. Choose from an espresso, cappuccino, latte or americano. Yours for £279.99. Travel ready – entrepreneurs on the move know how difficult it is to keep workwear crease free. This jacket from Rohan, priced at £235, is made from a crease-resistant blend of natural wool, polyester and elastane. It's also machine washable and there are matching trousers available for £115. Flexi working – standing desks could be seen as a health investment, since research has shown the harmful effects of sitting for eight hours a day. Ikea has a few options from £445 to get a desk-bound entrepreneur moving around that bit more. Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here for more advice, insight and best practice direct to your inbox.

'You put a great deal of thought into this," says Julien Baptiste towards the end of this final episode of The Missing (BBC1). He's talking to Adam Gettrick, apprehended at last. But Baptiste (Tchéky Karyo) could equally be speaking to his own creators, The Missing writers Jack and Harry Williams. It's been an extraordinary cat's cradle of a series: multistranded; (at least) triple time-framed; jumping around in Europe and the Middle East, with different people playing the same person at different stages of their lives; characters whose identities blur and then clearly become someone else; the whodunnit part solved three episodes before the end; hair that comes and goes. I'm not going to lie, there have been times when I've been a bit muddled. And there have been some fairly big asks along the way, not least Sophie going back as Alice, and the Websters' – Sam's at least – acceptance that she was their daughter. "You'd know, wouldn't you?" was something said a few times in our house. Yet it does all come together and make sense in the end. And suddenly events from previous episodes have a purpose: Sophie's encounter with the friendly Swiss waiter for example – now he can point Baptiste in the right direction. No major holes, then. The only big question I have remaining is how Gettrick paid for the toy monkey when he had left his Swiss francs behind in Germany. Credit card? No, he's far too canny to leave electronic footprints. Maybe he just bumped off the shopkeeper and bundled the body into the boot of the car. Again. He – Derek Riddell's Gettrick – has become more and more convincing since we learned who and what he really is: a monster driller-killer child abductor, but also a warped kind of family man. You can imagine Josef Fritzl or Ariel Castro having similar ideas of close-knit families. I think the Williams brothers did their research. Keeley Hawes has been the standout performer, though: a mother's pain personified. Her eventual reunion with her real daughter, alive, holding her tight, whispering "I've got you, I've got you now," is very moving. I do have another question: is there a better television actor, more capable of wringing every last drop of humanness from a role, than Hawes? It's a fabulous final episode that builds and builds in stomach-clenching tension until Baptiste and the Websters cross the little bridge, enter the woods, find the van (where's the Skoda by the way? Another question). It's almost unbearable. There has already been one shot, but that was a false alarm: hare for tea for Adam, Sophie, little Lucy – maybe a bone or two tossed down to Alice in the cellar. Again, that served a purpose, we now know Gettrick has a high-powered hunting rifle. This time he's firing it at two-legged foes in a desperate last attempt to save his sick sort of family. Man down! Sam! And special forces, men in black, swarming the forest under the mountain. Little Lucy makes a run for it, is scooped up by a Swiss robocop. Her mother Sophie escapes to the top of a precipice, Julien lollops up. Noooo! Back off Baptiste, remember what happened when you tried to talk her mother down from a similar situation (nice symmetry, by the way). I think Sophie's going to jump just to get away from Baptiste's bow-legged limp, his sing-song intonation and because he's on the point of spewing out a François de la Rochefoucauld maxim: "Absence diminishes little passions and increases great ones, as the wind extinguishes a candle and fans a fire." She doesn't jump. It's Sam who dies, to be interred in the same Eckhausen graveyard where he had earlier thought his daughter was buried (could the headstone be re-carved I wonder, to save a bit of cash?). At least he got to see her alive one more time. And made peace with his wife. Plus a bit of him is about to be born again, out of Staff Sergeant Stone's bump. It's a more than satisfactory ending – cat's cradle complete, loose ends tied up, redemption. Not over-soppy though, thanks to Brigadier Stone and the Herzes. And Baptiste? That's a nice touch too, going in for his op, actually looking frightened for the first time, a countdown to blackness, but stubborn to the last, even to the anaesthetic. Final, but not necessarily the end for ever. I wouldn't be surprised if we saw Julien Baptiste again. Hope so, tout de suite.

Football, religion and grief dominated the emotional requiem service in Southern Brazil on Wednesday night for the 71 players, technical staff, sports journalists and crew killed when a plane chartered by local team Chapecoense crashed on a Colombian mountainside on Wednesday night. But there was anger too, at the reports circulating that the plane had run out of fuel. On Wednesday night Brazil's O Globo newspaper said Colombian civil aviation authorities had confirmed there was no fuel in the aircraft's tank and have opened an investigation. Delays getting from São Paulo to Bolivia, where the team chartered the plane that crashed, meant a planned refuelling stop in Cobija, Bolivia, was abandoned because the airport does not operate at night, O Globo said. It was a mistake, said Nataly Ferranti, 16, from the team's female youth team, that "ended lives, ended Chapecoense". "I feel indignation," she said. A leaked recording of the final minutes of the doomed flight revealed a sometimes chaotic exchange with the air traffic tower, with the pilot repeatedly requesting authorisation to land because of "fuel problems". A controller explained another plane had been diverted with mechanical problems and had priority, instructing the pilot to wait seven minutes. As the plane circled in a holding pattern, the pilot grew more desperate. "Complete electrical failure, without fuel," he said in the tense final moments before the plane set off on a four-minute death spiral that ended with it slamming into a mountainside on Monday night. Just before going silent the pilot made a final plea to land: "Vectors, señorita. Landing vectors." On Wednesday night, at Chapecoense's Condá Arena, a Catholic priest and two evangelical preachers led prayers as fans wearing the team's green and white sang, cried and waved scarves and banners. "Switch on your cellphones. Switch on the lights of your cellphones. It is the light of God within us," an announcer implored the crowd at one point. Applause greeted the light show that followed. But the peak of an intensely emotional evening came when the players and coaching staff who had not been on the flight, joined by players from the youth teams, ran a lap of honour, some clutching each other as tears poured down their faces and the roars of the crowd echoed around them. "It helped a lot," said João Lima, a youth team player who ran in the lap of honour. "So many brothers lost in such a short time. But we have to go forward and overcome." Fans flooded into the Condá Arena long before the service began. This modest little stadium is named after the club's emblem, an indigenous warrior of the same name. A statue on a nearby roundabout shows him pulling back his bow and arrow, with neat white and green brushstrokes of colour on his cheeks. The word "warrior" was used in the service to describe the 19 players who died on their way to their first-ever international final, the first leg of the South American Cup, against Medellín's Atlético Nacional. The Colombian team also held a service on Wednesday for a huge crowd. "I don't have words to describe the scale of what the Colombian people did today," tweeted Brazilian journalist and blogger Raphael Tsavvko. "Warrior" is widely used in Brazil to describe those who struggle against the odds – just like this team of non-league underdogs who entered Brazil's fourth division only in 2009, and yet by 2014 were playing in its premier league. There was long, intense applause when the players' photographs, and those of the technical staff who died, appeared on big screens. Six survivors – including three Chapecoense players – are recovering in hospitals, with three of them in a critical but stable condition. The club's mascot, Cleiton Majolo, a driver's assistant, wears a costume based on the indigenous warrior Condá. "It is a nightmare for us that we will not see our friends. It seems like we will never wake up," Majolo said before the service, having removed his plastic mask. He would have gone on the trip to Colombia, he said, if he had only had a passport. "And I wouldn't be here," he said. Local psychologists have been volunteering to help the club's survivors deal with the trauma. But recovery will be a slow process, André Pedrosa, one of those offering their work for free, said earlier on Wednesday. "It is a wound that has been opened and people will have to learn to live with it," he said. "Pain, and a lot of suffering." After the ceremony, as supporters still sang team songs, many loitered on the pitch. Caroline Machado and her friend Samira Reis hugged each other and cried. Machado grew up around the club. Her uncle Eduardo Preuss, known as Cadu Gaúcho, was a key member of the coaching staff that had put together a team of underdogs good enough to reach the final of the second most important trophy in South America. He died in the crash. But the team will play on, she vowed. "We will not let this story die," she said. "They would not have wanted us to." Associated Press contributed to this report. The map graphic in this article was corrected on 2 December 2016.



It's understandable that the world didn't much care about Gamergate. The 2014 hashtag campaign, ostensibly founded to protest about perceived ethical failures in games journalism, clearly thrived on hate – even though many of those who aligned themselves with the movement either denied there was a problem with harassment, or wrote it off as an unfortunate side effect. Sure, women, minorities and progressive voices within the industry were suddenly living in fear. Sure, those who spoke out in their defence were quickly silenced through exhausting bursts of online abuse. But that wasn't why people supported it, right? They were disenfranchised, felt ignored, and wanted to see a systematic change. Is this all sounding rather familiar now? Does it remind you of something? If you're just discovering the world of angry, anonymous online dudes masquerading as victims – hi, come in. Some of us have been here for a while. The similarities between Gamergate and the far-right online movement, the "alt-right", are huge, startling and in no way a coincidence. After all, the culture war that began in games now has a senior representative in The White House. As a founder member and former executive chair of Brietbart News, Steve Bannon had a hand in creating media monster Milo Yiannopoulos, who built his fame and Twitter following by supporting and cheerleading Gamergate. This hashtag was the canary in the coalmine, and we ignored it. Lest we forget, Gamergate was an online movement that effectively began because a man wanted to punish his ex girlfriend. Its most notable achievement was harassing a large number of progressive figures - mostly women – to the point where they felt unsafe or considered leaving the industry. Game developer Zoe Quinn was the original target. Anita Sarkeesian's videos applying basic feminist theory to video games had already made her a target (because so many people have a difficulty differentiating cultural criticism from censorship) but this hate was powerfully amplified by Gamergate – leading to death threats, rape threats, and the public leaking of personal information. Other notable targets included developer Brianna Wu, actor Felicia Day, and prominent tech-culture writer Leigh Alexander, whose provocative article on the tyranny of "game culture" offered stark warnings that still resonate powerfully: "When you decline to create or to curate a culture in your spaces, you're responsible for what spawns in the vacuum." Other than harassment, very little was achieved, with tiny changes held aloft as great victories: media publications felt the need to publicly clarify pre-existing ethical measures, others implemented small new additions to account for shifts in the ethical landscape caused by modern funding tools such as Patreon and Kickstarter; games writers were duty bound to declare their support for projects they financially aided in these ways. But it quickly became clear that the GamerGate movement was a mess – an undefined mission to Make Video Games Great Again via undecided means. Many had embraced Gamergate because they felt it wholly matched their ideals, and yet – quite consistently – no one in the movement was willing to be associated with the abuse being carried out in its name. Prominent supporters on Twitter, in subreddits and on forums like 8Chan, developed a range of pernicious rhetorical devices and defences to distance themselves from threats to women and minorities in the industry: the targets were lying or exaggerating, they were too precious; a language of dismissal and belittlement was formed against them. Safe spaces, snowflakes, unicorns, cry bullies. Even when abuse was proven, the usual response was that people on their side were being abused too. These techniques, forged in Gamergate, have become the standard toolset of far-right voices online. In 2014, the media's reaction was often weak or overtly conciliatory – some sites went out of their way to "see both sides", to reassure people that openly choosing to be affiliated with a hate group did not make them in any way responsible for that hate. Olive branches were extended, but professional lives continued to be ruined while lukewarm op-eds asked for us to come together so we could start "healing". The motivations may have been sound, but it's the language Trump and his supporters have used post-election to obliterate dissenting voices. In 2016, new wave conservative media outlets like Breitbart have gained trust with their audience by painting traditional news sources as snooty and aloof. In 2014, video game YouTube stars, seeking to appear in touch with online gaming communities, unscrupulously proclaimed that traditional old-media sources were corrupt. Everything we're seeing now, had its precedent two years ago. The stark parallels between Gamergate and the political atmosphere of 2016 may come as a surprise, but it shouldn't: both saw their impact and reach amplified by self-interested parties who underplayed the obvious nastiness they were also promoting. With 2014's Gamergate, Breitbart seized the opportunity to harness the pre-existing ignorance and anger among disaffected young white dudes. With Trump's movement in 2016, the outlet was effectively running his campaign: Steve Bannon took leave of his role at the company in August 2016 when he was hired as chief executive of Trump's presidential campaign. Despite Bannon's distance from Breitbart in an official capacity, the outlet's ideology and relentless support of Trump remained unchanged – with editor-in-chief Joel Pollak notably sending an internal memo to staff that ordered them not to support Breitbart reporter Michelle Fields after allegations she was attacked by Trump's campaign manager Corey Lewandowski. Breitbart's aspirations to directly influence politics extend a long way into Europe, too – Bannon is openly keen to collaborate with the far-right Marine Le Pen in France, and hired UKIP's Raheem Hassam to co-run the Breitbart London office. These movements are gaining ground by finding political figures who will legitimise them in return for the support of their swollen online communities. The young men converted via 2014's Gamergate, are being more widely courted now. By leveraging distrust and resentment towards women, minorities and progressives, many of Gamergate's most prominent voices – characters like Mike Cernovich, Adam Baldwin, and Milo Yiannopoulos – drew power and influence from its chaos. These figures gave Gamergate a new sense of direction – generalising the rhetoric: this was now a wider war between "Social Justice Warriors" (SJWs) and everyday, normal, decent people. Games were simply the tip of the iceberg – progressive values, went the argument, were destroying everything. The same voices moved into other geek communities, especially comics, where Marvel and DC were criticised for progressive storylines and decisions. They moved into science fiction with the controversy over the Hugo awards. They moved into cinema with the revolting kickback against the all-female Ghostbusters reboot. Despite colonising the world with pointless tech and plastering modern film and TV with fan-pleasing adaptations of niche comic books, nerds still had a taste for revenge. They saw the culture they considered theirs being ripped away from them. In their zero sum mindset, they read growing artistic equality as a threat. For a long time, we didn't take these characters seriously. Breitbart's Milo Yiannopoulos in particular seemed such a desperate opportunist that we never predicted his rise to prominence, having explicitly stereotyped gamers in the past as "overweight" and "embarrassing". A disgraced journalist and entrepreneur who had to close his tech site The Kernel due to unpaid debts, leaving staff uncertain if they would ever be paid, he'd then spent the next few years spouting insincere hateful ideas to a burgeoning Twitter audience who responded to his anti-feminist, anti-establishment invectives. He was eventually banned from the platform after finally abusing a woman who was apparently just famous enough for Twitter to respond. Using 4chan (and then the more sympathetic offshoot 8Chan) to plan their subversions and attacks made Gamergate a terribly sloppy operation, leaving a trail of evidence that made it quite clear the whole thing was purposefully, plainly nasty. But the video game industry didn't have the spine to react, and allowed the movement to coagulate – forming a mass of spiteful disappointment that Breitbart was only more than happy to coddle. Historically, that seems to be Breitbart's trick - strongly represent a single issue in order to earn trust, and then gradually indoctrinate to suit wider purposes. With Gamergate, they purposefully went fishing for anti-feminists. 2016's batch of fresh converts – the white extremists – came from enticing conspiracy theories about the global neoliberal elite secretly controlling the world. The greatest strength of Gamergate, though, was that it actually appeared to represent many left-leaning ideals: stamping out corruption in the press, pushing for better ethical practices, battling for openness. There are similarities here with many who support Trump because of his promises to put an end to broken neo-liberalism, to "drain the swamp" of establishment corruption. Many left-leaning supporters of Gamergate sought to intellectualise their alignment with the hashtag, adopting familiar and acceptable labels of dissent – identifying as libertarian, egalitarian, humanist. At best they unknowingly facilitated abuse, defending their own freedom of expression while those who actually needed support were threatened and attacked. Genuine discussions over criticism, identity and censorship were paralysed and waylaid by Twitter voices obsessed with rhetorical fallacies and pedantic debating practices. While the core of these movements make people's lives hell, the outer shell – knowingly or otherwise – protect abusers by insisting that the real problem is that you don't want to talk, or won't provide the ever-shifting evidence they politely require. The beauty of this anti-establishment standpoint is, when any mainstream media source seeks to challenge the collective beliefs of the movement, it's merely used as further evidence that journalists are untrustworthy and aloof. This is a challenge the press must be ready to face in today's political climate: confronting these movements comes with a cost – it has never been possible to write openly about Gamergate without attracting a wave of online abuse. In 2017, the tactics used to discredit progressive game critics and developers will be used to discredit Trump and Bannon's critics. There will be gaslighting, there will be attempts to make victims look as though they are losing their grip on reality, to the point that they gradually even start to believe it. The "post-truth" reality is not simply an accident – it is a concerted assault on the rational psyche. The strangest aspect of Gamergate is that it consistently didn't make any sense: people chose to align with it, and yet refused responsibility. It was constantly demanded that we debate the issues, but explanations and facts were treated with scorn. Attempts to find common ground saw the specifics of the demands being shifted: we want you to listen to us; we want you to change your ways; we want you to close your publication down. This movement that ostensibly wanted to protect free speech from cry bully SJWs simultaneously did what it could to endanger sites it disagreed with, encouraging advertisers to abandon support for media outlets that published stories critical of the hashtag. The petulance of that movement is disturbingly echoed in Trump's own Twitter feed. Looking back, Gamergate really only made sense in one way: as an exemplar of what Umberto Eco called "eternal fascism", a form of extremism he believed could flourish at any point in, in any place – a fascism that would extol traditional values, rally against diversity and cultural critics, believe in the value of action above thought and encourage a distrust of intellectuals or experts – a fascism built on frustration and machismo. The requirement of this formless fascism would – above all else – be to remain in an endless state of conflict, a fight against a foe who must always be portrayed as impossibly strong and laughably weak. This was the methodology of Gamergate, and it now forms the basis of the contemporary far-right movement. We have no idea where this will lead, but our continued insistence on shrugging off the problems of the internet as "not real" – as something we can just log out of – is increasingly misled. 2016 has presented us with a world in which our reality is being wilfully manipulated. Fake news, divisive algorithms, misleading social media campaigns. The majority of people who voted for Trump will never take responsibility for his racist, totalitarian policies, but they'll provide useful cover and legitimacy for those who demand the very worst from the President Elect. Trump himself may have disavowed the "alt-right", but his rhetoric has led to them feeling legitimised. As with Gamergate, the press risks being manipulated into a position where it has to tread a respectful middle ground that doesn't really exist. Prominent critics of the Trump administration need to learn from Gamergate. They need to be prepared for abuse, for falsified concerns, invented grassroots campaigns designed specifically to break, belittle, or disgrace. Words and concepts will be twisted, repackaged and shared across forums, stripping them of meaning. Gamergate painted critics as censors, the far-right movement claims critics are the real racists. Perhaps the true lesson of Gamergate was that the media is culturally unequipped to deal with the forces actively driving these online movements. The situation was horrifying enough two years ago, it is many times more dangerous now.

When their unlikely hero arrived at 11pm, the crowd screamed as if Elvis himself had showed up. There were so many people surging towards him that Adama Barrow, the former estate agent who many hope will end the Gambia's decades of deadly dictatorship, was trapped on top of the car he arrived in. So he gave his speech, the last of the campaign, standing on its roof. Gambians will go to the polls on Thursday to vote in what is expected to be the closest election in the 22 years since Yahya Jammeh seized control of the tiny west African country in a coup. In a unique system, each voter will pick up a marble and drop it into one of three specially made drums representing the candidates. Jammeh has made no secret of his autocratic rule, vowing to govern "for a billion years if Allah decrees it", declaring himself "proud to be a dictator" and threatening to bury the "evil vermins called opposition ... nine feet deep". After four terms, he still has support: on the main road through the country, green scraps of cloth to denote support for his party hung from many homes, their rusted tin roofs held down with bits of brick. But change is in the air, according to those who have witnessed numerous elections in the country, where an unlikely combination of totalitarianism and topless tourists can be witnessed. Approximately 50,000 Britons arrive annually on daily Thomas Cook flights. Opposition parties have for the first time formed a coalition and chosen Barrow, who hails from several of the Gambia's tribes and hence commands support spanning the divides many say Jammeh has deliberately widened over the course of his rule. The country's youth, desperate for jobs, largely literate and armed with information from phone apps such as WhatsApp and Facebook, have been galvanised. On Tuesday night they ran through the streets to Barrow's rally in Bakau near the capital, crowding on to the back of pickup trucks, singing "Jammeh must go, he's a killer; he's a nonsense guy," blowing whistles and clanging pots and pans. Tourists looked on in amazement. The opposition leader, James Gomez, surveyed the celebratory crowd. "It's unprecedented, we've never seen anything like this in the Gambia before," he said. "I was the mayor of Banjul for 10 years, I was a popular guy, and I never got anything like this. "Everybody has been loosed out. Everybody's talking. Women are talking about their grievances, young people are talking about their grievances. Everybody's shouting out loud." Others are more cautious, however. They point out that Jammeh won with 72% of the vote in the 2011 election and question whether a significant drop in his support is likely. His orderly rallies attracted thousands. "He gives us free education. Everything is free in the Gambia," shouted teenage girls from Banjul High, campaigning in green T-shirts emblazoned with the president's face. Indeed, education and healthcare are free, but the school books and drugs prescribed are frequently either unavailable or prohibitively expensive. Each election year, under the gaze of observers and media, the government allows the opposition relative freedom for two weeks. But this is seen as a mere show, as for the rest of the five years between elections, journalists and opposition politicians are arrested, jailed, tortured and killed. Human rights activists worry that if Jammeh wins again, reprisals will come later, when the world is not watching. "For far too long the Gambia has not been of interest to anybody," said Amnesty International's west African researcher, Sabrina Mahtani. "It's a tiny country with very little strategic value. The international community needs to do more – it's been 22 years of business as usual." Observers from the EU and Ecowas, the Economic Community of West African States, have been denied entry this year, though the African Union has been allowed to send some. A month ago, Jammeh announced the country would leave the international criminal court, following South Africa and Burundi out of an institution that African leaders say is racist. He pulled the Gambia out of the Commonwealth in 2013, and last year he declared the country an Islamic republic. "What he wants is just to isolate us and separate us more," said Fatoumata Jallow-Tambajang, the architect of the opposition coalition, wearing a flowing grey headwrap to show her allegiance to it. "He's always been like that. He hid it more before. But now he's a wounded lion and unfortunately he doesn't have anybody to bite." She said Jammeh had driven the country into the ground. "There is abject poverty – 85% of the Gambia's 1.8 million are living below the poverty line. "He's the only successful businessman here. The economy is declining by the day." However, she said, "fear has faded", and people were feeling emboldened to speak out. "Jammeh never gave us what we wanted, but I just know Barrow will be different. He's listening to us," said Haddy Ceesay, 25, who had been looking for work for the five years since she left school but, in a country with a youth unemployment rate of at least 38%, has found nothing. As a result, the Gambia is losing a large proportion of its youth to Europe. More than 10,000 Gambians have arrived in Italy this year. Thousands of others who have tried and been sent back, or died along the perilous "back way" across the Sahara. "I'd rather fight in my country than die on the back way," said Alagie Blajo, 27. "Things are getting out of hand. The government has been failing for 10 years, but this year, things are getting worse." Like many coalition supporters, Blajo said if Jammeh was declared the winner, the people would not accept the result. "We'll send him out without violence, but if necessary, we will be ready to die," he said. "There's no way he can win this election."

Among the tiniest of the premature babies slumbering in incubators at the Mirwais hospital, one bore a name chosen by hospital staff. At five days old, "Fatima" had been abandoned by her mother after being born so early that her family assumed she was destined for the grave. Had her relatives grasped the welcome transformation unfolding at the government-run medical centre in Kandahar, the largest city in southern Afghanistan, they might have held their newborn a little tighter. Where once children crowded three to a bed, single occupancy is now the norm. The number of nurses making the rounds among the rows of infants has doubled, and new incubator units help neonatal specialists nurture the most fragile of lives through their first, vulnerable days. While much of the news from southern Afghanistan over the past year has been dominated by reports of Taliban advances, the creation of a new paediatric unit at Mirwais hospital has opened a new front in a different campaign: the struggle to reduce extremely high mortality rates among Afghan infants. Luis Tello, a Spanish paediatrician seconded to the unit by the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), said the expanded facilities had already helped to persuade more Afghan mothers that, with the right care, even the weakest babies might survive. "For me, the most astonishing improvement is with [premature] newborns. Before, nobody was taking care of them," said Tello, speaking in a ward where young children lay on crisp white sheets, mothers at their bedsides. "But we've managed to change people's minds." The new unit, which opened in September, is housed in a former nursing clinic in the hospital grounds, converted in a year-long project funded by the ICRC. It has 186 beds, including 15 for mothers – twice the number in the old paediatric wing. The number of incubators has risen from six to 10, while another new ward caters for children suffering from thalassemia, a hereditary, incurable blood disease prevalent in southern Afghanistan that can be ameliorated with transfusions and medication. By reducing overcrowding, the unit has dramatically cut the risk of contagious diseases skipping between patients. Staff who might previously have had to discharge barely improved infants to make room for even sicker children can now allow everyone time to recover. "We won't force them to go home early," said Dr Muhammad Sidiq, the unit's director. "We can let them stay here until they are completely cured." The unit is a tangible sign of broader progress in improving infant and maternal health. In contrast to the bleak picture on the battlefield in much of Afghanistan, years of painstaking efforts by the government and donors to improve access to basic healthcare, and train community midwives to assist at births – the vast majority of which take place at home – are yielding significant results. In 2000, Afghanistan had one of the highest infant mortality rates in the world, with almost 10% of babies dying before their first birthday, according to UN data. Since the overthrow of the Taliban in 2001, the picture has changed. According to a comprehensive health and demographic survey, published by the Afghan government in May, the nationwide mortality rate for all infants fell from 66 to 45 deaths for every 1,000 live births between 2001 and 2015. Similarly, for all children under five, the death rate per 1,000 fell to 55 from 87. Despite these achievements, infant mortality rates still remain high in many areas, partly due to a lack of basic education about the importance of hygiene during births. Tello explained that deadly sepsis infections could result from the common practice of using a knife to cut an umbilical cord on the sole of a shoe. Beyond Mirwais, meanwhile, large numbers of rural women have no access to even basic clinics. Some of the mothers arriving at the unit with infants swaddled in shawls had travelled hundreds of kilometres from remote areas. Escalating violence in many parts of Afghanistan has also made facilities harder to reach: a UN study published in April documented reports of 125 security incidents affecting access to healthcare in 2015, compared with 59 in 2014 and 33 in 2013. While the fighting begins to intensify each spring in Afghanistan, paediatric illness also follows a seasonal cycle, with diarrhoea more common in the summer and pneumonia and other respiratory diseases rife in winter. Doctors have witnessed a marked increase in malnutrition this year, possibly tied to the increasing numbers of people uprooted by fighting in the south. Some of the victims have been brought to a new therapeutic feeding centre in the unit for the most severely underweight. Making a brisk round of the new wards, checking on patients and issuing rapid-fire instructions to nurses wearing gowns and surgical masks, Tello soon encountered one of the deadliest killers. Holding up a chest x-ray from a tiny boy named Hekmatullah, he scrutinised an image of a ribcage dotted with hundreds of tiny lesions – telltale signs of miliary tuberculosis. "He's lucky because he has this x-ray, which is very clear for TB," Tello said, before hurrying to the next ward, where another listless child was battling pneumococcal meningitis. That such children can even reach Mirwais hospital reflects the shifting contours of the war in the south. At the height of the US troop surge in Afghanistan in 2010 and 2011, intense fighting in Kandahar province flooded wards and corridors with casualties bearing blast and gunshot wounds. As the vast majority of western forces withdrew ahead of a security handover in 2014, the locus of the conflict in the south shifted into neighbouring Helmand and Uruzgan provinces, which continue to provide the hospital with a steady stream of war-wounded. In the main hospital, a 22-year-old student named Abdul Matin was undergoing treatment after losing his right arm when a mortar round crashed into his family home in the district of Marjah in Helmand province a month earlier. Sitting up in a bed near other patients lying swaddled in bandages concealing even more grievous wounds, he greeted his injury with a certain degree of resignation. "This is the situation," he said. "I'm better off than some people – they've lost both their legs and arms." Despite the overwhelming challenges many patients face, Tello and his colleagues are starting to offer hope for sick children that many families might once have imagined possible. Though young "Fatima" did not survive, many more Afghans may one day look back and thank the staff at Mirwais hospital for giving them a second chance when they were most in need of help.

Katia Beauchamp co-founded the beauty subscription business Birchbox in 2010. Since then, it has grown into a $485m company, with more than a million subscribers and a physical retail store in Soho, New York. When Hayley and I were at business school, we were surrounded by conversations about new ways of selling online, but nobody was talking about the beauty industry; it wasn't part of the conversation. At the same time, we realised women were finding it challenging keeping abreast of all the new beauty products out there. This sparked the idea for Birchbox. We came up with a business model that would curate potential beauty products, personalise them to the customer, and send them out using a subscription model. The early days were challenging, as the concept of online beauty subscriptions was so new. But we had this emotional side of the business – which most companies are crying out for – where women really wanted to tell you how they felt about the products. It wasn't tough attracting customers. Women understood what we were doing and they enjoyed not having to try thousands of products, and having a personalised experience. They said to us: "Where have you been all my life?" We received really good feedback. We've evolved Birchbox over the years. Our US market share grew fast and in 2012 we moved into Europe. We launched Birchbox Men as we were hearing demand for it. We also launched a physical retail store [Birchbox opened its first shop in Soho, New York in 2014] after testing pop-ups. The biggest difference compared to other stores is that we don't merchandise by brand. No one shops that way. We merchandise by category as that's how the average woman shops for beauty. If their skin is flaky or they want a bold lip for a night out, they're not thinking about brand. This is much more customer-focused. My proudest moments are not the big wins, but the smaller things – like sitting in a meeting and seeing how smart and thoughtful my team is. We've evolved into something bigger than just me. The hardest thing for me is that I think about the team a lot and how they cope when there's rumours about the company. [Media outlets recently reported that subscription-box companies are seeing slow growth]. I can deal with it, so I tell them to bring it to me. But when our coworkers are scared or worried or they feel like they have to defend what they're doing, and when they have to read about it – I don't ever want them to go through that. I want to protect them. I also have twins. The first year of being a mom was tough. But I try to be nice to myself. Every woman needs to know that the first step is to ask for help and expect to get it, you deserve that. I'm incredibly grateful that I have the support of my husband. I don't know where Birchbox would be without my husband. He believes in me. The lack of women in tech is due to many factors. Honestly, I think it starts early [during childhood]. When a woman is growing up, it's important the people around her tell her what could be possible, and that she has role models to look up to. A critical part is believing it's possible. I also think if you decide to be an entrepreneur, as a woman it's more difficult to raise capital. Opportunities [for women in tech] would improve if there was more balance in the investor community. That's where most change needs to happen. My biggest advice for budding entrepreneurs is to start working towards launch, put it out to the market and iterate it. A lot of us keep tweaking everything and working on it, but I think it's best to get the product out as soon as you can. You're never going to be completely happy with it, but you can always change it. The faster it's out there, the faster you're going to have real feedback – and that's the most critical thing. Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs or sign up to Guardian Careers for the latest job vacancies and career advice

Q I've recently turned 20 years old and I've taken a year out from my degree course to get some industry experience, and I've also been saving up. I haven't got enough to invest in an amazing property, but I do think my savings will go some way in helping me get my foot on the ladder. I've always wanted to get into property development as something which I would do on top of the job I hope to have after I graduate. I'd quite like to start right now but I'm not sure how likely I am to get a mortgage at my age and as a student. I don't know whether I should wait until I've graduated and got a well-paying job. I've had a look at some properties and I think I've found a few that look promising. I'd probably go for a buy-to-let so I have a constant income – but how much of this do I actually get after tax? Do I have to have some sort of experience as a landlord before I'm likely to be lent money? How would I go about getting a mortgage: are there different types? I've tried researching this but I still don't know if I'm deemed as 'too young' to start in the property market. HK A The building opposite me is owned by a landlord who used his student loan to put down the deposit on the first of his now multiple buy-to-let properties. That was about 10 years ago, when lending rules were less strict but, in theory, a student is as eligible to take out a buy-to-let mortgage as anyone else. Nor is age a barrier (unless you're in your 70s or 80s) as most buy-to-let mortgages are available to 18-year-olds. You choice may be more limited than that of other buyers. Some lenders won't accept applications from people aged under 21 or 25. The fact that you don't already have a mortgage on another property is also a bit of a no-no for some but there are around 20 lenders (out of the 76 listed by Moneyfacts) who will look at applications from first-time buy-to-let buyers. Whether any application is successful will depend on whether the figures add up. The first stumbling block is the size of the deposit you are able to put down on a property. Unless it is at least 25% of the lender's valuation of the property, it won't be impossible to get a buy-to-let mortgage but your choice of lenders will be limited to two. For those two, you'll need a deposit of 20%. Then there's the question of rental income. While a handful of lenders look at both earned and rental income, the majority base their lending decision on rental income only. The catch is that most lenders expect the rental income you get from the property to cover the monthly mortgage repayments by 125%. So, if your mortgage costs £1,000 a month, the monthly rent will have to be £1,250. However, new lending rules and tax changes due to come into force from 2017 will push up this "rental coverage" rate to 145%. Even if you managed to get a mortgage, buy a property and find a tenant, how much money you make from your investment depends on all your other costs. To answer your specific question, what you actually get is whatever your tenant(s) pay you. But you'll have to use that money to pay the mortgage, fund the various insurances you need to buy and pay for the necessary safety tests, as well as the cost of any maintenance work at the property. You will also have to pay tax on your rental income. At the moment, you can deduct the costs mentioned from the rental income before arriving at the amount that is taxable. So, if you receive £15,000 a year (£1,250 a month) but spend, say, £12,000 on mortgage interest and £1,000 on other stuff connected to the property, you would pay tax on only £2,000. However, from April 2017, a new system is being phased in which, by 2021, will mean that you can deduct only 20% of the cost of mortgage interest. Using the same example as before, this would mean being taxed on £11,600 of the rental income rather than £2,000. This significant change to the taxation of rental income has caused the National Landlords Association to forecast that in 2017 around half a million buy-to-let flats will be put up for sale. Of course, while you are a student and/or in the process of finding a post-graduate job – and so probably not earning enough to pay tax – you won't have to worry about a tax bill, although you will still have to report your rental income to HM Revenue &amp; Customs.

Heather Nicholas, headteacher of Ferndale community school, is matter of fact about the difficulties her pupils face growing up in a deprived part of Wales. "I think every child should own a book," she says. One book may not sound like much but it is in Maerdy, a former coalmining village along the main road that snakes up the Rhondda Fach valley, where a good house can be had for less than £30,000. Ferndale has a lot riding on it. Local government spending cuts saw the school take over running the local library and swimming pool, to keep them open. And Nicholas is about to meet officials to discuss what more the school can do when the area's generous EU funding disappears, post-Brexit. But right now Ferndale carries even more weight for Wales's educational reputation, as one of the schools chosen to take part in the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development's triennial Programme for International Student Assessment (Pisa), which tests core skills in maths, literacy and science. Last year Ferndale's 15-year-olds sat the Pisa exams alongside half a million of their peers in 72 countries. The results will be published on 6 December. Governments worldwide use Pisa as the litmus test for their schools. It was Pisa that highlighted Finland's remarkable success within Europe, and then Shanghai's table-topping performance as a sign of China's development. In Wales there is concern about the latest set of results. While England's and Scotland's scores have been largely static, although slipping down international rankings because of new participants, Wales has seen its scores decline over the past decade, compounded by poor recent A-level results. Philip Dixon, a former director of the ATL Cymru teaching union, says Wales's poor Pisa results upended many assumptions about the world-class quality of its education system since devolution. "Pisa isn't perfect, but for all its faults it gives a reality check to governments. Being a small country, and not having a lot of checks and balances, we were a bit cocooned," Dixon says. "When the first lot of Pisa results landed in 2007, there was consternation. And then when the second set arrived in 2010, which showed not only that we still weren't remotely near the best but that we were actually going backwards, that caused a tremendous shock." According to Dixon – who has just published a book on the subject entitled Testing Times – the cause was a "lost decade", in which Wales failed to upgrade its teaching or introduce prescriptive strategies for teaching such as those seen in Scotland or England. The successive poor Pisa results set off alarms among policymakers in Cardiff, spearheaded by Leighton Andrews, Wales's minister for education from 2009 to 2013. "There were two options really," says Andrews. "One was to go into denial; the other was to say: this has got to be a turning point. And we obviously took the latter course." He recalls the Pisa results published in 2010: "It became the trigger for our school improvement programme, which kicked off in early 2011." First came banding, ranking schools into five levels of effectiveness, followed by new numeracy and literacy tests and frameworks, a new master's degree for newly qualified teachers, and efforts to amalgamate the 22 disparate and sometimes tiny local authorities responsible for school improvement. The 2013 results, published in 2014, saw Wales again lose ground in science and, in particular, maths, where its Pisa score fell further behind Scotland and England and slipped to 43rd in the international standings. But Andrews says the reforms introduced since 2011 have not yet had time to take hold, and so won't be reflected in the latest set of results. "The key question is whether you allow the policies you've introduced to continue and to embed, or whether you twist and turn every time there is a problem," he says. Kirsty Williams, Wales's current education minister, has been in the job only since May, and is the lone Liberal Democrat in Cardiff's Labour-dominated government. But she agrees that the earlier reforms need more time to take effect – including the introduction of the pupil deprivation grant she championed, which funds schools directly for disadvantaged children, similar to the pupil premium in England. Whatever this year's Pisa results, Williams argues there is widespread support in Wales for reforming its education system, and points out the improvement in GCSE results seen this year. "I believe we are in a better position than we have been in a long time. I think things are on the up in Wales – I detect an absolute commitment from parents, from educators, from our higher education institutions. It's a national mission. "There's a recognition that after all these years of devolution there's a disappointment that Welsh education isn't where we would want it to be. But there is a new sense of purpose, a collective understanding of what we need to do to move forward. There are some outstanding teachers, but we need make sure that quality is consistent no matter where you live in Wales, or what your background is." Williams's sense of a national mission is shared by Heather Nicholas at Ferndale. "The honest truth is, we've not been doing well in Pisa. But I think it's generated a surge of support for improving the education process, and I think Kirsty Williams will find life a bit easier than Leighton Andrews when he first started, in that she's pushing at an open door now. "I liaise with a lot of heads, and there are gripes and groans because it is quite high pressure and it's long hours. But there is a feeling that everyone is in it together," says Nicholas. In Maerdy, where the town's terraced houses can hide the deprivation behind their doors, that support often comes through the school. Nicholas talks of home visits, "with loving parents and a loving family but really deprived. Concrete floors, no white goods, no heating, children topping and tailing in beds. It's like the 1940s. It's much more commonplace than you would know." The foyer of the school has a large photo of a coalmine. The caption reads: "Mardy Colliery – the last pit in the Rhondda (sunk 1875, closed 21 December 1990)". It's a grim reminder for a school in an area with high long-term unemployment, where 40% of its pupils receive free school meals and a substantial number have been in care. But while the mines are long gone, Ferndale has set to work polishing diamonds. Elsewhere in the foyer are happier news clippings that speak of record-breaking exam results and new achievements. Since Nicholas took over as head five years ago, she and her staff have taken Ferndale from the bottom of the Welsh government's five bands to the top. In summer 2016 the school celebrated 55% of its pupils getting five good GCSE passes, including English or Welsh and maths, compared with just 22% in 2010. A new system of discipline has seen exclusions fall and attendance rise, year on year. Now the school is buzzing thanks to a partnership with Google, bringing Silicon Valley technology to the Rhondda valleys, and it is soon to be the subject of a BBC documentary. One of Nicholas's innovations has been a "Ferndale promise": no matter what a child's background, says Nicholas, "by the time they have left this school, they will have had a residential visit, they will have travelled abroad, if they want to". In return, pupils are expected to raise funds through sponsorship, or take part in tasks around school such as collecting litter. The promise extends to making sure every pupil has school uniform, and if they don't have a book, the school makes sure they are given one. It also runs two children's centres, engages parents and holds classes for adult learners. One overlooked detail from the last Pisa report was that pupils in Wales reported being happier than other parts of the UK. "If you picked any child out here and asked: 'what's the best thing about this school?', even the most grumpy, most truculent, if pressed, would say it's the sense of family, of care," Nicholas says. What is Pisa? (No, not that Pisa) The Programme for International Student Assessment (Pisa) is a set of test results published every three years by the OECD, with the aim of evaluating different education systems. Students aged 15 in randomly selected schools are tested on reading, maths and science. The results are widely reported and pored over across the world. The last Pisa results, assessing students in 65 countries, were published in 2013 and focused on maths. This year's results, expected on 6 December, will focus on science. The tests have become increasingly controversial. Some experts argue they encourage countries to engage in short-term fixes and to focus on a narrow curriculum and more standardised testing to climb the rankings. "Lack of progress on Pisa has led to declarations of crisis and 'Pisa shock' in many countries," wrote a panel of academics from around the world in an open letter to Andreas Schleicher, director of education for the OECD, in 2014. Others have complained it is not right to compare systems using average scores from random schools, and also that cultural differences make the tests unfair. French students, for example, are reportedly reluctant to guess multiple choice responses, preferring to leave a question blank – even though by guessing they would have had a 25% chance of being right. In addition, questions translated into different languages can be easily misinterpreted. There has also been criticism of Pisa, along with other international comparisons, for excluding children with disabilities. Top performers in the last Pisa tables were Shanghai, Hong Kong and Singapore. Finland has been a consistent high performer since the tests began, though it slipped in the last round. The UK's results have been less than stellar. In the last round (tested in 2012 and reported in 2013) England was 21st out of 65 for science, 23rd for reading and 26th for maths. The UK as a whole came 26th in maths, 20th in science and 23rd in reading. In maths, Scotland ranked slightly higher than England. Northern Ireland was seven places further down the table and Wales was 12th from the bottom, 17 places behind England. In 2013, the then education secretary, Michael Gove, blamed the previous Labour governments.

"We have a strange relationship with alcohol in the UK. We feel guilty about how much we drink, but we hate anyone telling us we should drink less," says Catherine Salway, co-founder of Redemption. Her business is a bar-restaurant with a difference: it doesn't serve booze. As we embark on the festive season, dry bars could offer respite at a time when large amounts of alcohol are consumed. When Redemption opened in 2013, testing out its business model at a pop-up in Hackney, it could easily have been mistaken as a fad. How could its alcohol-free, sugar-free, wheat-free and largely vegan menu keep customers interested? Three years later, however, it has two permanent branches in Notting Hill and Shoreditch. Its revenue grew 300% year-on-year in 2015 and it has won backing from three angel investors. Redemption has proved you don't need alcohol to pull in punters. Its mocktails, such as the coco-rita – a coconut water, lime and agave syrup "margarita"– are a hit with the health-conscious locals of west London. Students of nearby yoga and barre classes are regulars while tourists and trend-seekers frequent the east London branch. And more social enterprises with a similar business model are opening and thriving. There are at least 16 dry bars and cafes in the UK, plus pop-ups. Jonny Forsyth, global drinks analyst at market research firm Mintel, says teetotalism is growing, and with it the potential for no-alcohol bars as a long-term money-making prospect. One in five adults abstains from alcohol, according to the latest Office for National Statistics Adult Drinking Habits report. And there was an overall fall in alcohol consumption between 2005 and 2013, mostly in the 16- to 24-year-old demographic – the proportion of young adults who drank frequently fell by more than two-thirds. Forsyth says: "Younger people would definitely be a target for these teetotal bars. They are helping to build a market for non-alcoholic beer, for example, which is something that previously people didn't get at all." The student population in Liverpool is a prime customer base for The Brink, a dry bar-cafe opened through the charity Action on Addiction in 2011 and launched by a former employee, Jacquie Johnston-Lynch, whose brother Garry Johnston was killed in an accident involving a drunk driver. A lot of custom comes from students. Carl Bell, venue manager, says while the bar was initially meant to provide a mainstream venue for the charity's service users (recovering alcoholics and addicts), around 50% of customers now come from elsewhere. Bell has a good relationship with the three universities in Liverpool and is invited to freshers fairs. "We give flyers out, tell them what we do and let the students know they can go out and socialise without getting smashed," he says. As well as playing up its health benefits, The Brink is creative with its drinks menu; popular recipes include the Nojito and a "Shampagne mocktail". Bell says: "We're similar in a way to a local pub. Some people who are regulars may come here a number of times each week, some people nearly every day." The Brink also has an activity calendar including guitar lessons, speakers and screenings of football matches. According to Emily Robinson, deputy chief executive of the charity Alcohol Concern, chain bars and pubs are also widening their non-alcoholic drinks menus, in part due to the popularity of charitable initiatives. Alcohol Concern is behind the Zero Alcohol Awards and Dry January, during which participants abstain from alcohol and either donate the money they would have spent or commit to a challenge and collect sponsorship. When it launched in 2013 around 4,000 people signed up; in 2016 that grew to 60,000. Meanwhile, Macmillan Cancer Support, the charity behind Go Sober for October, says 67,500 took part this year. For fundraisers, dry bars can offer a sociable space without the temptation to drink. While the trend for dry bars has been growing in the last few years, it's based on a historical model – temperance bars of the 1800s. In 1835, the British Association for the Promotion of Temperance was formed. Temperance bars sprang up around north-west England selling non-alcoholic drinks as an antidote to a drinking culture in which alcohol wasn't regulated. The historic Fitzpatrick's temperance bar in Rawtenstall, Lancashire, once part of a chain of temperance bars owned by the Fitzpatrick family, reopened in August after a refurbishment. Owner Ashleigh Morley, says: "It's been really busy, a lot of people come in for its history." She said a recent visitor from south Wales first visited the bar 50 years ago when he signed a temperance pledge. "He's still teetotal today." While some enjoy its nostalgia, the bar has also found a new form of custom: baby showers. And the temperance movement has a modern incarnation in online sober and drink management communities, such as Soberistas and Club Sober, which seek out non-alcoholic environments. Blogger Louise Rowlinson, who describes herself as in long-term recovery from alcohol addiction, says: "I think it is incredibly hard to not drink in Britain, it is so part of our cultural landscape. Meeting people who don't drink [seems to be] a rarity. Sometimes it can feel exhausting to go to a pub and fend off questions all the time, people feel there is something wrong if you're not drinking – they ask if you're pregnant. It's nice to have the option [of dry bars]". At this year's Zero Alcohol Awards, launched in 2015, no-alcohol bars featured in the best zero alcohol initiative and the people's choice: favourite location categories. Dry bars were named as overall initiative and Sobar, a dry bar in Nottingham, was on the shortlist. Sobar opened in January 2014 through the Nottingham-based addiction charity Double Impact. Its business development manager, Eleanor Youdell, says: "The idea came from wanting to give something back to our service users that was lacking. But it appealed to a much wider audience than just those in recovery." Custom is building steadily. It has a varied clientele including parents with young children and students from the nearby universities. Bianca Tate, 23, a regular, sometimes visits with her two-year-old daughter, at other times with friends. She says: "The atmosphere is wonderful. There are many mainstream coffee shops in Nottingham, but none that have made me feel as welcome as Sobar, and the choice in food and drink is amazing." Forsyth says the rise of coffee shops is a useful indication of how the trend for dry bars could grow. He says when coffee shops began opening in the late nineties the concept barely existed. "Now coffee [is a billion pound market], and it's very normal to go and meet at a coffee shop. So, if you look at it like that, you can see how there is a demand for these non-alcoholic meeting places and how something that seems odd at the beginning can change over time." Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here for more advice, insight and best practice direct to your inbox.

Christmas TV advertising campaigns have little if any impact on where the vast majority of consumers do their shopping, according to a new poll. A survey of 11,500 consumers by shopping comparison website MoneySavingExpert.com revealed that just 1% said the adverts had a "big impact" on where they did their Christmas shopping, while 2% said it had "an impact". One in 10 said the ads had a "rare impact" on them and may have subtly influenced them once or twice, but 69% said they had no impact whatsoever. Depressingly for the industry, 6% said they liked some of the adverts but could never remember who they were for, while 9% said they were "turned off" by the adverts and deliberately avoided the stores behind them. Companies – led by the big-name retailers and supermarkets – will spend a record £5.6bn this year in a frenzied attempt to outdo each other, according to industry experts. John Lewis says its Christmas ad campaigns over the past four years – which have included a snowman's quest for a gift for his lover, a bear and a hare, Monty the penguin, an elderly man on the moon and this year's Buster the boxer – have fuelled an average 16% lift in festive sales. The number of festive shoppers in John Lewis stores has climbed more than 50% from 926,000 to 1.4m between 2013 and 2015. "It's good to know that consumers are not falling for the marketing hype of Christmas adverts and are not changing their shopping habits just because they think a particular dog, robin or even carrot is cute" said MoneySavingExpert.com's deals editor, Gary Caffell. "People are clearly just seeing these multimillion-pound adverts as a bit of festive entertainment which is great, as retailers will do whatever they can to get consumers to spend their hard-earned cash." A flurry of campaigns with totally divergent strategies have already hit the screens, from Burberry's mini-film featuring Sienna Miller and Domhnall Gleeson, and Harvey Nichols' tongue-in-cheek "Britalia" campaign celebrating all things Italian, to fashion retailer H&amp;M's unusual offering directed by Wes Anderson.

'Christmas is ripe for disappointment," acknowledges writer and performer Jonny Donahoe with a chuckle. "And yet we're so excited about it." Donahoe's new play, 30 Christmases, celebrates both the joy and letdown of the festive period, from family traditions to family arguments. It's one of a number of shows bucking the pantomime trend this year and offering a more ambivalent take on the holiday. Playwright Matthew Bulgo acknowledges that Christmas Day is "a real crucible". As such, it's a gift for a dramatist. Bulgo's play Last Christmas, about a man who returns home to confront his demons, wasn't originally set at this time of year, but "the tinsel and the baubles and the pudding just snuck in somewhere along the way". For Bulgo, Christmas was "the perfect context to address those issues of family, friendship and home because it seems like the time when you almost can't avoid them". Donahoe makes a similar point, observing that "Christmas is something that punctuates everyone's year, whether they like it or not". Both Donahoe and Bulgo are exploring how the past erupts into the present at this time of year. In Donahoe's show, he and comedian Rachel Parris play siblings telling the story of the Christmases – both happy and sad – that they've shared. Bulgo's protagonist, Tom, is travelling back to see his family in Swansea for the first time since his father died. Like Scrooge in A Christmas Carol, Tom is "absolutely riddled with flaws" and is "tied up in knots about regrets from the past". At the National Theatre in London, another kind of family drama is at the heart of Love, the new show from writer and director Alexander Zeldin. The play follows three families who have been placed in temporary accommodation, exposing a side to Christmas that is rarely made visible. Zeldin was inspired to make the show after a friend at the housing and homelessness charity Shelter sent him their annual report on families spending Christmas in B&amp;Bs. "For me, the starting point is never a political idea," Zeldin says. "It's always a human moment or encounter." Reading Shelter's report, he was struck by the voices of "women with young children speaking very simply about what it's like to live in terrible conditions in a tiny room, with all the kids piled up together and strangers around them". While researching the play, Zeldin stayed in hostels himself and met many families in temporary accommodation. This year Shelter estimates that more than 120,000 British children will be homeless at Christmas. This is something that Donahoe has been thinking about. 30 Christmases has been made in partnership with the Old Fire Station in Oxford, which doubles up as a Crisis centre for homeless people. "It's the perfect place to put on a show about Christmas," he says, "because we don't exactly have a perfect society." He recalls meeting the head of the biggest homeless shelter in Oxford during the making of the show. "She said, 'We get lots of people trying to volunteer for Christmas Day and we don't need that, we need things all year round.' So I wanted to address that as well, and look at the way we think about what Christmas is and what it represents to us." The question of what Christmas means is there in all three shows. Zeldin is interested in Christmas "as a metaphor of someone sacrificing themselves for something broader, or of hope being invested in a child". He also suggests that, as a time of year when people come together, Christmas "provides good conditions" for theatre that aims to create a collective experience among strangers. These three plays might eschew the glitter and glee of pantomime, but they are nonetheless optimistic. Donahoe stresses that 30 Christmases is "incredibly upbeat". Throughout the show, which features festive songs from Donahoe's band Jonny and the Baptists, he and Parris come up with new Christmas games, foods and drinks, inventing their own traditions. "It's about two people trying to discover new rituals," he explains. "Having gone through a Christmas trauma, they decide to make it their own thing." Bulgo says that audiences for Last Christmas (which has had several outings since its premiere at the Sherman Cymru, Cardiff in December 2012) describe it as "the kind of show that makes you want to leave the theatre and call your loved ones and tell them how much you love them". Zeldin, meanwhile, wants to show "the strength that comes from parental love and the love people have for each other inside the family". More than anything, the shows challenge the image of Christmas perfection. Christmas comes in many guises, but perhaps that's no bad thing. "It's usually a day marked with over- and under-cooked food and too much alcohol and shouting across the table, but also there's something incredibly joyful about that," Donahoe insists. "Those rituals are just as important as mistletoe and ringing bells and singing carols." 30 Christmases is at the Old Fire Station, Oxford, 13-23 December. Last Christmas is at the Old Adam and Eve Pub, Swansea, on 8 December; Chapter, Cardiff, on 9-10 December and the Traverse theatre, Edinburgh, 13-23 December. Love is at the National Theatre, London, 6 December to 10 January and at Birmingham Rep, 26 January – 11 February.

As we leave the EU, the UK can turn its back on the austerity policies that have been the hallmark of the euro area. My main argument against staying in the EU has been the poor economic record of the EU as a whole, and the eurozone in particular. The performance has got worse the more the EU has developed joint policies and central controls. The UK public warmed to the idea of spending our own money on our own priorities in the referendum campaign. The main issue between leave and remain was the money. Remain tried to dismiss its importance by claiming there was in practice little money at stake, and disagreed strongly with any reference to the gross figure for UK contributions. The public did not take away one particular figure from the debate, but did believe that we contributed substantial money that it would be useful to spend at home. Cancelling the contributions would also make an important reduction in our large balance of payments deficit, as every penny we send and do not get back swells the deficit, just as surely as if we bought another import. During the campaign I released a draft post-Brexit budget, showing how we could scrap VAT on domestic fuel, tampons and green products, and boost spending substantially on the NHS. The government will be able to choose what to do once we have stopped the payments. The autumn statement showed a saving of a net contribution of £11.6bn in 2019-20 once we are out of the EU, as well as additional domestic spending in place of spending in the UK by the EU currently. I am glad the chancellor has also adopted more flexible rules for the budget deficit. There is no need to genuflect to the Maastricht debt and deficit criteria once we leave, nor to pretend that we are about to get our overall debt down to 60% of GDP, as is required by those rules. The UK economy needs further stimulus, as the autumn statement acknowledged. There are roads and railway lines to be built, new power stations to be added, more water storage, schools and hospitals to cater for the rising population. The government is right to say the UK needs to invest more. We need to make new provision for all the additional people who have joined the country in recent years, and to improve the efficiency of our infrastructure. The country is well behind in meeting demand for train and road capacity, and in energy provision. The UK also needs to make, grow and provide more for its own needs. Leaving the EU will enable the UK to undertake a major campaign for import substitution. When we have our own fishing policy we could move back to being net exporters, instead of being importers. The common fisheries policy means too much of our fish is taken by other member states, leaving us short for our own needs. Designing our own agriculture policy will mean we can put behind us the quotas and regulations that have held back UK output during our years in the EU. We can change our procurement rules, so that the government when spending taxpayers' money can ensure more is bought from home suppliers. The UK is embarking on a substantial expansion of housebuilding. Too many materials and components for our new homes are imported. The lower level of sterling provides an opportunity for the UK to put in more brick, block and tile capacity, to prefabricate and manufacture more of the components and systems a new home needs. If more of the home is fabricated off-site – as happens in Germany and Scandinavia – we reduce the impact of bad weather, of labour shortages and other inefficiencies on the building site. Industry by industry there are opportunities for suitable investment and entrepreneurial activity, to meet more of the UK's own demands. This will be good for jobs, and better for the environment, when more is produced close to the place of consumption. One of the great unanswered questions of our time in the EU is: why do we run a balance of payments surplus with the rest of the world but a deficit with our EU neighbours? Why has it been so large and so persistent? Part of the reason rests in the way the EU rules were organised. Early liberalisation was designed to help the sectors the continent was best at, rather than the sectors where the UK had a relative advantage. The continental competitors soon outpaced us in their better areas, leading to UK factory closures and job losses in areas like shipbuilding steel production and cars in the early years of membership. The special designs of the common agricultural and fishing policies also led to larger import bills for us. Leaving the EU has coincided, so far, with a fall in the value of the pound. The UK should now be very competitive. It is time for business to respond to the favourable levels of domestic demand, and to work with government to put in the extra capacity we need to meet more of our own requirements. Prosperity, not austerity, should be the watchword. John Redwood is the author of Brexit Benefits: Prosperity not Austerity – Britain's New Economy, published by Politeia

The Australian production company behind commercial theatre shows such as Kinky Boots and Les Misérables has signed an agreement to prioritise hiring local actors over international talent. The industry union has hailed the deal between Michael Cassel Group and the Media, Entertainment and Arts Alliance "a groundbreaking first for Australian theatre". The three-year agreement comes into force this week and lays out transparent guidelines around the hiring of international actors with the aim of maximising employment of Australians. The agreement was reached after Australian performers aired their frustrations about the casting of international performers over Australians in both lead and supporting roles in major local productions of Aladdin, Kinky Boots and the Book of Mormon. The MEAA said they hoped the outcome would usher in the revival of "a rigorous consultation process" for the use of international talent across the entire Australian performing arts industry. The agreement comes four years after Live Performance Australia terminated the foreign artists agreement, which placed restrictions on the use of international talent in live theatre, dance, drama, ballet, opera and musicals. The LPA said at the time that consultation with its member companies had yielded "a unanimous view that the agreement had outlived its usefulness". Actors, directors and playwrights, including Geoffrey Rush, Neil Armfield, Rachel Griffiths and David Williamson, opposed the termination of the foreign artists agreement in 2012, publishing an open letter calling for LPA to reinstate the agreement. Frustrations peaked again earlier this year when the highly sought-after role of Jasmine in the big-budget musical Aladdin was offered to American actor Arielle Jacob for its Australian season. Erin James, an actor and editor of AussieTheatre.com, wrote at the time the issue of local actors missing out on big roles was "an issue which really isn't a new one in our industry. It's just becoming more relevant to artists right now because, well, what we feared would happen is actually happening." Live Performance Australia have been contacted for comment.

Not so long ago, commentators, myself included, were debating the possible demise of Ukip. With the triumph of its signature cause – Brexit – it seemed redundant. Nigel Farage had resigned; the frontrunner to replace him, Steven Woolfe, was hospitalised after a fracas; and the eventual successor, Diane James, lasted 18 days at the top. The party's bankroller, Arron Banks, threatened to pull his backing. Farce? Meltdown? Apparently so, but maybe not. For Ukip is a force that caters for a political demand. There is a need that sustains even this crisis-ridden husk. Like almost all of its European sister parties, Labour faces multiple existential crises, and Ukip is one of them. Not because Paul Nuttall has a northern accent and will bring flat-capped northerners flocking into the fold, presumably with their whippets in tow, as some patronising commentary implies. It is because Ukip is drawing strength from a crisis all elements of Labour must take responsibility for. Across Britain, Labour is on life support. In that discomfiting political situation, the party's instinct is to fall back on the NHS. That's understandable. The NHS is Labour's crowning glory, showcasing the party's founding principles of people before profit. Nuttall is on record calling for the dismantling of the NHS. "I would argue that the very existence of the NHS stifles competition," he wrote in a blog congratulating Tory privatisation policies that, in a display of cowardice, he later deleted. "As long as the NHS is the sacred cow of British politics, the longer the British people will suffer with a second-rate health service. I believe that the NHS is a monolithic hangover from days gone by," he declared in 2011, demanding "more free market is introduced into the health service". He is thus an easy target. The problem is the well-established pattern of Labour being ahead in the polls on the NHS, often substantially, and still losing elections. In the EU referendum, even John Major warned that the NHS would be "about as safe" with the rightwing Brexiteers "as a pet hamster would be with a hungry python". Leave still won, cynically minimising its trust deficit on the issue by deceitfully pledging £350m a week extra for the NHS. What Labour first needs to understand is which of its voters are defecting to Ukip. Ian Warren, the pollster who conducts focus groups of Labour-to-Ukip defectors, identifies two groups. One is blue-collar working households; relatively politically engaged; over 40; white; non-graduates; and from the Midlands, northern England or Wales. They are socially conservative on defence, social security and immigration. The other group includes deprived, disaffected voters from similar communities. They're typically under 40; either private renters or council tenants; often in insecure work; they are less likely to vote unless motivated to do so. Neither would ever vote Tory. Like Corbynistas, they generally prefer pre-Blair Labour to what happened next; but their social conservatism distinguishes them. Identity trumps leftwing economic populism. "The only reason they're staying with us is some sense of tribal loyalty which is being eroded with every passing day," Warren says. Both groups feel the left treats them with contempt. "They see Labour as being cosmopolitan and distant from them, with nothing to say to their concerns, and looking down at them," pollster James Morris says. This sense of being demonised by a liberal metropolitan elite – a resentment the rightwing populism of our time exploits – is widespread. "They're very sensitive that people like us will dismiss them," says academic Rob Ford. "They don't have status and standing with people they want to get a hearing from, and it angers them." To varying degrees, the left risks dismissing most working-class Britons as tabloid-brainwashed sheep or robots. Many of these natural Labour voters feel, however justly, that their traditional party now holds them in contempt, sneers at their concerns and values, and lives in a parallel universe. If the left wants to convince them on key issues – on immigration for example – it at least needs to understand where people currently are. The desire to reduce immigration is not at the same level across British society. But there is a majority who want to reduce immigration in every group of British society. A poll last year showed that, overall, 75% of Britons thought immigration was too high, compared with 18% who thought it was about right and 2% too low; 85% of over-60s thought it was too high, compared with 56% of 18 to 24s. Among Britons classified as middle-class it was 69%; among those labelled working-class, 81%. In multicultural London, it was 66%; in Scotland, 69%. Among Liberal Democrat voters, 60%; among Labour voters, 65%. According to the 2013 British Social Attitudes Survey, 82% of those with migrant heritage whose parents were born in Britain wanted immigration reduced; and so did 60% of first- and second-generation migrants. Among remain voters, 56% want a cap on European migrants. Much of the left simply waits for a transformation in their worldview that never comes. Tell enough facts, goes the approach, and they'll change their minds. Blame the media. Talk about the NHS. Rinse and repeat. I know: I've done it myself. It doesn't work. Partly it's about language. The populist right aims for the heart; the left often thinks it's about the head. Warren calls for "industrial, blunt, honest language", rather than the "clever, academic language" favoured by the left. Labour needs big public meetings on immigration on council estates at which local residents can offload their anger and at least feel listened to, he believes. Labour has demanded a properly resourced Migrant Impact Fund, to help communities experiencing higher immigration, and measures to prevent undercutting of wages and terms and conditions. But without constant repetition, without easily understandable messages, none of this lands. We need a programme, and a language, that chimes with the concerns of the overwhelming majority of society. Many who broadly share my politics will flinch at that sentence, seeing a capitulation to xenophobia. Stick with the "rinse and repeat" strategy, they will say. But all the while Ukip and Tory vultures circle. Labour's message of investment in left-behind communities has the potential to resonate among many Labour defectors to Ukip. But such messages and policies won't work without Labour voices who can connect with disillusioned voters. That means more northern Labour MPs at the forefront, such as the north-east's Ian Lavery, Yorkshire's Jon Trickett and Salford's Rebecca Long-Bailey. Rising Labour star Clive Lewis talks empathetically about concerns on immigration; his backstory – Midlands council estate, a soldier who served in Afghanistan – could resonate. But time is not on our side. The polling is calamitous and an early election beckons. We need a strategy above and beyond "save the NHS".

Blue Peter: Epic Christmas Card Make! 5pm, CBBC The festive season can truly begin when it's time to make the legend that is your Blue Peter Christmas card. Gather the sticky back plastic, glitter and glue (or whatever the modern equivalents are) as Barney, Lindsey and Radzi demonstrate how to create this year's card. Elsewhere in the children's TV stalwart, Lindsey is off on a road trip with one of the viewers and it's time to announce the annual Blue Peter book awards shortlist. Hannah Verdier Who Do You Think You Are? 8pm, BBC1 TV presenter Amanda Holden is the latest celeb to go in search of her forebears. She begins by hunting for confirmation of a family French connection, which appears via one Collin Thomas, trainee cordwainer, jailbird and a man who headed for the continent to fight Bonaparte under Wellington. An episode that offers real emotional oomph when it turns its attention to a second world war maritime disaster. Jonathan Wright The Sikhs of Smethwick 9pm, BBC4 Billy Dosanjh's brisk, vibrant film effortlessly blends archive sources and present-day encounters to tell the story of 50 years in one community. England was promised to the people of Punjab as a kind of heaven. When its young men arrived to work in Midlands foundries, they learned otherwise. It offered unregulated employment, and natives so racist Malcolm X paid a visit. Stories of marriages in the community add warmth and depth to the tale. John Robinson The Apprentice 9pm, BBC1 Perhaps remembering heady all-nighters playing Emlyn Hughes International Soccer on his Amstrad CPC, Lord Sugar tasks the eight remaining candidates with creating a virtual-reality video game. Never mind that even the most basic VR title requires hundreds of hours of development and coding: would-be cyberpunks Nebula and Titans have just a day to lock down their concepts before pitching them to gaming experts at a packed convention. Graeme Virtue Close to the Enemy 9pm, BBC2 Episode four of Stephen Poliakoff's drama set amid the shadows inhabited by post-second world war British secret services. Close To The Enemy has received perplexed reviews but is worth sticking with: tonight sees British spook Callum Ferguson ever more enmeshed in ethical swamps. It's followed at 11.15pm by Know Your Enemy: Stephen Poliakoff In Conversation, in which the dramatist discusses the vexed relationship between history and fiction. Andrew Mueller Film choices Joe (David Gordon Green, 2013) 10.45pm, Film4 Director Green returns to his moody roots with this atmospheric slice of southern gothic. Nicolas Cage is Joe, a boozy, melancholic ex-con staying just about on the straight-and-narrow as leader of a dodgy deforestation team. When likable 15-year-old Gary (Tye Sheridan) turns up seeking work, the two quickly bond, but with Gary's drunken, abusive father Wade (Gary Poulter) in tow, an air of latent menace grows ever thicker in this gritty, brutal and affecting drama. The Woman on the Beach (Jean Renoir, 1947) 6am, Movies4Men A scintillating combination of US box-office superstar Joan Bennett and the great (then refugee) French director Renoir produced this weird, wonderfully melodramatic film noir. Bennett plays Peggy, frustrated wife of famous artist Tod (Charles Bickford), whom she blinded in a domestic quarrel. The arrival of Robert Ryan's hunky but traumatised naval officer creates a toxic mix of sex, passion and betrayal, with Bennett acting her socks off as an achingly human femme fatale. Live sport Snooker: UK Championship 1pm, BBC2 Coverage of the ninth day at the Barbican Centre in York as the fourth round concludes. Championship Football: Queens Park Rangers v Wolverhampton Wanderers 7.30pm, Sky Sports 1 Two underachieving big-name clubs meet at Loftus Road. NBA: Cleveland Cavaliers v Los Angeles Clippers 1am, BT Sport 1 Action from the Quicken Loans Arena.

The Co-operative Group's Christmas TV advertisement is featuring people involved with the local community groups that have benefited from its revamped membership scheme. The Manchester-based mutual, which now focuses on groceries and funeral homes with some remaining financial services operations, said it wanted to show how shoppers buying its award-winning champagne, smoked salmon and other foods for Christmas could help local charities by giving them financial support. The images in the TV advert, which airs from Thursday evening, pair Co-op food with the local causes it helps to fund. The group has raised almost £1.5m for community groups across the UK since September and the campaign features four of them: Southport lifeboats, Leeds urban farm for people with learning disabilities, an amateur youth theatre group from Glusburn in Yorkshire and a male voice choir. In September, the Co-op embarked on the latest stage in its financial turnaround plan by rolling out a revamped loyalty scheme intended to revitalise its relationship with its owner members. The new scheme gives its 5 million members 5% back on the cost of Co-op own-brand products and then donates 1% to three nominated local causes. "For our Christmas 2016 campaign, we have focused on the very thing that makes the Co-op so special, showcasing how buying our brilliant own-brand food and drink can do good within your community through the 1%," said Jemima Bird, Co-op customer director. "As a convenience retailer who operates in the heart of communities across the UK, we see our membership scheme benefiting local causes every single day, and the groups in our Christmas advert had great fun participating in the filming, too." Ex-Coronation Street actor Emma Edmondson provides the voiceover for the TV advert which is part of a campaign – produced by ad agency Leo Burnett – that also includes posters, press, online, social and in-store advertising.

City trees, popularly thought to remove pollutants and improve urban life, may also increase the amount of foul air that people breathe, says the UK body which gives independent health guidance to national and local government. "Leaves and branches slow air currents, causing pollutants to settle. They may also act as sinks for particulates and chemicals that may have direct or indirect effects in air quality. Air quality [under trees] may deteriorate at street level near vehicles," says the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (Nice) in new draft guidance for local government to combat air pollution. Nice does not recommend that councils cut down trees in leafy suburbs to meet pollution limits, but urges planners, local authorities and developers to take into account the adverse effect that trees can have on air quality if badly sited or unmanaged. "It is not always true that trees reduce air pollution. Their effect is dependent on factors including species, canopy density, time of year and wind direction. Ventilation [on streets] will vary according to the size, distribution and species of tree and their position," it says. The guidelines also question the unintended consequences of other measures often taken by cities to improve people's quality of life. Road humps aimed at slowing traffic and noise barriers erected alongside busy roads can both increase air pollution, says Nice. "Traffic calming measures such as speed humps ... may increase emissions by adding to decelerations and accelerations," it says. "Ensuring motorists drive steadily at the optimum speed can reduce stop-go driving and reduce emissions. "People regularly travelling or living downwind of a plume of vehicle pollution can experience poorer air quality as a result of a solid barrier." The 60-page report, which goes to consultation on Thursday and could be adopted by July, is expected to feed into the government's response to the supreme court. Following several cases brought by law firm ClientEarth, the court has demanded faster action to reduce air pollution which causes more than 40,000 early deaths a year in Britain, with conservative estimates putting the cost at between £8.5bn-£18.6bn. Under pressure from the courts, the government has proposed clean air zones in five cities, including Birmingham, Derby, Leeds, Nottingham and Southampton. But Nice recommends that all councils consider setting up similar zones which could allow them to ban heavily polluting vehicles from town centres, and set their own pollution standards for taxis, hire vehicles and council fleets. It proposes that councils consider air pollution at every stage of the planning process. This could extend to where new housing is sited and recommending that developers build new houses with the living room situated furthest away from roads. Schools and nurseries should be sited away from main roads and councils should avoid developments that trap pollution in canyons, says Nice. But it also wants to see drivers educated as to how to reduce emissions. New guidelines are expected to support low and zero emission travel. "Public sector transport providers should educate drivers how to reduce emissions. This could include switching the engine off when they are dropping people off, or making deliveries, and avoiding rapid accelerations and decelerations," said a spokesman. However, the committee could not directly address the sheer number of cars now on roads and was limited to proposing ways to mitigate pollution. "We can take steps now to encourage people to walk or cycle rather than drive but these efforts will be futile if we do not have a long-term plan to improve air quality," said Mark Baker, director for the centre of clinical practice at Nice. "Past measures have not had the required impact. The draft guidance sets out ... practical measures for local authorities to encourage low or zero emission transport," said Paul Lincoln, chair of the Nice guidelines committee. A British Lung Foundation spokesperson said: "Robust measures must be taken to clean up the air we breathe. We need to specifically target the most polluted areas in our towns and cities. Everyone deserves to breathe clean air." "Action is needed both to ensure vehicles on the road are clean and that there are fewer of them. Diesel vehicles, which are the most polluting, must be phased out and our transport and planning policy needs a radical overhaul," said a spokeswoman for Friends of the Earth. "This is no time for tinkering around the edges – to deal with this public health crisis we must plan our towns and cities in ways which actually reduce traffic and give people real alternatives to driving."

On 7 July this year, Raffaello Bucci's body was found at the bottom of the so-called "viaduct of suicides". Just a day before, he had been interviewed by police investigating links between football and organised crime. The viaduct is an impressive structure connecting Turin to Cuneo, a city 100km to the south, and south-eastern France. The arches carrying the dual-carriageway over the Stura di Demonte river are 45 metres high. It was on this same spot that Edoardo, only son of Gianni Agnelli (the late owner of Fiat and Juventus), ended his life in 2000. Bucci's life, as well as his death, linked him to the Agnelli family. Although he grew up in San Severo, a town 850km to the south of Turin, Bucci was – like many southerners who move to the north – a hardcore Juventus supporter. He had grown up watching the greats of the "old lady" of Italian football: Platini, Baggio, Ravanelli, Vialli, Del Piero. Juventus was, according to one of his oldest friends, "an obsession". Bucci was christened Raffaello but everyone knew him as Ciccio. His roots were humble: his father was a school caretaker, his mother a housewife. They were very Catholic and – according to friends – indulgent. By all accounts Bucci was a lovable rogue: cheerful, fun and a "trascinatore", a natural leader. He went to a technical secondary school to study book-keeping, where he had a wide groups of friends – he was elected student representative, but also hung out with teachers playing football pools in the bar. As soon as he left school he moved, in the mid-1990s, to Turin, in the north-western region of Piedmont, the home of his beloved Juventus. With its perfectly parallel grid of streets framed by two sedate rivers and the Alps to the north, the city is august and grand. It is also a place of bon-viveurs, renowned for its fine wines, chocolates and aromatic drinks (Campari, Martini and Cinzano). Bucci didn't find a job as an accountant, but he had energy and imagination, and soon found an opening in the lucrative world of match ticket sales. He began sourcing and selling tickets to his friends, and friends of friends. He saw himself as a reliable fixer for his fellow, fanatical Juventini. In photographs from those years, he does not have the tough-nut look of many touts: he had a long, thinnish face, a cheeky smile and ever-present shades. Football fans in Italy are notorious for their feverish support: the Italian word for fan, "tifoso", translates as those who have typhoid. But Bucci was drawn into the even more ardent world of the "ultras" – tight-knit firms of fanatics, created not just to support a team but to promote the group's own brand and business interests. The first ultra groups were formed in the late 1960s, when supporters from Milan, Inter, Sampdoria, Torino and Verona formed vociferous and sometimes violent gangs. The original groups were often from the far right, or were influenced by the romance of leftwing guerrilla and partisan insurgencies (hence names such as "Brigades", "Fedayeen" and "Commando"). Over time, as hooliganism increased, the names of ultra groups became anglicised ("Fighters", "Old Lions", "Boys") or wilder ("Deranged", "Out of Our Heads"). By the mid-1970s, every major club in Italy had its own ultra group and a decade later, most had dozens. The firms had spent the intervening years splintering, regrouping, renaming and reinventing themselves – all in order to take possession of the centre of the curva. This area, behind the goal, has traditionally been the place where a club's poorest, but most devoted, fans assemble. The curva is every bit as territorial as a drug dealer's corner, and ultras stake out their turf in similar ways: fights, stabbings, shootings and, sometimes, by making alliances and business deals. There are 382 ultra groups in Italy, of which some are still explicitly political (40 far-right and 20 far-left). Because Juventus draw their support from all over the country, their ultras are more eclectic than those of most other teams. Bucci became involved in a group called the Drughi. The name is taken from the Droogs of A Clockwork Orange – young men, known for their louche and stylish violence. The firm's logo, displayed on flags, banners, badges and hats, consists of four silhouettes with batons and bowlers, set against a white or orange background. A poster of Benito Mussolini forms the centrepiece of their private members' club in Mirafiori, three bus-stops beyond the end of Turin's metro. In a sport characterised by the perceived disloyalty of players and owners, the ultras see themselves as the only faithful elements of a club. In a rootless world, they offer a sense of belonging. That, certainly, was part of the attraction for Bucci. But there has always been a dark side to the ultras. They have been at the centre of most violence on the terraces in the last 50 years and are involved in illicit businesses: ticket-touting and counterfeit merchandise, even drug dealing. To begin with, Ciccio Bucci didn't see that dark side. He was living a charmed life, making money and friends on the semi-legal periphery of Serie A. He even saw his ticket-touting as a way to realise his dream of one day working for the great club. Like so much in Italian life, the relationship between Juventus and its ultras was not one of open confrontation but of secretive compromise. In return for a safe and supportive stadium, Juventus helped the ultras make millions of euros a season from touting. As Michele Galasso, a lawyer who has represented both Juventus and ultra leaders, says: "The compromise between Juventus and the ultras was simply the compromise between the rules and the realities." * * * Although the ultras are, in some ways, comparable to old‑style English hooligans, they take their planning to quasi-military levels. They ambush rivals to capture their banner, like an enemy flag. They also announce their presence in the stadium by executing drills and salutes, through flags and chants, by banging drums and setting off flares. Each firm has its own uniform and meeting place – normally a bar or private members' club, filled with logos, slogans and memorabilia. Before a big match, these clubs look like the back room of a bank: stacks of tickets and banknotes surrounding middle-aged men, with half-moon glasses on the ends of their noses and calculators out. When Ciccio first moved to Turin, in the mid-1990s, it had seemed as if the ultras were becoming ever more powerful. They could block the purchase of players they didn't like (a small, antisemitic faction of ultras attached to the north-eastern club Udinese objected to the club's attempts to acquire the Israeli forward Ronnie Rosenthal), or the sale of those they did – like the mooted transfer of Beppe Signori from Lazio to Parma – by threatening whole-stadium boycotts that would cost clubs millions in lost revenue. As the ultras grew in influence, the number of people injured inside and outside football stadiums increased from 400 in the 1995-96 season to 1,200 in 1999-2000. The names of "martyrs" of ultra-related violence could often be seen spray-painted on the walls of cities across Italy. There were tributes to both ultra members and regular fans: Claudio Spagnolo (knifed on his way to a match); Vincenzo Paparelli (who died when a nautical rocket fired by an ultra flew the length of the pitch and hit him in the head); Antonio De Falchi (a Roma fan murdered outside the stadium); Antonio Currò (killed when a Catania fan threw a homemade bomb into a group of Messina fans); Sergio Ercolano (who fell to his death in 2003). At times the ultra label has been little more than a fig leaf for neo-fascism. When the Dutch player Aron Winter – the son of a Muslim father and a Jewish mother – signed for Lazio in 1992, graffiti was sprayed outside the club's training ground that read "Winter Raus" – an echo of the words "Juden Raus" from Nazi-era Germany. In 1997, ultras from Juventus's local rivals, Torino, threw a Moroccan man, Abdellah Doumi, into the Po river. One of the men owned a dog named Adolf. Bottles and a vacuum cleaner were thrown at Doumi, who could not swim. "Dirty black shit," the attackers shouted as he drowned. In 2004, a group of Roma ultras caused the cancellation of a derby match against Lazio four minutes into the second half, after a rumour spread around the stands that a boy had been killed outside by a police car. Fans from both sides protested furiously against the police, even after several statements were made over the stadium tannoy that nothing of the kind had happened. The images of the Roma captain, Francesco Totti, surrounded by ultra leaders telling him not to play, became symbolic of the power of the firms over Italian football. As he walked back to the players, Totti called out to the manager: "If we play on, they're going to kill us." Some of those drawn into the world of the ultras are not fans, but simply petty criminals hoping to make easy money. In a recent phone call recorded by police as part of the investigation into links between ultras and organised crime, one ultra was asked by a friend if he was going to the stadium on Sunday. "If we're making money, yes," came the reply. "Why [else] should I give a shit?" There are even occasional stories of ultras switching teams, not as fans but as investors. But no one could accuse Bucci of anything other than loyalty to Juventus and the Drughi. He was so good at selling tickets that he earned a gold star on the wooden beam in the Drughi's private club: "R Bucci" it said. He was at the stadium for every game. It was often Bucci who led the supporters' chants with a megaphone. In 2004, Bucci met Gabriella, a woman from Cuneo. They married and had a baby boy together. The couple lived in Beinette, a village just outside Cuneo. The area is a strange combination of the rustic and the industrial. Cows graze between the houses, and in the distance you can see the first of the mighty mountains of the Alps. Opposite Bucci's house, however, is a metal-recycling depot and at several road junctions nearby prostitutes in miniskirts sit next to fields filled with eight-foot-tall stalks of corn. Bucci commuted back and forth between Beinette and Turin, an hour north-east, where he had a little flat above a bar near the Juventus stadium. He was always on his phone. He had a terror, his wife later said, of losing it. It would ring all hours of day and night with people begging for tickets. Bucci may have been the go-to man for tickets, but he was never The Man. That was Dino Mocciola, leader of the Drughis, who spent 20 years in prison for armed robbery and murder of a policeman. Few people get close to the notorious Mocciola: after his release from prison in February 2005, he was banned from matches, so unlike other ultra leaders, there are no photos of him on the terraces – only the mugshot taken when he was arrested in 1989. One source in the Turin flying squad describes Mocciola as a Scarlet Pimpernel: he hasn't used a phone for years. Not even his lawyers, they say, know how to reach him. But such is his notoriety that soon after he had served his time, opposing fans from one of Roma's ultra groups held up a banner at Juventus's stadium saying: "Ciao Dino. Bentornato" ("Hi Dino. Welcome Back"). The Drughi had become sidelined whilst Mocciola was in prison, shunted from the centre to the fringes of the curva, with all that implied for their prestige and their business interests. "Predominance in the curva is worth gold," one journalist wrote at the time. "It means being the intermediary of the club. It brings free tickets, favours and travel allowances." With Mocciola out of prison, they began to reassert themselves. In April 2005, an ultra from a rival Juventus group, the Fighters, was stabbed – by a Drugo, it was assumed. The resulting feud lasted more than a year: in the summer of 2006, two Drughi (including Mocciola) were stabbed and 50 fans arrested in clashes between different Juventus ultras. But by then, under the leadership of Mocciola, the balance of power had shifted: the Drughi were the top dogs. The Fighters split and merged into other groups and Mocciola claimed his position as the undisputed king of the curva. Because he was banned from matches, Mocciola needed a lieutenant near the turnstiles, bossing the terraces and liaising with the club. Bucci seemed to know everyone and, with his accountancy training, had a good head for numbers. He was close to Juventus staff, sometimes even sleeping over at the flat of Stefano Merulla, the head of the club's ticket sales division. He was the perfect candidate. * * * Bucci had arrived. He was close to his beloved club and to its fans. He had an income, and a family. "When Ciccio came back south," a friend of Bucci's told me, "he would always talk about Gabriella and his son, and show us photographs." But it could not last. After years of her husband's frenetic wheeling and dealing, and late-night dashes back to Turin, Bucci's wife had had enough. He was rarely at home and, according to Gabriella's sister, they argued about how he spoiled their son. Gabriella didn't like it when Bucci took their young son into the city and kept him overnight. In 2011, the couple separated, but remained on good terms. Bucci bought a small flat in Margarita, a neighbouring village with a small castle and rust-coloured brick church. His position as the middle man between the legitimate and criminal worlds was also about to become harder. In 2007, a young policeman, Filippo Raciti, was killed during clashes between police and Catania fans. The killing of Raciti finally persuaded Italian politicians to confront the menace of violent football fans. All matches were suspended for a week. Strict measures against ultras included banning flares, megaphones and drums. Banners now had to be preapproved by clubs. Armoured vehicles and security cameras were present at all grounds. Juventus had particular reasons for wanting to stop the violence. The club had recently acquired the Stadio delle Alpi from the city council. The club was planning to build a new, 41,000-seater stadium on the site, meaning that it would be one of only three clubs in Serie A to own its own sporting venue (all the others are owned by town or city councils). The income would be immense, and the security state-of-the-art. There was so much money at stake, the last thing the club hierarchy wanted was for the club to be fined, or even docked points, as a result of their ultras' behaviour. The upper echelons of Juventus needed to reach a compromise with their hardcore fans. It was a compromise that would later become the subject of a police investigation: when interviewed in July this year, the head of Juventus's ticket sales, Stefano Merulla, admitted that the club would supply hundreds of match-day tickets, on credit, to the leader of each ultra group, through a ticket agency called Akena, in return for good behaviour. This was in clear contravention of the rules, which stated that no more than four tickets could be sold to any individual. Juventus has strenuously denied any wrongdoing. In a statement to the Guardian, the club said: "No manager or employee of Juventus is under investigation, and those that were heard by the judicial authority were called as witnesses. It should be noted also that Juventus, as emerged from the investigations, has always fully cooperated with law enforcement agencies." Match-day tickets were just the bread and butter of the compromise. The real meat was in season tickets. At the beginning of each season, a foot-soldier from one of the ultra firms would go all over the city renting identity cards from people so they could be duplicated. He would then photocopy hundreds of ID cards or passports and use them to buy a stack of season tickets from Juventus. Since the named ticket-holder had no interest in attending the matches, the gangs could rent the season ticket, game by game, to the highest bidder. (All it required was that the security detail on the turnstiles did not notice the discrepancy between the season-ticket holder's name and that of the entrant. As there were vans filled with ultras parked outside the Curva Sud, of course, they never did.) In a startling admission to police years later, Merulla stated that he knew the ultras were "doing business" with those tickets: "The compromise," he said, "was a good solution for everyone." Juventus had a vibrant but safe stadium and won five consecutive championships between 2011 and 2016. The Agnelli family – due in part to their ownership of the city's newspaper, La Stampa – continued to be revered as Turin's quasi royal family. Meanwhile each of the handful of most powerful ultra firms was making serious, hassle-free profits. With as many as 300 match-day tickets, and 300 season-tickets, each paying an average of €50 a game, and with 30-plus games a season (depending on cup runs), each ultra gang could make close to €1m a year. It was good money for minimal risk (ticket touting is not a criminal offence under Italian law, only an "illecito amministrativo" – administrative fraud, punishable with a fine). Little wonder Bucci always had ready money. Little wonder that various mafia families were beginning to cast an envious eye on the Juventus ultras. * * * In the postwar period, it was decided that the best way to diminish the power of the mafia in southern Italy was to banish its worst elements from their home territory and relocate them to the more law-abiding north, far from their criminal associates. Begun in 1956, the policy was called "soggiorno obbligato" – a "compulsory stay". Of course, instead of removing the mafia from the south, these measures simply exported it to the north. The Calabrian mafia – known as the 'Ndrangheta – from the region that forms the toe of Italy's boot, proved itself more adept than any other at insinuating itself into northern Italy. Beginning with the sale of counterfeit bergamot orange oil (the original is grown in Calabria and used as a flavouring in Earl Grey tea), the 'Ndrangheta exported its businesses to the north: moneylending, extortion, illegal gambling, construction cartels and drug trafficking. Piedmont, which borders France and Switzerland, was one of the industrial hubs of Italy, and a magnet for the Calabrian mafia. By 2013, two particular Calabrians were of interest to anti-mafia investigators: Saverio Dominello and his son, Rocco. They were suspected of being part of the powerful Rosarno clan, involved in extortion in small towns between Turin and Milan. Investigators believed that the Dominellos were also mixed up in nightclubs and narcotics. The father, Saverio, was an old-school, surly type, but Rocco was often described as garbato – "smooth" or "graceful". From recorded conversations in the spring of that year, investigators deduced that the Dominello family were planning to move in on the ticket touting business in Turin and wanted to form their own ultra group, called the "Gobbi" (or "hunchbacks", a nickname for Juventus supporters). Saverio and Rocco Dominello knew they had to tread carefully and obtain the approval of the other ultra groups. "If the plate is round," Saverio Dominello was recorded as saying, "it'll be cut five ways." This was old-fashioned spartizione: slicing up the profits between different cartels. Slowly other interested parties were sounded out about the new ultra group. The head of the Viking ultras, a poker player known to have Sicilian connections, gave his assent. 'Ndrangheta strongholds in the south also agreed. The man who was fronting the new ultra group was under police surveillance, and boasted over the phone about having the support of mafia clans: "We've got our backs covered, we've got the guys who count. What the fuck more do you want?" On 20 April 2013, the Drughis' top man, Dino Mocciola met with the Dominellos and their associates. The Dominellos arrived with ostentatious humility in a Fiat 500, while Mocciola rolled up in a Series 1 BMW. They went into a cafe in the village of Montanaro for a meeting that lasted almost two hours. A police listening device hidden in one of the Dominello group's cars caught the men boasting about the power of the new Gobbi ultra firm: "You've had the honour to sit at table with Dino ... no one can touch you. You're the number one ... you can lay down the law if anyone behaves badly." The next day, in a crunch match against Milan on 21 April 2013, the new group announced itself with a huge banner in the stadium: "Gobbi". All over Italy, the ultras were reasserting themselves. The popularity of the firms was on the rise among fans, and a lack of political will meant that their influence went unchallenged by the authorities. In 2012, a relegation run-in against Siena was halted for 45 minutes when Genoa ultras threw fireworks on the pitch and screamed at players to take off their red and blue home shirts in shame after they went 4-0 down. All but one of the players sheepishly put on their away shirts. Other matches were abandoned because of fan revolts. In 2013, in the Lega-Pro, the Italian third division, a match between Salernitana and Nocerina was stopped when five players from Nocerina, whose ultras had been banned from attending matches, feigned injury in protest. The game had to be abandoned. Rocco Dominello quickly became influential among both Juventus officials and different ultra groups. He was introduced to Stefano Merulla. He also became a close friend of Juventus's security manager, Alessandro D'Angelo, and by June 2013 was giving him orders. When D'Angelo told Dominello that the rival Vikings' allocation of tickets had been reduced, Dominello said: "Like I told you to". He also bragged that people "are scared of me". Juventus did nothing to halt Dominello's rise. In January 2014, a Swiss citizen complained to the club that he had paid €620 for a ticket officially worth €140. Internal checks by the club proved that the ticket had initially been supplied to Dominello by D'Angelo. Merulla was beginning to have suspicions about Dominello. "I don't know what job he has, I don't know what influence he has," Merulla said in a phone call to another ultra member, intercepted by police. Dominello was, he said, "mysteriously powerful" – code for mafioso. And yet, despite all those fears, just a week after the Swiss fan's complaint, D'Angelo told Dominello they would find a way to get him tickets using "a different code". As you read police transcripts of D'Angelo's sweary telephone conversations, it becomes clear that he was way out of his depth. He relished being matey with the ultras and was seemingly blase about their darker dealings. A source within the Turin flying squad told me "there was an error of judgment [by Juventus management]. They thought they could handle it." One judge later wrote that D'Angelo and Juventus appeared to behave with "subjection and submission" with regard to Rocco Dominello. Part of the problem, as always in Italy, was a nepotistic system that promoted friends instead of professionals. D'Angelo's father had been Umberto Agnelli's chauffeur, and Andrea Agnelli (now Juventus's president), had been a childhood friend. Through 2014, the ultras became even more troublesome. For the Juventus-Torino derby that spring, Mocciola called a fan strike in a show of power to the club's hierarchy: he wanted the Drughi to receive more tickets, at cheaper prices. For years, D'Angelo had looked to Bucci as the go-between to shore up the Juventus-ultra compromise, but now he called the Calabrian, Rocco Dominello, instead: "I want you [ultras] to be calm, and us [Juventus] to be calm, and we'll travel together." It was clear that Bucci's influence was on the wane. The final of the Coppa Italia, on 3 May that year, between Napoli and Fiorentina, was marred by violence before the match. A fascist ex-AS Roma ultra shot three Napoli fans, one of whom later died. Napoli ultras were so incensed that they prevented the match kicking off for half an hour. The Napoli ultra leader, Genny 'a Carogna (Genny the Swine), proudly wore a black T-shirt urging the release of the man jailed for murdering the policeman Ispettore Raciti back in 2007. * * * On 25 November 2014, investigators made a breakthrough in their search for links between the ultras and organised crime. Andrea Puntorno, a 39-year-old Sicilian living in Turin, was arrested for importing heroin and cocaine from Sicily and Albania. Puntorno was the head of another Juventus ultra clan, the Bravi Ragazzi ("The Goodfellas"). Between 2004 and 2011 Puntorno had declared an income of just €2,600 per year, but he owned a house, a car and a motorbike. The Bravi Ragazzi already had a bad reputation: on 19 December 2011 various members had organised a violent pogrom, setting fire to a travellers' encampment in Continassa, on the edge of the new Juventus stadium, forcing 20 families to leave the area and clearing it for developers to move in. Puntorno's arrest was, a judge later wrote, the first evidence of "a dangerous and worrying business link between members of the ultras and individuals belonging to mafia clans". After his arrest, Puntorno's wife was threatened and intimidated by her husband's business partners. She decided to become a witness for the prosecution. She described the processes by which her husband would sometimes make €30,000 from a single Juventus game, much of the money being distributed to the relatives of members of the firm who were serving time in prison. Profits from tickets sales were invested in wholesale drugs purchases, and vice versa. "This business went on for many years," she said. "Season tickets were supplied to Andrea ... by Juventus at the beginning of every season, whilst every match Andrea managed to get more tickets." She said that the profit margin on each ticket was between €30 and €100. The Bravi Ragazzi also had a monopoly on counterfeit merchandising, or what are called in Italian "gadget": badges, shirts, keyrings, bumper stickers, scarves and so on. Investigators were now in no doubt that there was not just one, but many criminal gangs circling around the profitable business of ticket touting. Meanwhile, the Drughi had turned against Ciccio Bucci. There was a whispering campaign against him, suggesting that he had touted tickets online and that he was a police informant. When the short-lived Gobbi merged with the Drughi, Bucci found himself sidelined by Rocco Dominello. Bucci's former champion Dino Mocciola turned on him, and gave him a beating. Bucci, in fear for his life, retreated back to his home town for the whole of the 2014-15 season. Always a thin man, he lost 8kg and told Gabriella that people were trying to "take him out". From San Severo, Ciccio tried to plot his comeback. He called Alessandro D'Angelo in November 2014 and alluded, albeit in veiled terms, to Rocco Dominello's mafia links: he called Dominello "that type of person". "Ah, OK," said D'Angelo. "Only at that point," commented the public prosecutor in a later document, "does D'Angelo seem to understand." By now, Juventus were aware that they had allowed wolves into the barn, and that more were trying to get in. The club was under pressure from racketeers to give building work at the new stadium to a particular construction company, in order to avoid vandalism and stop the intimidation of workers. The club felt that Bucci was one of the few ultras with whom they could still do business. He had been a fixture at the club for a long time and was well liked. The commercial director of the club, Francesco Calvo, said that Bucci was a man who "inspired empathy". The club's elderly lawyer, Andrea Galasso, called him "a simple, sunny, enthusiastic, clean guy". So, a plan was hatched to give Bucci an official role within the club. He would work as a consultant alongside the club's supporter liaison officer. Bucci's employer was Telecontrol, a Turin security firm. From down south, Bucci phoned D'Angelo to pitch how he would work with the ultras: "It wasn't my intention to sink this ship," he said, "but a bit of water needs to get in." It is unclear whether he meant the club would be allocating fewer tickets to the ultra gangs, but he did seem to realise that when, as he put it, "people got their feet wet", they would turn on him. "They'll be calling me shitface," he said. By the start of the 2015-16 season, Bucci was back in Turin. It seemed that his childhood dream had come true: he was working for the club he had worshipped since he was a boy. The last time the club's lawyer saw Bucci, on the occasion of the Torino-Juventus derby in March this year, he received an enthusiastic hug: "I'm an official figure," Bucci said, smiling happily. The trouble was that Bucci had, in his words, "a foot in both rivers". He was "double-dealing": aiming to satisfy the demands of Juventus, ordinary fans, various ultra groups and even the police ("they call me every day" to confirm tip-offs, he once complained). As he did at school, he was trying to be friends with everyone. But the ultras would not accept any reduction in their ticket allowance, and Bucci was ostracised and branded a traitor to the Drughi's cause. While his dream of working for Juventus had come true, after a year the position was no longer quite as attractive as he had imagined. In the spring of 2016, Bucci's mother died. He was isolated and, despite all those incessant phone calls, alone. On 1 July this year, Rocco and Saverio Dominello, and 13 others, were arrested for a variety of mafia-related crimes. They have denied all wrongdoing. Dominello and son are in prison, awaiting trial for mafia association and attempted murder. Andrea Puntorno was convicted of drug dealing at trial, and was later released on probation with a fine of €500,000. On 6 July, Bucci was questioned as "a witness to the facts". The transcript of his interview the day before his death gives no hint of despair or terror. One of the investigators told me that Bucci appeared "calm and good humoured". He made no startling revelations, only confirming what investigators already knew: "I don't deny having received tickets. It's not as if Juventus gave them to us. We called and asked for up to 300 tickets. We bought them on credit and paid the balance afterwards." That night, though, he phoned his ex-wife and apologised to her and their son for any "lack of respect". She didn't understand and Bucci could only say he was "totally paranoid". He was "100%" convinced that he would be arrested and that Juventus would sack him. His lifelong ambition was over before it had really begun, and he feared he would have to sell his house. He phoned her again at 11.30 the following morning, saying he was going to work. Half an hour later, he jumped from the famous viaduct. Two workmen witnessed his fall, and were able to assure investigators that Ciccio had not been, as the saying goes, "suicided". It is not, clearly, a story that reflects well on Italy's biggest club. Juventus was complicit in large-scale ticket-touting and conducted business, albeit unwittingly, with criminal elements. Ciccio Bucci, a man who had always been passionate about the club, was compromised and even scapegoated. He found himself caught between not just Juventus and its ultras, but between police and the Calabrian mafia. In the end he could see no way out other than ending his life. Follow the Long Read on Twitter at @gdnlongread, or sign up to the long read weekly email here.

Whatever the outcome of the Richmond Park byelection today, the result will offer a glimpse of the shape of politics to come. That's the easy bit. This corner of southwest London is such an odd constituency that it may be hard to say quite what the result means. But even before the polling booths close, it is safe to say that the campaign itself has been a sign of how far politics has departed from what, as recently as last year, was deemed to be normal. There is nothing typical about this byelection. Start with the candidates. There is Eurosceptic Zac Goldsmith, who after six years as Richmond's Conservative MP, resigned, as he had promised, when the government approved the expansion of Heathrow. He is running as an independent in an election he wants understood as a referendum on the third runway. He could be said to represent insurgency and direct democracy. But he has the tacit, and sometimes discreetly active, support of his old party, as well as the backing of Ukip, which will portray a victory for Goldsmith as a reinforcement of Brexit. There is Sarah Olney, the candidate for the Liberal Democrats – the party that held the seat from 1997 to 2010. She is campaigning against triggering article 50, the tentative pioneer of some kind of progressive alliance (better names welcomed), who has the support of Bob Geldof and the leadership of the Green party, although not all of the local Greens, some of whom back the Labour candidate. She can also count on some local Labour members, although not those supporting Christian Wolmar, who is Labour's official man. He was selected after the party's central command refused to have any truck with the former coalition partners of the Tory party. There is also the normal run of candidates from the exotic fringe. Even for a byelection these are unusual circumstances. They don't even fit the now-familiar truth that Britain, like many other western liberal democracies, has become a deeply divided society in both economic and cultural terms. Richmond Park is one of the few constituencies where that couldn't be less the case: it is unusually homogeneous, and its residents are more than averagely young, prosperous, in work, and healthy. Its unemployment rate and the number of children in poverty are both half the UK average, while house prices are a stonking three times above it. In fact, the constituency stands out only for having a larger than average number of non-white and non-UK-born voters. It ticks all the boxes to be strongly pro-remain, and so it was, by an estimated 72% to 28%. Goldsmith built his political career on claiming to be the servant of his constituents. As a new backbencher five years ago he campaigned assiduously for a recall bill – allowing constituents to force a byelection – that was rather stronger than the feeble one MPs finally approved. The Goldsmith version would have put control of the process firmly in the hands of the voters rather than the party machine at Westminster. It is perfectly possible for him to be both the wealthy, solipsistic dilettante his critics see, and at the same time the representative of a different kind of politics – one which, if it were repeated widely, would destroy Westminster as we know it by subverting the discipline of the party whips that allows the government to get its business through parliament. Olney, on the other hand, stands for a souped-up version of "business as usual". She says that if she is elected, she will take it as a mandate to oppose article 50. And ardently though I long to see that, at the same time it seems to me that such a course might be nearly as perilous as the Goldsmith route. The uncomfortable truth is that the more that is known about why people voted Brexit, the harder it becomes to frame an argument in favour of remaining that will win people back. The question then becomes: how, and around what, can a case be constructed that goes beyond support for the EU, and becomes the basis for a defence of the liberal democratic values it represents? Remaining is deeply unpopular. It is even more unpopular now than it was on 23 June. YouGov's latest poll, like its one a month earlier, found that two-thirds of voters, including half of those who voted remain, thought the government had to go ahead with Brexit. That is one indicator. Another can be found in analysis done soon after the June vote. It mapped the Brexit result on parliamentary constituencies (the referendum was counted on local authority boundaries) and concluded that in a general election, leave would win nearly twice as many seats as remain. Even allowing for the referendum being as different from a general election as elephants are from giraffes, there is no reason to suppose that anything has changed. If new analysis that YouGov presented in Cambridge a couple of weeks ago is correct, the characteristics of people who backed Brexit closely match the characteristics of a group of voters that the polling organisation calls "authoritarian populists". They are people who could broadly be described as out of step with the cultural assumptions – such as a respect for human rights, immigration, feminism and diversity – that are the bread-and-butter of liberal democracy. The significance of cultural preferences, as well as economic ones that are now widely recognised, makes the fightback for the EU much more complex. It is not, or not just, about tackling inequality or corporate greed. It is about shifting the way we all see the world. And that means that those of us who are convinced that Britain is better off in the EU have to find something, soon, that is much more persuasive than "don't do it".

Theresa May must avoid making any new immigration system too bureaucratic or risk harming Britain's businesses, the CBI director general Carolyn Fairbairn has warned. Sources suggest ministers hope to negotiate a Brexit deal that would allow the government to control high- and low-skilled immigration. But Fairbairn issued a stern warning to Downing Street, saying a new, tougher system outside the EU could create an unmanageable burden for employers and deprive firms of the workers they need. "Whatever new system comes in, and businesses recognise there will be one, make it easy: make it administratively straightforward, and flexible and speedy, because actually if it takes six months to bring somebody in, and your project starts next week, then in terms of productivity it will take us backwards," she said. Fairbairn said the CBI was in regular touch with the Home Office to impress upon the government the need to make any new controls workable. "We think it needs to be evidence-based; it needs to understand different kinds of migration – students, skilled labour, less skilled labour, different job categories. But whatever system comes in – ease of use," she said. "Particularly in this fast, flexible, competitive world that we're in. If it's just going to be leaden, and heavy, and bureaucratic, we will lose out." Speaking to the Guardian as the CBI launches a new report analysing the factors that make some regions more economically successful than others, Fairbairn urged the government to invest more in boosting school standards in order to help address the financial concerns that led to Brexit. In response to the report's finding that GCSE results were the key factor in determining local economic performance, she said: "I was really fascinated by this. The dominant factor was educational attainment at the age of 16. It was kind of obvious, and we knew it, but it still brought me up short to see it in black and white." She argued that replicating the improvement in school performance achieved in London over the past decade elsewhere in the country could help to narrow the economic divide. "If you're a local business, you are recruiting from your local labour pool, who were educated locally, and educational attainment at the age of 16 is absolutely fundamental. The variability between our schools in our country is huge. "One of the really interesting opportunities is for education to be thought of as part of industrial strategy. And it's something which I think this government is really open to." David Cameron's government published a white paper on improving schools standards in the spring, but the central thrust of May's approach has been allowing more grammars to open. Productivity was at the heart of Philip Hammond's autumn statement last week. He pointed out that British workers take five days to produce what their German counterparts make in four - and pledged to borrow an extra £23bn over the next five years to make the economy "match fit" for Brexit. Fairbairn said the CBI's analysis suggested that the areas where productivity had lagged behind coincided with those which voted to leave the EU. "If you look at where the loudest voices were, and some of the strongest votes for Brexit, they come from those parts of the country that have faced the challenges of globalisation; they have had core, staple industries change and decline over time, not yet to replaced by high productivity new sectors. "We do have some of the biggest differences in regional productivity and living standards in western Europe". The CBI report suggests that the economy could receive a £208bn dividend by 2024 if areas whose economic performance is weak grew as fast as the best. It finds that a series of factors could help, including improving local transport links to speed up commuting times, boosting firms' management skills and increasing the supply of affordable homes. Fairbairn said it was important to "create the conditions outside London where businesses can thrive" employing bright, capable young people and with good transport connectivity. "Weak productivity has long been a bugbear of the British economy," she added, "and successive chancellors have sought to tackle it — but Philip Hammond believes the Brexit vote makes the task more urgent." The May government's relationship with big business got off to a bad start. Fairbairn expressed alarm after the prime minister's conference speech appeared to presage a hardline approach to Brexit and the home secretary, Amber Rudd, appeared to criticise firms employing a large proportion of foreign workers. But she pointed to a change of tone more recently and welcomed May's decision to row back from her proposal to put workers on company boards, to the dismay of trade unions. "We are sensing a stronger desire to engage with business: stronger than it was at the time of the conference," Fairbairn said, describing May's emollient speech to the business group's annual conference last week as an "important moment". Labour accused May of caving in to corporate lobbying after the corporate governance proposals were published earlier this week. Fairbairn said: "We have been having conversations with Number 10 and BEIS [Department for Business, Energy &amp; Industrial Strategy] – very productive conversations."

Climate change is set to cause a refugee crisis of "unimaginable scale", according to senior military figures, who warn that global warming is the greatest security threat of the 21st century and that mass migration will become the "new normal". The generals said the impacts of climate change were already factors in the conflicts driving a current crisis of migration into Europe, having been linked to the Arab Spring, the war in Syria and the Boko Haram terrorist insurgency. Military leaders have long warned that global warming could multiply and accelerate security threats around the world by provoking conflicts and migration. They are now warning that immediate action is required. "Climate change is the greatest security threat of the 21st century," said Maj Gen Munir Muniruzzaman, chairman of the Global Military Advisory Council on climate change and a former military adviser to the president of Bangladesh. He said one metre of sea level rise will flood 20% of his nation. "We're going to see refugee problems on an unimaginable scale, potentially above 30 million people." Previously, Bangladesh's finance minister, Abul Maal Abdul Muhith, called on Britain and other wealthy countries to accept millions of displaced people. Brig Gen Stephen Cheney, a member of the US Department of State's foreign affairs policy board and CEO of the American Security Project, said: "Climate change could lead to a humanitarian crisis of epic proportions. We're already seeing migration of large numbers of people around the world because of food scarcity, water insecurity and extreme weather, and this is set to become the new normal. "Climate change impacts are also acting as an accelerant of instability in parts of the world on Europe's doorstep, including the Middle East and Africa," Cheney said. "There are direct links to climate change in the Arab Spring, the war in Syria, and the Boko Haram terrorist insurgency in sub-Saharan Africa." After Donald Trump, who has called climate change a hoax, won the US presidential election in November, Cheney said he expected senior military officials to impress upon Trump the grave threat posed to national security by global warming. "I've got to believe there are enough folks on the national security side that we can make a dent in this." R Adm Neil Morisetti, a former commander of the UK maritime forces and the UK's climate and energy security envoy, said: "Climate change is a strategic security threat that sits alongside others like terrorism and state-on-state conflict, but it also interacts with these threats. It is complex and challenging; this is not a concern for tomorrow, the impacts are playing out today." Morisetti said climate change would mean the UK military will be deployed more often to conflict and disaster zones. The military leaders were speaking ahead of an event in London on Thursday. In September, a coalition of 25 US military and national security experts, including former advisers to Ronald Reagan and George W Bush, warned that climate change poses a "significant risk to US national security and international security" that requires more attention from the US federal government. In 2015, a UK foreign office report made a stark assessment of the dangers posed by unchecked global warming, including very large risks to global food security, increased risk of terrorism as states fail, and unprecedented migration that would overwhelm international assistance. "Countries are going to pay for climate change one way or another," said Cheney. "The best way to pay for it is by tackling the root causes of climate change and cutting greenhouse gas emissions. If we do not, the national security impacts will be increasingly costly and challenging."

He was one of the key salesmen of New Labour, a Westminster wheeler-dealer whose backstage machinations and silver tongue saw him nicknamed Britain's svengali of spin. Now, Tony Blair's former communications chief Peter Mandelson is pushing a rather different project: the New Titanic, a 1bn yuan (£116m) bid to rebuild the doomed passenger liner in a landlocked Chinese county more than 1,200km from the sea. On Wednesday, more than a century after RMS Titanic sank claiming more than 1,500 lives, Mandelson reportedly travelled to Sichuan province's Daying county to take part in what local media described as a "solemn ceremony" to officially kick off construction of the full-scale replica. The 269-metre New Titanic is the centrepiece of a high-end tourist resort being built in Daying, about 115km east of Sichuan's capital, Chengdu. "This is a great project," Mandelson was quoted as saying during Wednesday's keel-laying event by news website Tencent Tourism. Qixing Energy Investment, the Chinese firm behind the doomed liner's revival, has faced criticism that it is seeking to profit from the 1912 catastrophe, which occurred during its maiden voyage from Southampton to New York. But Mandelson reportedly told guests at the ceremony those behind the venture were doing "a remarkable job" in rebuilding the liner. The Labour peer's support for the New Titanic project appears to stem from his role as the president of the Belgravia-based Great Britain China Centre, which promotes ties between the two countries. The China-Britain Business Council has previously offered its support to the New Titanic initiative which investors have claimed is fuelling "tremendous expectations" in both China and Britain. Xinhua, China's official news agency, reported that after giving his speech on Wednesday Mandelson attended a tourism forum in Suining, another nearby city. Recent years have seen New Labour's "sinister minister" become a vocal cheerleader for Chinese interests in Britain, with some even questioning whether Blair's one-time confidant is being paid to lobby on Beijing's behalf. Mandelson has publicly advocated Chinese involvement in the Hinkley Point nuclear project, arguing that after Brexit "we can't be too fussy about who we do trade with". He became head of the Great Britain China Centre in October 2015, on the eve of a state visit to Britain by President Xi Jinping that was designed to launch a "golden era" of relations between London and Beijing. Mandelson is also chairman of a controversial consultancy called Global Counsel. Founded in 2010 the group claims to help "companies and investors across a wide range of sectors anticipate the ways in which politics, regulation and public policymaking create both risk and opportunity – and to develop and implement strategies to meet these challenges". The firm's website says it offers to help clients with "navigating the critical area between business, politics and policymaking". In 2012 it emerged that Mandelson's firm had been advising a multinational company accused of illegally chopping down endangered rainforest in Indonesia. The Chinese replica of the Titanic will be put on show far from any icebergs, at Sichuan's Romandisea resort on the banks of the Qijiang river. The China Daily, a state-run English language newspaper, said the vessel would be permanently moored there and was designed to "boost development of the local tourism sector". Su Shaojun, one of the project's main investors, said the New Titanic would feature replicas of the liner's banquet hall and first-class guesthouse. "Many blueprint fragments found their way into the hands of collectors or remained missing. We spent many years collecting the blueprints from many parts of the world and managed to obtain most of them," he was quoted as saying. Guests and visitors will also enjoy modernity amenities such as Wi-Fi and a spa. Curtis Schnell, a veteran Hollywood production designer who has been hired to work on the project, told Reuters the project was being handled in a "very respectful way", rejecting criticism that it was exploiting the disaster. Those behind the New Titanic attempted to explain their project in a tweet earlier this month. "Titanic is an epic tragedy of a century ago, but the glory of the humanity has existed forever and should be commemorated and inherited," they wrote. Villagers in Daying told Reuters they feared they might be evicted from their homes to make way for the replica ship. "If we're not going to have to move out of here then that will be really good for us. Us old folks might do a little business in that case," said local farmer Li Jieyong, 60. "But then if we have to move then that won't be any good. They wouldn't provide enough compensation for us to get by."

In early May, this blackthorn thicket had been smothered in the most spectacular display of blossom that I had ever seen and I made a mental note to return in autumn, to see if it had fulfilled its promise. I'd intended to return sooner. Now it felt like the first real day of winter, and my breath turned to steam in the icy wind. In the shade of the trees beside the beck, where deep shadows would linger all day, fallen leaves were fringed with frost crystals. Most of the hedgerow blackthorns hereabouts are brutally trimmed at regular intervals, but these seem never to have been molested and have become small trees. I found them laden with such a crop of sloes as might, perhaps, be seen only once in a lifetime, on fruiting spurs of old wood encrusted with lichens, and on slender young twigs weighed down by their burden. The crop on even the most accessible branches was untouched. No one, it seemed, had been interested in harvesting them for sloe gin; too late now, anyway, for most of the fruits. Frost had cracked them open, fungi had invaded and as they thawed brown liquid oozed from their wounds. Many were already shrivelling, wrinkled like prunes. Only a few plump sloes retained that veneer of natural yeast that bestows such an exquisite pale blue bloom over indigo skins in early autumn. Almost all will remain on the branches, withered and mummified, until spring. I have rarely seen birds eat them and with this year's bumper hawthorn berry crop they are the least tempting fruit on offer. The most likely beneficiaries will be mice that gnaw through the hard stone to reach the kernels. It seems such a waste that they should be food of last resort to seed dispersers but perhaps, for all this floral extravagance in spring and autumn abundance, that is all that is needed. Once established, blackthorn spreads underground via suckers, so old thickets like this one could easily be a single clone, the product of one in a thousand seeds from one in a million flowers. Follow Country diary on Twitter: @gdncountrydiary

When the Tropfest founder, John Polson, was 15, a mixed bag of juvenile delinquencies saw him booted out of high school for a second time. It could so easily have proven disastrous but Polson responded by hurriedly mapping out a plan to start a mechanic apprenticeship and learn the saxophone, hoping that would temper the anger of his jazz musician father. Near-disaster focused the mind, as it so often does, and set Polson back on the right course. And so it was again last year when inexplicably poor financial management put his annual Tropfest event, the world's largest short film festival, on the brink of collapse. The disappearance of hundreds of thousands of dollars, blamed on the management company, forced organisers to "postpone" the festival a month out from screenings. "When I made the announcement to 'postpone' this time last year, what I really believed was that we were done," Polson tells Guardian Australia. "I knew the financial hole, and I knew it was never going to be fixed. But I couldn't bear the idea of saying that, and I wanted to soften the blow." A sponsor's last-minute lifeline saved the event but the fallout caused lingering damage to a brand already under fire for awarding the 2013 top prize to a film that had been criticised as transphobic, and for a licensing arrangement that gave Tropfest exclusive rights to all films "in perpetuity". The experience has been chastening for Polson. Now he is attempting to reimagine Tropfest in a form closer to its first iteration as a grassroots event in the Kings Cross cafe Tropicana 25 years ago. "Tropfest lost its way for the last few years and I take some responsibility for that," he says. "I've been living in New York, I've been focused on my own career. "I had a licence agreement that I thought worked well, and to be fair it did work well for a long time, but no one can argue that we [haven't] lost our way. Now we're trying to find our way back to the path." The corporation that ran the festival, Tropfest Festival Productions, is gone, replaced by a not-for-profit overseen by a Tropfest board. The controversial licensing conditions have also been ditched, a move Polson describes as a "no brainer". He openly acknowledges the mistakes of the past, including the selection of the film Bamboozled as the 2013 winner, and concedes that Tropfest must do more to encourage diversity in film-making. "We're not perfect. I know [with] that film, if we had our time again it might have gone down very differently. But you've got to take those on the chin and say, 'OK, let's try and do better next time.'" Next year the festival is moving to Sydney's west for its 25th birthday, and will be held on a Saturday, with a series of weeknight events leading up to the main showing. "One thing I know about life, and about Tropfest specifically, it's up to us to make it a success," Polson says. He is still in dispute with the management company over the missing money. The episode has been put to the back of Polson's mind, he says, but "by no means have I moved on". "The truth is I've spent a lot more time focusing on getting back on the rails than I have on what happened. "It felt like I had a choice between going back and seeking revenge, for want of a better way of putting it, versus getting this thing back on the road – and I chose to get it back on the road. But I'm not going to be giving up on that anytime soon." The move to Parramatta is a multi-year agreement and one Polson strongly believes will work, despite its distance from the city centre. He said moving the event to a Saturday night from a Sunday would allow more travel time, and help keep crowd numbers strong. The successes of the festival over more than two decades, attracting an audience of 1.6 million people since 1993, had bred complacency. The uncertainty of the past few years changed that, he says. "It feels like the first year, in some ways. In some ways, it's a brand that everyone knows and loves, and in other ways we have to re-prove ourselves. "That's what happened in the first time round; I had a vision for Tropfest in the early days that nobody else could really see at the time." Tropfest will be held on 11 February 2017, with entries open until 15 December.

Josh Frydenberg overrode federal law to give the go-ahead to lethal shark nets in northern New South Wales to save the local tourist industry and nipper clubs. The environment minister has argued that there was a "national interest" in installing the controversial nets because, with the tourism season about to start, surf shops were experiencing decreased sales and nipper clubs had fewer registrations. On Wednesday the Tasmanian Greens senator Peter Whish-Wilson instigated a Senate inquiry to examine the netting program, as well as the minister's reasons for making the exemption. The netting program began after three shark-related deaths in NSW waters. The nets aim to entangle sharks and are expected to catch other animals too, including dolphins, turtles and bony fish. The program is not allowed under the federal Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act, but Frydenberg granted an exemption for the program, deciding it was a matter of "national interest". Guardian Australia can now reveal the reasons the environment minister gave for granting the exemption. Among the reasons is a secret report that surf shops in the region have experienced a drop in sales, as well as a drop in registrations for the local nipper clubs. Frydenberg argued tourism to the area contributed billions of dollars to the economy each year and that it was under threat by the media attention being drawn by the shark interactions. "I considered that the public safety of water activities in the north coast of NSW is a matter of national interest," Frydenberg said in his official statement of reasons for granting the exemption. He argued that there was likely to be an impact on threatened species, as well as the critically endangered grey nurse shark, but that these impacts were "difficult to quantify at this time." The official statement of reasons follow Frydenberg earlier incorrect indication that any action other than culling was permitted without ministerial approval, adding he would consider allowing a cull of protected species. "I absolutely put human safety first and foremost in my mind," he told ABC TV. "State governments ... can take whatever mitigation measures they like within reason, other than the culling, without needing the federal approval. Now if they were to put a proposal to the federal government I would consider it, but we have to put human safety first." Whish-Wilson, an avid surfer, was scathing of Frydenberg's new official reasons. "Media attention over shark interactions is not sufficient justification for putting aside an environmental assessment and neither is confidential claims of reduced wetsuit sales," he said. "Sharks have been present in the ocean for 450m years. People were swimming in the ocean with sharks 100 years ago and people continued to be swimming in the ocean with sharks when Mike Baird became [NSW] premier two years ago." "This new Senate inquiry will look into the details of shark interactions without the hysteria. We will examine all the claims of the NSW government and the reasons given for the ... exemption."

A leading poker machine researcher has accused the Victorian government of excluding the Crown casino from a review of how regulations could be tightened to better protect problem gamblers. On Thursday the state government called for community and gambling industry feedback as part of a review of existing regulations, including restrictions on 24-hour gaming, cash withdrawal limits, limits on note acceptors, auto-play facilities, and spin rates and maximum bet limits for gaming machines. But many of the measures under review do not apply to the Melbourne casino, said Charles Livingstone, a leading researcher on the impact of gambling on public health from Monash University. "Casinos have ATMs in their lobbies, whereas pubs and clubs can't do that any more," he said. "By and large casinos haven't been bound by many of the measures aimed at pubs and clubs. Loyalty cards in casinos allow unrestricted maximum bets. The pre-commitment system [restrictions on gaming machine expenditure] is voluntary and unlikely to be taken up by those experiencing harm." He believes there should be a mandatory pre-commitment system in casinos, and said the review needed to be extended to look at poker machine design and the way that encourages people to become hooked. "The review also needs to look at the processes around electronic gaming machine approval," he said. "This is an inflexible and ill-defined process with no guidelines, and is very industry friendly, with 94% of applications approved between 2007 and 2014. "Leaving that out will annoy the local governments, who want it changed." Livingstone said while the review was encouraging, he feared the government would be "bombarded" with submissions from the industry. Livingstone is also sceptical about the timing of the release of the consultation paper, with submissions to the review closing on 16 January. "It's odd that they're doing it over the silly season," he said. "Maybe they want it to slip under the radar? Industry, of course, will be well prepared." But the minister for gaming and liquor regulation, Marlene Kairouz, said the review was "long overdue" and a genuine attempt to rein in the harms caused by problem gambling and addiction. "We can't ignore the harm caused by gaming machines," Kairouz said. "We're seeking the right balance between protecting problem gamblers and ensuring the current rules are up to date." An estimated 300,000 people across the state are affected by someone else's gambling. In October, law firm Maurice Blackburn announced it would use Australian consumer laws to argue that poker machine operators are engaging in deceptive and misleading conduct. The case is expected to be brought before the supreme court early next year.

A Queensland man who pleaded guilty to a charge on the advice of a fake solicitor who said he would avoid jail time is claiming a miscarriage of justice after he was sentenced to almost 10 years. The case of Jason Graham Matheson has shone a light on an allegedly bogus Gold Coast law firm "endorsed" by the barrister who owns it while "instructed" by a law graduate twice convicted of posing as a solicitor. Matheson was convicted in April of maintaining a sexual relationship with a child, on the account of his former wife and mother of his three children, who claimed their sexual relationship began when she was 13 and he was 21. He has filed in the court of appeal for a retrial, claiming he was assured by Legal Advisory Service "practice manager" Jacob Reichman and barrister Chris Rosser that the worst he faced by pleading guilty over a charge was a five-year wholly suspended sentence. Matheson maintains that his sexual relationship with his former wife began when she was 17. But he told the court he was prepared to plead guilty to unlawful carnal knowledge on the advice of Reichman, who he believed was a qualified solicitor. Matheson told the appeal court in Brisbane on Thursday that "I thought I was in good hands" but was never given full details by Reichman or Rosser of his ex-wife's allegations and the prosecution brief. He said that Reichman discouraged him from reading the victim impact statement of his ex-wife, telling him it was "pornographic" in detail. Matheson said he was "absolutely horrified" to learn the exact nature of the case against him for the first time when it was read out in court the day he pleaded guilty. They included details of alleged digital rape and indecent treatment of a child. Matheson alleged he had previously told Reichman he would not plead guilty to any of the charges against him. He said Reichman then told him that he had to "cop something and plead guilty to something or go to trial" which would cost another $20,000. Matheson said he could not afford that, having already paid $14,000 to Legal Advisory Service. He alleged neither Reichman nor Rosser raised the possibility of legal aid. He told the court: "I thought I had no option but to plead guilty." Matheson's new legal team, in court papers, alleges his guilty plea was based on gravely flawed advice from Rosser and Reichman, given despite Matheson having a defence to the charge. Matheson's lawyers argue he believed he was represented by a firm of solicitors – engaged by his father upon his arrest in 2014 – that was in fact a ruse of Rosser's. They allege Rosser lures clients to Legal Advisory Service by promoting it as a solicitor's firm – including by video testimonial – when it was really staffed by his employee Reichman, who is not a qualified lawyer. Matheson paid fees for Legal Advisory Service to a bank account held by a company of Rosser's. Legal Advisory Service was not a registered law firm with the Queensland Law Society. Its ABN and website were registered in the name of Robert Rosser, which Rosser said was in fact him. Rosser told the court he used the name "Robert Rosser" as it was "part of my name" and he recalled doing so on the advice of his accountant. Matheson's barrister Peter Davis accused Rosser of lying by "representing to the world" that his related Brisbane-based Court Advisory Service on its website claimed to be "staffed by experienced lawyers and barristers when it's just you". Rosser claimed the fact he would refer civil, family and some criminal matters to other lawyers meant it was true. Chief justice Cate Holmes, on the bench, told Rosser: "But it won't be Court Advisory Service, will it?" The court was shown a video on the service's website in which Rosser, describing himself as "barrister at law", referring to the firm in the third person and urging people to "talk to them before making any arrangements with any law firm". Davis said Rosser was "using the authority of your office as a barrister to entice people to use Legal Advisory Service... but you don't tell the viewers that what you're actually doing is recommending yourself". "I suggest that you are trying to pretend that both of [your] establishments are law firms, and you're trying to pretend you are separate from those law firms," he said. "Not at all," Rosser said. Rosser denied misleading the public, saying he was entitled to advertise his legal services, including on Gold Coast council buses. Rosser said he was not pretending to be a firm of solicitors but that "I can be a law firm". He claimed Reichman did not give legal advice but relayed information to clients on "how I run my business". This included when Reichman visited clients in police custody "not to give legal advice...[but] as a support person". The court heard Reichman's conviction for posing as a solicitor in breach of legal profession laws included him attending a police interview with a client on Rosser's instruction. Rosser maintained Reichman had been dispatched as a "support person ... he's not there to give legal advice". But when pressed by Davis, Rosser conceded Reichman had been convicted for giving legal advice. The hearing continues.

A few years ago I asked an acquaintance what Santa was bringing her kids for Christmas. "Oh, we've told our kids Santa isn't real," she said, in a tone of grave seriousness. "We told them it's a nice story, but it's not true. We don't lie to our children." I think I managed to stop my jaw from dropping open in horror-struck astonishment but the fire in my eyes would have told a different story. First of all, we lie to our children all the time. Or at least we do if we're good parents. If your child asks, "Why are you sad, Daddy?" are you really going to say it's because some bastard at work is making your life miserable and you fear you're going to lose your job? No, of course not. You tell your child you're just a bit tired, you give them a smile and you say, "Do you want to kick the ball around?" But new research has given encouragement to the Santa haters and their joyless, heartless delusions. It seems that believing in Santa could "undermine their trust in their parents and leave them open to abject disappointment when they eventually discover that magic is not real". What is wrong with these people? Why is scientific study being wasted on finding reasons for humourless people to justify their Santa denial? It seems the kind of modern parents who spend a fortune on drama classes to encourage their children's imagination, are also sometimes oblivious to the phenomenal imagination driver that is Santa Claus. Do they tell their kids bedtime stories, then add, just as the child is about to fall asleep, "They were just lies, darling, they're not true. The wicked witch is just an anti-woman stereotype, Snow White wasn't real, and if she was, she was very cruel to little people, and while big bad wolves do exist, they're not going to blow our house down. In fact, I'm sorry I told you any stories at all. Sleep tight, drama class tomorrow!" Thankfully, there are far more experts who understand the power of Santa than those who seem to think every lie is morally equivalent. "I don't think it's a bad thing for kids to believe in the myth of someone trying to make people happy if they're behaving," said Dr Matthew Lorber, a child psychiatrist at Lenox Hill hospital in New York. "Imagination is a normal part of development, and helps develop creative minds." Australian author Robert Macklin says when he discovered Santa was not real, he felt betrayed by the knowledge that the adults he trusted most had lied to him for years. But he also says his Santa discovery led to his success as a journalist and writer. "Along with a fierce sense of disillusion, there arrived unbidden a counterforce – an overwhelming, insatiable curiosity, a desperate desire to discover the truth behind every aspect of our world and its wonders." That sounds to me like a very good reason to be resolutely pro-Santa, but Macklin implores parents not to let their children believe in the man from the North Pole. Thankfully, there is a much older tradition of journalists realising the rapture of believing in Santa. In 1897, eight-year-old Virginia O'Hanlon wrote a letter to the editor of New York's Sun newspaper, asking "Please tell me the truth; is there a Santa Claus?" The Sun printed an editorial, written by Francis Church, which has since become legendary. "Yes, Virginia, there is a Santa Claus," Church wrote. "He exists as certainly as love and generosity and devotion exist, and you know that they abound and give to your life its highest beauty and joy." The editorial ended by saying: "A thousand years from now, Virginia, nay, ten times ten thousand years from now, Santa will continue to make glad the heart of childhood." I'm a middle-aged man and I still 100% believe in the power of Santa Claus. Those who don't should find something more important to worry about, rather than trying to spoil the fun for billions of children and adults.

French magazine Charlie Hebdo placed German chancellor Angela Merkel variously on a toilet seat and a car mechanic's hydraulic lift as it released its first German edition on Thursday. The cover asserts that Volkswagen, the carmaker hit by an emissions cheating scandal, "stands behind Merkel", and shows the chancellor lying atop a platform with a mechanic commenting that "with a new exhaust, she'll be good to go another four years". The launch publicity featured a poster showing Merkel sitting on a toilet and reading the weekly, with the slogan: "Charlie Hebdo – it's liberating." The magzine's first foreign-language edition is an innovation undertaken nearly two years after its staff were almost wiped out in a jihadist attack in Paris. The initial 16-page edition – with a print run of 200,000 – features a sober four-page graphic travel reportage by cartoonist and publisher Laurent Sourisseau, better known by his artist's name Riss, which portrays people he met and their reflections on their national identity, Germany's refugee influx and other social issues. German media mainly warmly greeted the launch of Charlie Hebdo, which will compete with homegrown monthlies Titanic and Eulenspiegel, the local counterparts to Britain's Private Eye and US site The Onion. The Frankfurter Rundschau daily judged that, although the proudly tactless Charlie Hebdo regularly takes a running leap across the boundaries of good taste, its appearance on the German media scene was to be welcomed. It contains humour "as subtle as a steamroller" and its "impudence, especially when dealing with the religions, is legendary", the newspaper said. "The magazine is pure impertinence. From December 1, German readers will be subjected to it. What can we say? Quite simply: Welcome, Charlie Hebdo." Riss, who was badly wounded in the January 2015 attack, believes there is a market. "Humour is everywhere, even in Germany," he told public broadcaster ARD. "It's an experiment for us to publish Charlie Hebdo in another language and try to find new fans for the magazine who can help defend it." Charlie Hebdo is now produced in a secret location, a legacy of the massacre at its former offices that claimed 12 lives, including some of France's best-known cartoonists. The German version will be edited from France by a 33-year-old from Berlin who on the advice of her colleagues uses a pseudonym, Minka Schneider. Schneider told Sueddeutsche Zeitung daily that the "Je suis Charlie" solidarity movement was especially strong in Germany, where the magazine sold 70,000 copies of its "survivors' edition" one week after the shootings. Despite its many loyal fans and supporters in France, Charlie Hebdo has never had a shortage of enemies. It became a target of Islamist extremists after publishing cartoons of the prophet Muhammad but has also delighted in outraging the Vatican and the French political establishment. It angered many with a cartoon of Syrian refugee boy Aylan Kurdi, whose body was photographed on a Turkish beach in 2015, by imagining he would have grown up to join the "arse-gropers" who committed mass sexual assaults in Cologne, Germany, on New Year's Eve last year.

Toronto FC reached their first ever MLS Cup after a thrilling 5-2 victory over Montreal Impact in the second leg of the Eastern Conference final. The first leg had finished 3-2 and on a rain-soaked Wednesday night in Toronto, fans were treated to the same score again after 90 minutes, sending the match to extra-time where a late burst saw the home team over the line, 7-5 on aggregate. Toronto are the first ever Canadian team to reach MLS Cup, where they face another team looking for their first title, the Seattle Sounders. The match got off to a fiery start, with players clashing after Jozy Altidore barged Hernan Bernardello when both men challenged for a header. Montreal were to gain revenge when they opened the scoring: the former Toronto striker Dominic Oduro finished calmly after Michael Bradley had been caught in possession. That left the hosts trailing by two goals on aggregate but they soon equalized in the 37th minute. The goal came after some more poor defending, with Armando Cooper stabbing home after Montreal failed to clear a corner. Altidore was in the thick of the action again just before half-time, nodding home a Sebastian Giovinco corner. The Impact were oddly ragged for a team that was unchanged for the 11th game in succession. Whatever their weaknesses in the first-half, Montreal started to play as a unit in the second period and Ignacio Piatti scored off a deflected shot. The goal was another flashpoint as it appeared Dominic Oduro was offside and interfering with play. No matter, Toronto made it 3-2 - and levelled the scored on aggregate – when Nick Hagglund headed home a wicked cross from Justin Morrow in the 68th minute. Toronto FC had the better of the chances as time ticked down but could not kill off Montreal in front of a home crowd of 36,000 fans. Much of that crowd held their breath when Toronto's best player, Giovinco, limped off in extra-time but they needn't have worried. His replacement, Benoit Cheyrou, had barely made his way on to the pitch before he scored what was to be the winner in the 98th minute. It was Altidore who was to have the final say, displaying great skill down the right before whipping in a ball for Tosaint Ricketts to finish. Toronto FC will host 10 December's final as they came into the playoffs with a higher seeding than the Sounders.

An Australian judge has declined a request from a Muslim woman to wear a niqab while giving evidence in a damages claim against police where she alleges that officers assaulted her during a raid on her home. On Tuesday in the New South Wales district court, Judge Audrey Balla ruled on a request from Moutia Elzahed to wear her niqab while giving evidence to the court, in what may by one of the first rulings of its kind in Australia. Balla offered a number of alternatives to Elzahed – including that the court be closed to the public or that she give evidence in a remote room – but she declined to accept the alternatives, because there would still male legal representatives in the room. The issue was first raised by Elzahed's counsel, Clive Evatt, during the hearing on Tuesday. The case concerns the conduct of NSW police during a raid on Elzahed's house in September 2014 as part of the joint counter-terrorism operation Appleby. Elzahed's husband Hamdi Alqudsi was convicted of aiding terrorism in September 2016 for helping to recruit Australians to fight in Syria. Evatt told the court: "I'm instructed that she's of the Muslim religion and it's against her religion to reveal her face to men, although not to women, and therefore, I'm instructed she will not remove her veil, if that's the correct expression, or whatever it is. "Just before your honour rules on that, I can't see much difference between that and giving evidence on telephone." He told the court that it was the "first time that I've experienced it" and that he was unclear on how other courts had examined similar matters. He acknowledged that "there are difficulties if the face is concealed, in my opinion". Counsel for the NSW police, Michael Spartalis, said it was their preference that she gave evidence without her face covered. "Facial expressions is a very important part of giving evidence and, as I understand, it in these courts, in New South Wales at least, my understanding or recollection was that if you are here, you must show your face," he said. In making a decision, Balla said: "It is my role to ensure that there is a trial which is fair to all parties. I must balance, on the one hand, the need to respect the first plaintiff's religious beliefs. In this case, those beliefs mean that she may choose not to give evidence, which could impact on the successful prosecution of her case. "On the other hand, I must take into account whether I would be impeded in my ability to fully assess the reliability and credibility of the evidence of the first plaintiff if I am not afforded the opportunity of being able to see her face when she gives evidence. "I am well aware that the demeanour of a witness and the viewing of their face is not the only way in which credibility is assessed. In some cases, the demeanour of a witness may be misleading. However, neither of those considerations can, in my view, mean that I should be completely deprived of having the assistance of seeing her face to assess her credibility." The ruling may complicate Elzahed's case against the police, in the absence of any evidence being led from her about the circumstances of the raid. But the decision to exclude her evidence could also later form a potential ground for judicial review by the NSW supreme court. The woman's son, Abdullah George, gave evidence on Tuesday, where he alleged his mother told him that she had been assaulted during the raids. He told the court: "When my mum walked over to me, she sat down and she explained to me that they punched her in the face, and then she explains that while she was trying to cover herself and to – while she was holding the blanket above her body because she was – like, she wasn't really clothed, the – once she refused to take the blanket off for the man that came in at the beginning of the raid, he punched her." He later continued: "My mum said that they wanted to see her naked, and that she was holding the blanket so that they wouldn't remove it and she also said that they broke the door, and that she asked why. She says, 'why did they break the door?'." The NSW police and the Australian federal police, which are both parties to the action, have denied wrongdoing in the case. The circumstances in which Muslim women who wear the niqab give evidence in court has been the subject of considerable debate in countries overseas. A lengthy legal dispute in Canada in 2012 emerged after a woman who alleged she was sexually assaulted declined to give evidence against the defendants unless she was able to wear the niqab for the duration of her evidence. Canada's supreme court eventually ruled that the trial judge had not appropriately taken into account the woman's religion. The chief justice of the court, Beverley McLachlin, wrote in her decision: "A secular response that requires witnesses to park their religion at the courtroom door is inconsistent with the jurisprudence and Canadian tradition, and limits freedom of religion where no limit can be justified." She continued: "On the other hand, a response that says a witness can always testify with her face covered may render a trial unfair and lead to wrongful conviction. What is required is an approach that balances the vital rights protecting freedom of religion and trial fairness when they conflict." But the reasoning of the court was split, which has made it difficult to outline clearly circumstances in which facial coverings can or cannot be worn.

A French tourist has died after being stabbed in the neck at a remote outback rest stop in Australia's Northern Territory. The 33-year-old man and his wife, who had only recently arrived in Australia, had stopped at Connor Well on the Stuart Highway, about 100km north of Alice Springs, on Wednesday afternoon when they were approached by a 35-year-old man. Police said the man then stabbed the French tourist in the neck in "an unprovoked attack". The suspect fled the scene but was arrested on Thursday morning after an overnight manhunt. Police have not yet given any details about his identity but he was expected to face court on Friday. Detective Superintendent Travis Wurst of Northern Terriotry police told a media conference in Darwin on Thursday that the victim died at the scene. HIs "traumatised" partner was being treated for shock at Alice Springs hospital. Detectives believe the rest stop was empty except for the victim, his wife and the suspect at the time of the attack. The victim's partner is believed to have flagged down another couple on the highway who then drove 30km to the nearest roadhouse to raise the alarm, contacting emergency services about 5.30pm on Wednesday. The attacker had already fled in a silver-grey Hyundai hatchback but was stopped by police at Ti Tree, about 90km to the north, where officers recognised the car's Victoria-registered number plate. He then fled into the bush, prompting police to establish roadblocks on the highway and launch an overnight land search. A helicopter was deployed at first light and the man was located and arrested about 8.30am on Thursday. "A crime scene will remain in place for the remainder of today," Wurst told media in Darwin on Thursday. "Police will continue to speak to a number of witnesses to establish the exact circumstances surrounding the death. The partner of the victim is currently at Alice Springs hospital where she is being treated for shock. "As one would expect she is particularly traumatised by this event ... This is an absolutely devastating occurrence for her and for the family of the deceased as well. Our hearts go out to her and her family, and as far as the Northern Territory police are concerned we'll investigate this matter thoroughly and efficiently and bring this offender to justice." The French consul had been informed, Wurst said. Connor Well is about 30km south of the remote town of Aileron on the Stuart Highway, which runs through the centre of Australia from Darwin to the coast of South Australia. Police are calling for anyone who may have seen the silver Hyundai hatchback on the highway, particularly between Ti Tree and Alice Springs, to contact them.

A group of Australian high school students have managed to recreate a life-saving drug that rose from US$13.50 to US$750 a tablet overnight after an unscrupulous price-hike by former hedge fund manager Martin Shkreli. The Sydney Grammar students reproduced the drug, Daraprim, used to treat a rare but deadly parasitic infection, in their high school laboratory with support from the University of Sydney and global members of the Open Source Malaria consortium. Dr Alice Williamson, a postdoctoral teaching fellow with the university's school of chemistry, said she could not stop dwelling on the story of Shkreli, who acquired Daraprim last year through his company, Turing Pharmaceuticals, and almost immediately and exorbitantly hiked the price. The drug is used to treat malaria and to prevent toxoplasmosis infection in people with HIV. The move made him a public villain, a label he embraced as he also became known as "Pharma Bro". "I couldn't get this story out of my head, it just seemed so unfair especially since the drug is so cheap to make and had been sold so cheaply for so long," Williamson said. "I said 'Why don't we get students to make Daraprim in the lab', because to me the route looked pretty simple. I thought if we could show that students could make it in the lab with no real training, we could really show how ridiculous this price hike was and that there was no way it could be justified." Sydney Grammar could afford to pay for the equipment and chemicals, and had the facilities. The group of year 11 students were talented and confident, Williamson said, and decided to give it a go. The students made their work open to the internet, and scientists anywhere in the world were able to view all the data generated and mentor the students to accelerate their progress. Williamson and the university's associate professor Matthew Todd also mentored the students. Todd told Guardian Australia that what the students had achieved was "a little Breaking Bad", a television show about a struggling high school chemistry teacher who works with one of his former students to produce and sell crystal meth. "With the right guidance they could do everything safely," Todd said. "There were clues in literature already from patents around these molecules, but they had to change things as some reagents were nasty and dangerous so some invention was needed on their part. The open source platform meant as they posted data in real time, Alice, myself and others could guide them." He said the open nature of the project demystified science and revealed the number of roadblocks the students had faced in coming up with the final product, which involved three complicated chemical steps. "With science results you can be presented with a polished finished product that hides the false steps along the way," he said. "The students' real-time diary highlights their whole process, and is a very transparent way of doing things." The students realised they had succeeded two weeks ago when their teacher, Dr Malcolm Binns, brought Todd and Williamson a sample. "Alice did the analysis and looked at the screen and said 'Oh my god, they've done it'," he said. "And not only have they done it, it's super pure. It's A-grade. I couldn't believe my eyes. That was the moment. I realised they had nailed it. The students were over the moon." He said unfortunately the students would not be able to sell their drug to the US market. While the drug can be bought in Australia for about A$13 for a packet of 50, there are a number of complicated legal roadblocks in the way of producing and selling it in the US. "Turing has the exclusive rights to sell it, even though the drug is no longer under patent," Todd said. "The ridiculousness of this legal loophole means if we wanted to launch it as drug in the US we'd have to go through a whole new clinical trial because we would have to compare the Sydney Grammar stuff with the officially sanctioned stuff, and Turing would have to give us the drug to allow those comparisons to be made. "It's not just a matter of going to the store and buying the Turing drug either, they would have to hand it over directly." In response to a question on Twitter about whether the schoolboys were competition, Shkreli simply tweeted: "No". Watch Dr Alice Williamson discuss open drug discovery here

Malcolm Turnbull has acknowledged the looming review of the Direct Action climate policy in 2017 "may result in some changes" to the federal renewable energy target. The prime minister's hedged observation on Thursday morning comes ahead of the release of the preliminary findings of the Finkel energy security review determining whether the national electricity market can deliver reliable base load power while meeting Australia's climate change commitments. Some participants in the Finkel process think it is possible the review could float the desirability of an emission intensity trading scheme for the electricity sector – a form of carbon trading currently being championed by the South Australian government through the energy ministers council. Even if Finkel doesn't go down that path, pressure from business, energy and climate groups will build on the Turnbull government once the new political year opens, because there is widespread criticism that the Coalition's climate policy won't deliver the emissions reductions required to ensure Australia meets its international commitments. Business and climate groups have been dismayed by a rerun of Australia's toxic climate politics triggered when the prime minister linked a statewide blackout in South Australia in September explicitly to the state's use of renewable energy – which led to brawling between Canberra and the states on renewable energy targets. In a joint statement issued in October, major business organisations and energy users warned that, in the absence of bipartisanship, "uncertainty will cause essential energy investments to be deferred or distorted, to the ultimate cost of us all". Many groups will use the review of Direct Action to call for greater policy certainty, either through a carbon trading mechanism, or longer legislative timelines on the federal renewable energy target – eventualities that would trigger renewed internal brawling within the Coalition about climate policy. The government's recent decision to ratify the Paris climate agreement triggered a small internal breakout, with the chairman of the government's backbench committee on the environment and energy, the Liberal MP Craig Kelly, declaring on Facebook after Donald Trump won the presidential election in the United States the Paris agreement was now "cactus". George Christensen, the outspoken Liberal National party backbencher from Queensland, later backed Kelly's view. Anticipating internal turbulence, both Turnbull and the minister for environment and energy, Josh Frydenberg, have been careful to play down the potential for the Direct Action review to lead to major changes in the existing policy. In his remarks on Thursday morning, Turnbull acknowledged the review could lead to change, but he also attempted to fence-sit on the issue. "The climate policy will be reviewed and the renewable energy target is agreed, it is legislated, we have got no plans to change it," the prime minister said. "But the 2017 review, which has been part of our policy for a very long time, is to examine the mechanisms that we have to meet the 2030 Paris targets, which, as you know, is a reduction of our emissions by 26 to 28%." But while playing down the prospect of big changes in the Direct Action review, Frydenberg has been making the case since he assumed the energy and environment portfolio for gas as the transitional fuel to help Australia continue to deliver reliable base load power while lowering carbon emissions. An emissions intensity scheme for the electricity sector is a favourable regulatory regime for gas, because gas would be considered preferable to coal in the short term to deliver base load power. Frydenberg used a speech this week to argue gas provided "a pathway to a lower emissions generation future with up to 50% fewer emissions than coal, depending on the generation technology". "Recent events in South Australia in particular have brought home the role of gas in providing capacity to balance the intermittent nature of solar and wind. Gas can be dispatched in a short timeframe, something renewables cannot do in an affordable way at this stage." Frydenberg has consistently criticised current moratoria on coal seam gas exploration. "We need to improve market efficiency and competitiveness while attracting further investment in exploration and development," the minister said this week. "We need to make it easier for new producers to enter the market and for buyers to more efficiently move that gas around our pipeline networks."

A New Zealand-wide secret Santa in which complete strangers send each other gifts in the post has had a bumper season, processing more than 2,000 presents in its Auckland hub. The game was launched in 2010 by Hamilton man Sam Elton-Walters, who matched strangers on Twitter to send secret Santa gifts to each other in time for Christmas. Participants would drop hints of their interests and hobbies via tweets – or, more directly, write lists of gifts they would like to receive. When the endeavour became too big for Elton-Walters to manage, he handed the torch in 2013 to New Zealand Post, which assigned a team of 10 "elves" to orchestrate the game. "We've never declined a gift for being too big or too small," said NZ Post's social media specialist, Libby Greatnews. "It is great if the gifts are well-researched and show a lot of time and care has gone into their selection to make them personal." The twitter users involved in the #nzsecretsanta game are mostly in the 18-44 age bracket, and 60% are women, said Greatnews. Over the last four years, about 8% of senders involved in the game had been identified as "bad Santas", who sign up to receive a gift but don't send one out in return. NZ Post would not release figures on how many bad Santas had been uncovered during the game's history. It also does not check or veto gifts before they are sent out, though Greatnews said she was sure the "the majority" of gifts were in good taste. The most popular presents exchanged between Kiwi strangers include chocolate, coffee, novelty gift mugs and adult colouring books. Brand new laptops and cellphones had also been gifted, as well as "a 3D-printed silhouette of a player, face to face with Harry Styles from One Direction", said Goodnews. NZ Post currently has no plans to broaden the game beyond its Twitter platform. In the last decade the number of letters sent in New Zealand has almost halved in volume, and in the last financial year fell by 5.7% to 578 million. However in the same period parcel volumes rose by 6.4%.

Netflix Film: Barry (2016, US) directed by Vikram Gandhi – out 16 December Produced by Netflix, this is a pretty enjoyable but not-excellent telemovie: a Great Politician Origin Story about a few months of Barack Obama's life as a newcomer finding his way in New York in 1981. Although Barry recycles many familiar conventions of the biopic, it's fascinating for the nascent political fable it tells. Made before Trump's ascent, Barry shows how Obama's mythologisation is occurring before he has even left the Oval Office. The film's thesis is that Obama's in-between status as a man with a father from Kenya and a mother from Kansas is what makes him truly American; a man searching for a sense of belonging in the very idea of Americanism, and therefore an ideal candidate for uniting a torn nation. Nostalgia for the Obama years has already begun, and they're not even over. Film: A Girl Walks Home Alone at Night (2014, US) directed by Ana Lily Amirpour – out now Made in the US by a debut Iranian director, this is a Persian-language vampire film with a feminist edge. The premise is a great one: a centuries-old female vampire lurks in the shadows of the streets, avenging men's sexual and violent crimes against women. Until she falls in love. Shot in black and white and unabashedly indie rather than horror in its sensibility, the film uses the vampire genre to make a political statement about justice and the fear that many women feel just making their way through the world. The concept and characters don't fully blossom to their potential, but it's fun and unlike anything I've seen in a while, which I think comes down to the fact that it is one of the few cinema stories made by a young woman. Honourable mentions: Gilmore Girls: A Year in the Life (TV, out now), Matilda (film, 21 December), Black Hawk Down (film, 28 December). Stan Film: We are the Best (2013, Sweden) directed by Lukas Moodysson – out now So many coming-of-age stories follow a troupe of teen boy protagonists — the most recent being Netflix's Stranger Things. But what a revelation a gender switch makes. Writer-director Lukas Moodysson may be a mid-40s dude, but his empathetic portrait of the intense dynamics of teen girls' friendships is near telepathic. Two androgynous outcasts, Bobo, introverted and inscrutable, and Klara, reckless and prone to calling her disputants "fascists", convince a classically-trained Christian guitar player to join their punk band. Set in Sweden in the 1980s, it may sound like serious European arthouse, but it's really just a joy to take in, and treats the hearts and minds of youth with dignity and realness. In ethos, it all boils down to one of the trio's beloved song lyrics: "What will you become? Keep on, keep on, be yourself, be a rebel!" Film: What We Do in the Shadows (2014, New Zealand) directed by Jemaine Clement and Taika Waititi – out now A comedy that is actually funny? On its release, Guardian critic Peter Bradshaw even called it the best comedy of the year: A group of vampires share a house in Wellington, squabbling about the washing up and facing off with a rival gang of werewolves, à la Twilight. The rigour with which their hideous and crepuscular world is imagined, combined with the continuous flow of top-quality gags, makes this a treat from first to last. After a while, I was embarrassed at myself for giggling so much. Film: Melancholia (2011, Denmark, Sweden, France, Germany) directed by Lars von Trier – out 8 December Like all art, film functions at a gut level: you either get it or you don't. Upon its release, many just didn't get Danish master-pessimist Lars von Trier's masterpiece, in which a rogue planet called Melancholia threatens to wipe out Earth. It's a disaster film from an art-house perspective: more about how you respond to the manifestation of your worst fears than the CGI spectacle of aliens landing or comets colliding. It's also a drama about family, but I saw it as a hallucinatory film of great beauty and empathy about the anticipatory grief of climate change, political chaos and the expression of those things through a great cinematic portrait of the experience of depression. The film's two sisters, Claire (Charlotte Gainsbourg) and Justine (Kirsten Dunst), react to the prospect of their annihilation completely differently: as a clinical depressive, Justine has expected the worst her whole life and prepares to meet her fate with steady, calm acceptance. There are many images from this film that will stay with you, not the least of which are the final moments, when everything comes together and falls apart at once. Film: Sleeping with Other People (2015, US) directed by Leslye Headland – out 29 December Why are romantic comedies so rarely romantic or comedic? Written and directed by Leslye Headland, this film is the anomaly that proves how enjoyable the genre can be when it embraces the absurdity inherent in human behaviour – particularly around dating and sex. Like all great romcoms, it has a plot that can be whittled down to one line: two commitment-phobes who are emotionally avoidant but sexually compatible spark a friends-with-benefits situation that allows them to grow a friendship, expand as individuals and sow the seeds for something more. With witty dialogue and a sex-positive attitude, Sleeping With Other People is unusually smart, and surprising for the believable emotional arcs. Honourable mentions: Peep Show seasons 1-9 (TV, out now), Taxi Tehran (film, 2 December), Haemoo (film, 19 December) Dendy Direct Film: Sing Street (2016, Ireland), directed by John Carney – out now I have a theory that you can sense when filmmakers still remember what it felt like to be a teenager. Like We are the Best!, Sing Street is made by that kind of filmmaker. It's an Irish comedic drama about an ingenious dork who invents a "futurist" band as an excuse to hang out with a cool older girl across the road. The band turns out to be awesome, and the film locates that teen outsider vibe so accurately, it made me recall my own bleak experience of unacceptable haircuts and daily head-to-toe Kmart outfits. Despite its themes of the tyranny of high school and the grimness of working-class life in 1980s Dublin, Sing Street is tuned into that youthful vivacity. It's the type of film that blends an indie ethos and a big commercial audience sensibility, with the band's video clips thrown together with a Michel Gondry-like DIY joyousness. It's funny, clever, sweet, sometimes bittersweet stuff, approaching the hopes and longing of youth from the prism of maturity. Film: Chasing Asylum (2016, Australia) directed by Eva Orner – out 6 December A talking-heads documentary or a real-life horror movie? Oscar-winning Australian filmmaker Eva Orner begins Chasing Asylum on the high seas on the helm of rickety boat, being smashed by grey waves from every angle. The fear is palpable. From there, Orner gets a series of hidden cameras into the offshore detention centres usually protected from journalistic interrogation, and persuades former staffers to blow the whistle. Orner's innovation is that she uses the conventions of a horror film to show us what we thought we knew: we creep around hallways, see shadowy silhouettes of refugees cross doorways and eventually come upon messages of sorrow written in blood on the walls. Chasing Asylum doesn't offer a solution to this moral mess, but as evidence of a catastrophic human rights failure, it undoubtedly succeeds. Honourable mentions: Westworld season 1 (TV, 6 December), Sully (film, 14 December) ABC iView TV: The Checkout, series 3 (2016, Australia) – out now, updated weekly A show about consumer affairs sounds so deeply unsexy. But in the nimble hands of young Sydney comedians and the production minds of the Chaser guys, this clever format satirises the manipulations of this country's insane retail market. After all, retail in Australia is so diabolically monopolised by Coles and Woolworths that 23 cents out of every single dollar we spend ends up in their pockets. The Checkout is a skit comedy show (really, a public service) about how that kind of big-picture stuff affects our daily expenditure and decisions. It reveals the evils of pricing tricks, gendered marketing and false advertising to defamiliarise the absurd daily manipulations we've become resigned to as we blankly scan our groceries at DIY supermarket checkouts. In particular, Kirsten Drysdale and Zoe Norton Lodge's sections on the conflicting "advice" of women's magazines for "busy mums" is a dark pleasure. Extortionate Australia needs this show. TV: Please Like Me, series 4 (2016, Australia) by Josh Thomas – out now, updated weekly A big yes to the new series of this sitcom by Josh Thomas, a brilliant, neurotic comedian. To me, Please Like Me is the closest thing to reality on television: it's about the awkward life flailings of a generation of people like me who study things like media arts, are in constant quarter-life-crisis and will be life-long renters. The women on the show have hair under their arms! The gay guys are genuine characters who actually have sex with each other rather than being Camp Best Friend stereotypes! It's a bittersweet program – Woody Allen without the misanthropy – and as Thomas perfects the sitcom form, season four might just be enough to dignify this critically under-appreciated format in Australia. Honourable mentions: Rosehaven (TV, out now), Citizenfour (film, 4 December), Girl Asleep (film, 11 December). SBS On Demand TV: Midnight Sun (2016, France/Sweden) directed by Måns Mårlind and Björn Stein – first two episodes out now, the rest to follow throughout December New French-Swedish series Midnight Sun's opening scene is as striking as anything I've seen this year. A murderer has tied his victim to a helicopter blade; the speed of the rotations beheads him as the camera pulls up overhead the chopper. "Is the head missing?" asks a detective? "Not completely, we found the teeth." But Midnight Sun doesn't play violence for kicks; it's more of a psychological thriller. Gothic in tone, like Top of the Lake and The Kettering Incident, it uses an elaborate crime to explore a general sense of being lost in society – that strange, sad Western malaise of today (one character's interactions with a cab driver: "Where to?", "I don't know."). The unpeopled vistas of a mining town in the Swedish Arctic circle where the sun never sets is the perfect setting for such a crime theme ("The place is completely lost," says an investigator). Engaging storytelling from the new wave of Scandi-noir. Film: Goodnight and Good Luck (USA, 2005) directed by George Clooney – out now Now is a great time to revisit this portrait of valiant journalist Edward R Murrow during the McCarthyist 1950s, given the fog of fear and paranoia that has risen with the election of Donald Trump. A precursor to Steven Spielberg's Bridge of Spies and Clint Eastwood's Sully, this film is an instructive example of how US filmmakers tell their national myths, expressing what critic Luke Goodsell wonderfully calls "a certain brand of anxious American idealism." George Clooney, in the role of director, presents a riveting story of idealism and intellectual defiance, fierce with feeling and undercut with sentimental nationalist politics. Its optimism and disciplined storytelling means it holds up today, but viewing it now almost disproves its worldview of a historical arc that bends naturally toward justice: it retrospectively shows that McCarthyism isn't specifically about Joe McCarthy and the House of UnAmerican Activities, but a culture of unjustified accusations of treason, which has all but strengthened of late.

Most of Australia can expect a hotter-than-average December, with temperatures being forced up by both regional climate patterns and a global upwards trend. Temperatures were forecast to peak between 29C and 34C on Thursday, the first day of summer, in all states bar Victoria and Tasmania. Melbourne and Hobart could look forward to highs of 21C and 24C. Queensland would be the worst affected, with Friday expected to be Brisbane's hottest December day in 15 years peaking at 38C. Severe heatwave conditions forecast in southern and central parts of the state were forecast to continue into early next week. The Bureau of Meteorology (BoM) warned residents to be mindful of the impact of heat stress. There were also low- to severe-intensity heatwave conditions across northern Western Australia and the Top End of the Northern Territory. Almost all of Australia could expect drier-than-average conditions in December, with a 70 to 80% chance of below-average rainfall across most of the eastern part of the country. Above-average temperatures were forecast for days and nights across eastern and northern Australia for the entire summer through to February. The higher-than-usual pressures in the short term were the result of a climate driver known as the Southern Annular Mode, typically associated with reduced rainfall and higher temperatures. It was forcing wind systems further north than normal, holding monsoon weather at bay while moving air far across the continent. "It acts a bit like a wall that blocks the influence of the tropical wet season," said Andrew Watkins, the acting head of climate monitoring and prediction at BoM. The combination has resulted in severe fire danger for parts of NSW, Queensland, WA and ACT, and that risk would persist with the drier and hotter conditions over the summer. The second-wettest winter on record had encouraged grass growth, prompting concerns about fast-running grass fires, particularly on the urban fringe, said Watkins. The Bushfire and Natural Hazards Cooperative Research Centre said the fire risk was predominately in grassland areas of Victoria and NSW. Cyclone season is not set to begin in earnest until January, but Watkins said an average to above-average season – typically 11 cyclones – was forecast. Last season there were only three, a record low, because of an "exceptionally strong" El Niño. "We don't want people to be complacent because not much happened last year ... It was not typical by any means." BoM's seasonal outlook for December to February also warned that "Australian climate patterns were being influenced by the long-term increasing trend in global air and ocean temperatures". This year has already been declared the hottest ever recorded. Watkins said it was difficult to break down the impact of climate change on weather in Australia compared with local patterns and drivers. "The reality is climate change is playing a role in all of our weather and climate these days," he said.

Kanye West has checked out of hospital after being admitted with exhaustion after canceling his remaining tour dates last week. The rapper and clothes designer left the UCLA Medical Center on Wednesday, according to CNN, who reported he had been under observation since 22 November. West's week-long stay in the facility came after a week during which he told an audience in San Jose on 18 November that he would have voted for Donald Trump in the recent presidential election. On 21 November he played three songs at a concert in Sacramento before going off on a spoken-word tangent about Hillary Clinton and how he felt betrayed by Beyoncé and Jay Z, before he walked off stage prematurely. A day later it was confirmed that he would cancel the remainder of his Saint Pablo tour, and after police were called to reports of a disturbance at his home on 21 November, he was taken to the hospital. His mother-in-law, Kris Jenner, told US TV show Extra at the time: "He's exhausted, he's just really tired. He's had a grueling tour and it's been a grind so he just needs some rest."

Twenty days ago, on the eve of a world championship match that would prove more gruelling and arduous than many observers had expected, Magnus Carlsen described his forthcoming title defence against Russia's Sergey Karjakin in pugilistic terms. "For me, it's a matter of when I get the chance, I'll try to punch him until he finally knocks over," Carlsen said. For nearly three weeks, Carlsen tried and tried, but made little progress against the painstakingly resolute defensive play of his Russian rival, who time and again was able to salvage results from seemingly impossible positions. But then on Wednesday, the 26-year-old Russian finally toppled to the canvas. The world's top-ranked player saw off his dogged challenger to retain his world title after winning Wednesday's four-game rapid playoff with victories in the third and fourth games following draws in the first two. There had been nothing to separate champion and challenger after 12 classical games in the purpose-built soundproof studio at the Fulton market building in lower Manhattan. The first seven ended in draws – with Karjakin coming back from the brink in the third and fourth – before the challenger drew first blood in the eighth. That left Carlsen more vulnerable than he had ever appeared during his three-year championship reign, with any false move all but precluding his hopes to retain. But Carlsen, also 26, levelled the match with a stirring victory in game 10 on Thanksgiving Day, before a pair of draws set the stage for Wednesday's four-game rapid match, in which each player had 25 minutes to complete his moves. The players fought to a forgettable draw in Wednesday's opener before Karjakin managed one last daring escape in the second game, clawing back to salvage a draw despite a wildly inferior position and a perilous time disadvantage. Carlsen had missed a move that surely would have led to victory, a blunder that enabled Karjakin to escape with the tie-breaker series still level. "I had all sorts of negative thoughts in my head," said Carlsen, who will bring home 55% of the roughly $1.1m prize fund – and not the originally contracted 60% winner's share – because the match went to a tie-breaker. "It was very difficult to settle down." But Carlsen, who is also the world's top-ranked rapid player, recovered admirably playing as black in the third game. He build up positional and time advantages to pressure Karjakin, who resigned after an inexplicable blunder. That left Karjakin in need of no less than win with the black pieces to keep his flickering title hopes alive. He opted for the Sicilian defence, to cheers from more than 600 spectators in the gallery, but couldn't overcome Carlsen's tactical aptitude and unwavering positional advantage. A queen sacrifice by the Norwegian caught the challenger's king in a mating net, allowing the champion to finish off the championship defence in style. It marked the first time New York had played host to a world title match since 1995, when Garry Kasparov retained his title against Viswanathan Anand on the 107th-floor observatory deck in the south tower of the World Trade Center. A generation later, it offered a venue for a player regarded by some as the best ever to grind out a victory when he wasn't as his best – the litmus test of any great champion. "I'm very happy that at the end of the match I managed to find joy in playing," Carlsen said. "Today, it was fun to play."

The supplier of the new plastic £5 notes has been forced into a rethink after vegan and vegetarian campaigners complained that animal fat was used during the note's production process. After coming in for criticism earlier this week over the use of the derivative, known as tallow, in the polymer note, the Bank of England said on Wednesday that it was "aware of some people's concerns" and that it would treat them with the "utmost respect". The Bank said it was in talks with the supplier, Innovia, which was looking at "potential solutions". In a statement released on Wednesday, it said: "This issue has only just come to light, and the Bank did not know about it when the contract was signed. "Information recently provided by our supplier, Innovia, and its supply chain shows that an extremely small amount of tallow is used in an early stage of the production process of polymer pellets, which are then used to create the base substrate for the £5 note. "Innovia is now working intensively with its supply chain and will keep the Bank informed on progress towards potential solutions." The note, the first from the Bank of England to be printed on polymer – though not the UK's first – was introduced in September and is seen by many as heralding the beginning of the end for paper money. There was fury among vegetarians and vegans following confirmation by the Bank that the notes contained tallow. Doug Maw, who started a petition against its use, said he was "disgusted" a more suitable alternative had not been sourced. The 47-year-old hotel worker from Keswick in Cumbria, said: "There is no excuse for it. There has got to be other ways of making money without using animal products." More than 110,000 people have since signed the petition.

That's all for now. Thanks for following along with us and do check back later for a full match report. "The classical part [of the match], I'm quite satisfied," says Karjakin. "But somehow after we played 12 classical games, I was completely not ready to play rapid games. In the three games out of four I was lost. Of course Magnus took advantage of my mistakes and he deserved to win. My congratulations to him." "I pretty much knew this was going to happen when we made the draw in the 11th game," Carlsen says. "But I felt good coming into today having had a few days of rest and days to prepare. The second game was a bit frustrating, but I'm very happy to have gotten there in the end." Carlsen has emerged for the post-match press conference. Norwegian media are serenading him to the tune of the Happy Birthday song. Norway's Magnus Carlsen has successfully defended the world chess championship after winning today's rapid-game playoff with a victories in the third and fourth games after draws in the first two. The world's top-ranked player, who turns 26 today, has finally seen off the dogged efforts of Russian challenger Sergey Karjakin. It's over! Carlsen wins to finish off this world championship match in style! Karjakin is down to his final seconds. The engines now favor Carlsen by 80-20. He's running out of time and options. Karjakin is in need of a miracle. Carlsen has the superior position while the challenger has less than 30 seconds on the clock. Here's a fascinating theory put forth by grandmaster Peter Svidler. Might Karjakin be baiting Carlsen to play for a win in an effort to give him more chances? If so, it doesn't appear to be yielding dividends. The engines still favor white by a 63-37 margin and Carlsen (10min 43sec) has more than triple the time as Karjakin (3min). The challenger spent more than six minutes on that last move (27... Qc7). Judit Polgár questions whether Karjakin is doing enough to create winning chances. The Hungarian grandmaster describes his position as "terribly passive". The challenger is now under 10mins while Carlsen has more than 14min of time. Carlsen is on the verge of retaining the title. He's looking awfully comfortable here with a superior position and a 3min time advantage. Early advantages for Carlsen in position and time. Sound familiar? The computer gives him a 58-42 advantage, while Karjakin is already down to 17min (compared to 23 for the champion). The fourth game of the tiebreak has just started with Carlsen playing as white, needing only a draw to retain the title. Finally a Sicilian opening, hardly a surprise given that Karjakin needs a win. Carlsen's manager was in high spirits during the 10min break: "It's only one more game but I'm starting to celebrate now." And time runs out on Karjakin! Carlsen strikes a decisive blow and leads 2-1 entering the fourth and final rapid tie-breaker. Karjakin must now win with the black pieces in order to keep his championship hopes alive. Karjakin is down to 20 seconds and counting, having considered his move for more than one minute. Carlsen has more than seven minutes. Can the Norwegian convert this position? Another blunder by Carlsen, perhaps? He's gone for 29... Bf6 instead of 29... gf6. Russian grandmaster Peter Svidler calls it "a bit of a mystifying decision". After 28 moves, the engines have it dead even at 50-50. But Carlsen has more than 10min of time with Karjakin already under 3min. With Karjakin under pressure here in Game 3, the moment feels decisive for Carlsen. Should he convert these advantages for a win, he will play with white for the last of the four rapid tie-breakers only needing a draw to retain the championship. Another tight spot for Karjakin, who is down to 6min compared to 16min for Carlsen after 22... axb4. The computer gives the champion a slight 55-45 advantage. Once again Karjakin finds himself at disadvantages in time and position. Now Carlsen is organizing an attack on the king side with 19... Qg6. An unpleasant position for the challenger. Carlsen is very active in the opening of Game 3, looking to create winning chances. After 18 moves, he's slightly favored by the computer and has more than 21min of time compared to less than 15min for Karjakin. Another Ruy Lopez opening, the 10th in the 15 games of this world championship match. According to NRK, Carlsen was disappointed but not angry after failing to convert his massive Game 2 advantage into a victory. The third of four rapid tie-breaker games is underway. How will Carlsen, now playing as black, respond from such an extraordinary result? Roars in the spectator gallery as Karjakin has managed to scratch back to force a draw. He's found the drawing move with four seconds left. "Unbelievable defensive skills by Karjakin!" Judit Polgár says. What a devastating blow for Carlsen, who seemingly had the game (and perhaps the match) in the bag. And Carlsen blunders with 62. Bg4! The sure winning move was Kf7. Time is basically even. Carlsen's advantage is now down 63-37 according to the computer. The computer has just announced that white mates in 31 moves. Of course, the only two people in the building who don't benefit from that knowledge are behind the pieces. Karjakin is still fighting in Game 2. He's benefitted from the 10sec increments given for every move and is up to 59sec while Carlsen is now under four minutes through 40 moves. The engines still give Carlsen a 75-25 advantage but the challenger has managed to close the time deficit. Things are looking dire for Karjakin. Carlsen has a massive advantage in both position and time, with more than nine minutes on the clock compared to 40 seconds for the challenger. Anish Giri, the world No10, thinks it's done and dusted. The second game has now taken on a fulcrumatic feel. Karjakin is under two minutes with Carlsen at 12min 48sec. The engines give Magnus a 67-33 advantage. Judit Polgár says that if Karjakin can somehow escape from this situation, it would deliver a huge psychological blow against Carlsen. If he wins, these may very well be the decisive moments of the world championship match. Things are getting very tense here at the Seaport. Karjakin is under four minutes while Carlsen, who is really turning the screw and making severe demands of the Russian's defensive faculties, is on 13 minutes. Carlsen has more than twice as much time (16min) as Karjakin (7min). The computer, which doesn't take time into account, also favors the reigning champion by a 57-43 margin. Derrick from Long Beach asks via email whether Carlsen, who turns 26 today, would be the youngest ever former champion if he loses. He would not. Mikhail Tal won the title at 23 in 1960, then lost it in a return match the next year. More solid defending from Karjakin, which has been a running theme over the fortnight. But the computer has started to favor Carlsen by a slight margin after a 50-50 opening through 15 moves. Once again Carlsen is opening a time advantage. He's on 23min compared to 20min for Karjakin. An Italian opening for the second game with both players on book for the opening eight moves. Both players have taken off their jackets and Karjakin is sipping a coffee made by his team during the break. The second rapid tie-breaker is underway. Carlsen is playing as white, Karjakin as black. The players are back at the board. The second game will begin shortly. The first rapid tie-breaker game ends in a draw after 37 moves. A solid result for Carlsen as black. "Both players felt this was a warming-up game for today," grandmaster Judit Polgár says. The players will now take a 10-minute break where they are allowed to prepare. Karjakin is now under the four-minute mark while Carlsen is still over 10min. Still looking drawish. The computer says it's a 50-50 match, though it doesn't take time into consideration. Among today's attendees: Silicon Valley billionaire and Trump transition team member Peter Thiel (who made the ceremonial first move) and Dmitry Peskov, press secretary to Russian president Vladimir Putin. The position has simplified after 31. Kh2 and it appears a draw is forthcoming. The computer has it dead even. An inaccurate move by Carlsen (20. d4) briefly gives Karjakin the advantage on the computer, but Magnus quickly wrests it back. He's ahead more than 10 minutes on the clock and the pressure is building on Karjakin. An eagle-eyed viewer notes that Carlsen is wearing socks with the NBA for today's decider. The Norwegian is an avowed Boston Celtics fan. He's taking more time with his moves now, but still has a significant advantage on the clock with 17mins compared to Karjakin's 11min. The computer analysis after 16... h6 gives a slight advantage to Carlsen. He's also ahead on time. Early days, however. The entire world championship match has been broadcast in prime time by Norwegian state broadcaster NRK. Carlsen is playing fast in the early stages and briefly had even more time than he started with. Karjakin is playing with white, Carlsen with black in the first rapid tie-breaker. They're underway here in New York. The players have taken the board. The photographers are snapping their final shots before vacating the sound-proof studio in the corner of the third floor at the Fulton Market Building where they've spent so many hours over the past fortnight. Only Carlsen and Karjakin will be in the room with a pair of silent arbiters when the first rapid tie-breaker game starts in just a few minutes. For many years if a world chess championship match was tied after the designated number of games, the holder retained the title. Only in the past decade did Fide determine that a champion must be decided. The tie-breaker was first used in the 2006 showdown between Bulgaria's Veselin Topalov and Russia's Vladimir Kramnik, which saw Kramnik prevail after four rapid games. It happened again in 2012 when Vishy Anand of India retained his title against Boris Gelfand of Israel. Carlsen, whom many have called the best player ever, was the favorite when the match began and remains the favorite today. He's the top-ranked rapid player in the world. However, shorter games by nature engender more volatile results. Surely there would be an uproar if the title were to change hands under today's circumstances. But what is chess without a spot of controversy? Hello and welcome to the Fulton Market Building at the South Street Seaport for the final day of the world chess championship. Twelve classical games were not enough to settle the match between the champion Magnus Carlsen and the challenger Sergey Karjakin. Each player managed only one win over two weeks – Karjakin drawing first blood in Game 8 and Carlsen striking back in Game 10 on Thanksgiving Day – with the other 10 games ending in draws. With the match level at 6-all, a series of tiebreakers will decide the world champion today, starting with a four-game rapid match in which each player has 25 minutes to complete his moves. If they're still tied after that, up to five two-game blitz matches will be played in which each player has five minutes to complete his moves. If each of these ends in a draw, the world title will be settled with an Armageddon match in which a victor is guaranteed, as black wins on a draw with white getting more time as compensation. No possibility for controversy there. You can check out the complete rules below. Anyway, it's pouring here in lower Manhattan and they've just started allowing spectators into the gallery. The first match will begin in roughly 35 minutes. 3.7.1.a If the scores are level after the regular twelve (12) games, after a new drawing of colors, four (4) tie-break games shall be played. The games shall be played using the electronic clock starting with 25 minutes for each player with an increment of 10 seconds after each move. 3.7.2 If the scores are level after the games in Article 3.7.1a, then, after a new drawing of colors, a match of 2 games shall be played with a time control of 5 minutes** plus 3 seconds increment after each move. In case of a level score, another 2-game match will be played to determine a winner. If still there is no winner after 5 such matches (total 10 games), one sudden-death game will be played as described below in Article 3.7.3. 3.7.3 If the score is still level after five matches as described in Article 3.7.2, the players shall play a one sudden death game. The player who wins the drawing of lots may choose the color. The player with the white pieces shall receive 5 minutes, the player with the black pieces shall receive 4 minutes whereupon, after the 60th move, both players shall receive an increment of 3 seconds starting from move 61. In case of a draw the player with the black pieces is declared the winner. Bryan will be here shortly. In the meantime here's the background on the build-up to today's finale. Their last match on Monday ended with a draw after just 35 minutes and 30 moves, an outcome that disappointed fans and chess experts alike. The grandmaster Susan Polgar observed that it was "as exciting as watching clothes dry", while the British grandmaster Nigel Short tweeted: "If the 12th game ... were a restaurant dish, I would send it back to the chef." "We're not at the penalty stage yet. We're at extra time," Carlsen said after Monday's match, making a football analogy. "I understand if sometimes both teams are not trying to score in the last minute of regulation that can be frustrating but also having extra time is exciting." After launching an aggressive attack in game eight, only to eventually lose, Carlsen stormed out of an obligatory press conference. Latterly, he has appeared more relaxed. Wednesday's tie-breaker starts with four rapid games, with an initial time limit of 25 minutes per player. If the deadlock continues there will be an "armageddon game", in which white has five minutes and black four. Karjakin – who starts with black, if it gets that far – will only have to draw to win the title.

It's been done before, but rarely in such spectacular and dramatic fashion. Goalkeepers getting their name on the scoresheet is nothing new, but not often do they perfectly execute audacious 96th-minute overhead kicks – or celebrate quite like Oscarine Masuluke. With his team trailing 1-0 and the South African top-flight match against Orlando Pirates deep into stoppage time, the Baroka FC custodian left his own box and raced forward in one final attempt to salvage something from the game. As the corner came over, his opposite number punched clear; Masuluke was first to the loose ball and with his back to goal launched himself into the air to score the most spectacular of goals. Delighted to have earned his side a draw, the ensuing celebration – as he led his team-mates in a dance towards the corner flag – nearly matched the goal for flare. Justice Chabalala had put Orlando ahead just after the half-time break but Masuluke's outrageous injury-time intervention ensured the home side emerged with a point. Baroka sit 10th in the 16-team South African Premier Division. Orlando Pirates are sixth after 11 rounds of the competition. It is not the first time a goalkeeper has scored with an overhead kick; most memorably, Alcudia's Bartolomé Barceló scored with a sensational effort in a Spanish lower league game in 2013. Manchester United's Peter Schmeichel, who scored 11 times during his career, also found the back of the net with an overhead kick in an FA Cup fourth-round replay against Wimbledon in 1997, only to see his effort chalked off for offside.

The final death toll of an earthquake in Poland that caused rockfalls deep underground at Europe's largest copper mine stood at eight, operator KGHM said on Wednesday. The quake hit the Rudna copper mine just after 9pm on Tuesday. A search followed through the night and Wednesday, with five bodies initially found, then another three. "Thus the outcome of this tragic tremor is eight casualties," state-run news agency PAP quoted the Rudna mine director Paweł Markowski as saying. "The rescue operation lasted for 24 hours. We have done everything to save the miners, unfortunately we lost," Markowski added, calling the tremor KGHM's biggest tragedy in the past 55 years. The epicentre of the tremor was 1,500 metres below the surface, with a magnitude of 3.4, PAP reported. Sections of tunnels hundreds of metres below the surface were blocked by rocks, hampering rescue efforts. Markowski said it was the first time in KGHM's history such a distant tremor had caused such extensive damage. State-run KGHM said the Rudna mine, in operation since 1974, had 11 shafts reaching a depth of 1,244 metres. "We are all shocked by the scale of this tragedy, which occurred in a place we had assessed as exposed to a moderate level of risk," said the KGHM chief executive officer, Radosław Domagalski-Łabędzki. Domagalski-Łabędzki said nine people working in the mine had suffered spinal and head injuries and five were in hospital. KGHM's spokeswoman said none were in a life-threatening condition. Officials at KGHM said some of the underground tunnels still blocked by debris were eight metres wide and four metres high. Poland's prime minister, Beata Szydło, cancelled the government's weekly cabinet meeting to visit the mine. A KGHM spokeswoman said: "After the rescuing operation is finished a special commission with the representatives of the state mining authority and KGHM experts will be convened. Only the part of the mine where the accident took place will be halted." KGHM is one of the biggest copper and silver producers in the world. Its copper output stood at almost 700,000 tonnes in 2015. With Reuters

Refugee activists have used parliament as a stage for dramatic protests to demand closure of offshore detention centres for the second day in a row. On Thursday, two climbers from the Whistleblowers, Activists and Citizens Alliance (Waca) abseiled down the edifice of Parliament House, while others stood in the waters of the fountain, dyed red to represent blood, carrying signs calling for the camps' closure. On the same day parliament approved changes to increase security, after Waca activists interrupted question time on Wednesday, with some gluing their hands to furniture to delay being dragged out of the lower house by security staff. Protesters in the fountain carried signs criticising the Liberals as "world leaders in cruelty" and the Labor party for providing "no opposition to cruelty". Two professional climbers hung from parliament with the main banner that read "Close the bloody camps now #justiceforrefugees", one of whom was involved in the group's protest at the Melbourne Arts Centre in February, where they scaled the landmark spire, as part of Let Them Stay protests. The parliament protest started at 8:30am and lasted about two hours. In a statement the Australian Federal Police said the two abseilers ended their protest after negotiations with police, which onlookers could hear included a threat to cut them down. It said the two abseilers will be summonsed to appear before court. Those in the pond came out of their own accord and were asked to move on. Speaking at the protest, Waca spokesman Phil Evans said the action "continues the call for urgent action on refugees", including closing offshore detention camps and bringing all refugees and asylum seekers in them to Australia. Evans confirmed no charges were laid over Wednesday's protest, nor were the group given paperwork banning them from the parliamentary precinct. Asked about their treatment by security on Wednesday, he said it was "fine ... and pales in comparison to the treatment of people on Manus Island and Nauru" who are being "tortured raped and abused". The Greens senator Lee Rhiannon attended the protest and gave a gift of chocolates to the activists. Asked about the appropriateness of the protest, she noted it was non-violent and argued "they should be here". "The problem lies with the human rights abuses, the mental health problems, the anguish. We're breaking our international obligations ... that's where the laws are being broken. "These people are courageous, they are showing what the parliament should do." Rhiannon said she only found out about the protest an hour ago, in effect denying any coordination between the Greens and protesters. Over the last three years offshore detention facilities on Manus Island and Nauru have been plagued by reports of shocking conditions, poor management and deteriorating mental health of asylum seekers. The Guardian's publication of the Nauru files showed the devastating trauma and abuse inflicted on children on Nauru. An asylum seeker was beaten to death by guards in a wave of unrest on Manus Island in February 2014, and on Nauru in May 2016 an asylum seeker self-immolated in front of staff from the UN high commissioner for refugees. On Thursday in a radio interview with 2GB, Malcolm Turnbull criticised refugee protesters who disrupted question time, accusing them of "denying democracy". "And it tells you a lot about the Greens party in particular that they praised them. Imagine that, they praise people who interfere with democracy who wanted to shut down the parliament." On Thursday parliament approved a security upgrade including fencing off the sloped lawns leading up to the roof of parliament. Turnbull said erecting a glass barrier in front of the public gallery would be considered but he was personally "very reluctant" to do so. He said it would interfere with the sense parliament was the people's house, and suggested instead that security should "do a better job of checking who is coming in and more quickly moving out if they do the wrong thing". Turnbull said he was surprised no charges had been laid over Wednesday's protest, but that was a matter for the police. "There's got to be a strong message sent that if you want to come into this place and disrupt the people's house in that way, then there has to be a very strong message sent that that is not acceptable."

José Mourinho would not divulge where he watched Manchester United's 4-1 win over West Ham in the EFL Cup quarter-finals, but said he is delighted that Henrikh Mkhitaryan finally seems to be coming good. Mourinho told Sky Sports it was "a secret" where he watched the match from after accepting a touchline ban earlier in the day for his dismissal during Sunday's Premier League clash between the same two sides. But he said United's performance had filled him with "real happiness" and was quick to praise Mkhitaryan's contribution to a vibrant attacking display. "I'm so happy with his performance today because it was against a Premier League team with Premier League qualities and characteristics," said the United manager. "Against Feyenoord we could think, 'Okay, it's a different profile of football but today against a typical Premier League team, 'Micky' could perform this way. "We are really happy. We know the reason we bought him and were waiting for his reputation. It looks like it's coming." Mkhitaryan, who was named man of the match despite two goals apiece from Anthony Martial and Zlatan Ibrahimovic, said: "I'm pleased that we won. It was a very important game because now we're in the semi-finals. We've done a good job and need to keep going. "Playing in a cup final at Wembley is a dream but it's not the main goal now. We have to focus on the next game and we'll see what happens." United will face Hull in the semi-finals with rivals Liverpool drawn against Southampton.

Edinson Cavani was booked after scoring a penalty for Paris Saint-Germain in their 2-0 defeat of Angers when he stripped off his shirt to reveal a T-shirt in support of Chapecoense, the Brazilian club which lost the majority of its squad in a plane crash in Colombia. The goal was Cavani's 100th in a PSG shirt and came after a foul on Hatem Ben Arfa in the 66th minute. After scoring, he took off his shirt to reveal a white T-shirt bearing a hand-drawn logo of the Brazilian club above the word "Fuerza" (strength). He pointed both hands to the sky. But the referee, Frank Schneider, followed the letter of the law and booked Cavani at the Parc des Princes. A minute's silence had been held for the victims of the plane crash before kick-off and several Brazilian flags were to be seen in the crowd. The Uruguayan has reached the century mark, the same number of goals scored by Dominique Rocheteau for the club, in 166 games but he remains well behind Zlatan Ibrahimovic's record of 156 goals. The Brazilian Thiago Silva opened the scoring for the champions in a victory that moved PSG above Monaco into second place. Nice went back to the top with a 1-0 win at Guingamp. Nice have 36 points from 15 games, with PSG on 35 and Monaco, who drew 1-1 at Dijon on Tuesday, on 33.

The first batch of 75-metre-long wind turbine blades will roll out of a new factory in Hull on Thursday, destined for huge windfarms off the UK's coast. The inauguration of the Siemens plant at the city's Alexandra Dock employs 700 people and was hailed by campaigners as an example of how curbing carbon emissions could create jobs. Greg Clark, the energy secretary, is due to attend the opening of the £310m facility, which he said was the sort of project he wanted as part of the UK's industrial strategy. The UK leads the world on offshore wind power, but other European countries such as Germany are catching up. "In the coming years the new offshore wind projects that this factory will supply could generate enough clean electricity to power over 3m homes and businesses – all with wind turbine blades produced by the dedicated and highly skilled Siemens workforce right here in Hull," said Clark. The facility's blades are much longer than those on previous generations of wind turbines, and will be deployed on bigger, more powerful windfarms further off the coast. The first batch will be delivered to a 580MW windfarm being built by Dong Energy 17 miles (27 km) off Blakeney Point, Norfolk, which is expected to be complete by 2018. The factory is expected to build hundreds of the blades each year. "This is a fine example of the new jobs and investment that people across the UK can expect to see if the government backs offshore wind in its industrial strategy and emissions reductions plans," said Dr Doug Parr, Greenpeace chief scientist. "But for this to take off, companies needs a strong signal from the government that Britain is open for business and is still an attractive investment environment for cutting-edge renewable technologies and infrastructure, such as offshore wind or solar and battery storage." The green energy trade body, RenewableUK, called the plant "a key part of our nation's modern industrial strategy". Renewable sources provide around a quarter of UK electricity generation, but since coming to power in 2015 the government has ended subsidies for onshore windfarms and solar panels. Ministers have continued to indicate their backing for offshore wind, but have delayed spelling out how much support it will get beyond 2020. More detail is expected in the 2017 budget.

Trainee doctors in the NHS are often so sleep-deprived that they are in danger of harming patients, the medical profession's regulator has said. Increasingly heavy workloads and widespread staff shortages mean the UK's 54,000 junior doctors are being left to look after wards of patients without proper experience, according to the General Medical Council's biggest annual survey of trainee medics' experiences One in four doctors below the level of consultant say their schedule leaves them sleep-deprived and 43% describe their workloads as heavy or very heavy. Those with the most intense schedules are much more likely to encounter patient safety being put at risk, the survey found. In one unnamed hospital, a junior doctor was the sole medic left in charge of 300 patients overnight – a case the GMC's chief executive, Charlie Massey, said was extremely concerning. The risk of the doctor being unable to deal with two medical emergencies happening simultaneously meant such lack of cover should never happen, he said. "Patients who are in hospital overnight are in a hospital for a good reason and if something should happen to one or more patients during that nightshift, and that trainee has been left alone, that creates real potential risk to patients," Massey said. He said he was "astonished" to have learned that a single doctor had been left unsupervised and having to handle the care of so many patients. The proportion of trainees describing themselves as sleep-deprived rose from 21% in 2012 to 24.4% this year. "This is an increasing and worrying trend and it's very concerning when doctors say that it's jeopardising their ability to make good judgments and to provide safe care," Massey told the Guardian in his first interview since taking up his role last month. "Sleep deprivation matters because [tired] doctors may not remember all of the things that they should remember – for example, all the things to do to safely intubate an individual – because they are so knackered or may not remember all the patient's history and may therefore make the wrong clinical judgment about them." Massey is so worried by the potential for patients being harmed by rising fatigue and workload pressure among hospital doctors that he has written to every NHS provider of care across the UK warning them to take steps to ensure the safety and quality of care are protected. "Those responsible and accountable for the delivery of medical education locally must take the appropriate steps to ensure the training of doctors remains protected, particularly as medical training is so often a bellwether for the quality and safety of patient care, and because patients are directly at risk if the support and supervision of doctors in training is inadequate," he wrote in the letter. A separate survey of junior doctors, undertaken by the Royal College of Physicians and published on Wednesday, found that 80% of trainee medics say their job sometimes or often causes them excessive stress. One in four of the 498 junior doctors surveyed by the RCP said their job seriously affected their mental health and 54% said it affected their physical health. Pressure on trainees had reached a "harmful and unsustainable level", the college said. Massey said the demands being placed on trainees were now so great that there was a risk of some being "used and exploited" by their hospitals because there were too few staff to cope with the work that needed to be done. "We have seen some signs that that is beginning to happen," he said. The GMC, which supervises all doctors' training, fears that some are not getting the training they need and the next generation of consultants may not be as highly skilled as they need to be. Massey also voiced unease that the quality of handovers from one set of doctors to another – which are integral to patients receiving good care – had emerged as a growing concern. Young doctors' clinical education is also being interrupted by them being called out of training sessions to attend to problems involving patients, the GMC found. Key medical specialties that have seen some of the sharpest rises in demand from patients – such as A&amp;E, acute internal and general medicine, respiratory medicine and gastroenterology – are those where trainee doctors' workloads have increased significantly in recent years, the GMC found. A total of 53,835 junior doctors – just under 99% of the 54,563 across the UK who were eligible to complete the GMC survey – took part. Dr Pete Campbell, of the British Medical Association's junior doctors committee, said: "Patients and the public may be shocked by these findings, but no junior doctor will be surprised. It is still far too common that junior doctors are left sleep-deprived after regularly working beyond their rostered hours, on rotas that are desperately short of doctors." NHS Employers said the new contract being imposed on junior doctors in England, which prompted the recent year-long industrial dispute between the BMA and the government, would remove or mitigate many of the concerns behind their rising dissatisfaction. "We want to support our junior doctors," a Department of Health spokesman said. "That's why the NHS has employed 11,900 more doctors since 2010. Yesterday, the health secretary announced plans to improve junior doctors' training, including more support from consultants, more notice of future placements including where couples are placed, reviewing the appraisals process and investing £10m to bring doctors back up to speed when they take time out to have a family or other caring responsibilities."

Andrew Lloyd Webber has said he fears for the survival of British theatre unless it reflects the diversity of the nation's population, referring to the industry as still 'hideously white'. The award-winning composer of hits including Evita, Cats and Jesus Christ Superstar sounds the warning in a diversity report he commissioned to address the lack of non-white performers and backstage staff. In its introduction, he writes: "I passionately believe that the stage needs to reflect the diversity of the UK population or it risks becoming sidelined." The report, published on Thursday, warns: "If the situation continues, there is real danger that, not only will black and Asian young people stay away from the theatre as a profession, they will stay away as punters. And without them in the audience, theatres will become unsustainable, as they are forced to compete for a dwindling ageing, white, middle-class audience." The report was commissioned earlier this year by the philanthropic Andrew Lloyd Webber Foundation to explore the absence of black, Asian and minority ethnic (BAME) people in live theatre. The composer's casting director, David Grindrod, has said "a vast majority" of those who audition for UK productions are "white middle class". Lord Lloyd-Webber said he was alarmed by the findings of the report, Centre Stage: The Pipeline of BAME Talent. He is calling for "arts sector bodies, drama schools, theatre producers, actors, creative teams and philanthropists to take responsibility and specific action" to ensure that BAME people are given the chance to take centre stage within the industry. The report's authors, Danuta Kean, an arts, media and publishing analyst, and Mel Larsen, an arts consultant, say "white middle classes still dominate audiences" and that "even in London, where the BAME population is now 44%, audiences outside specialist theatres and theatre groups remain overwhelmingly white". Lamenting a tendency for black and Asian actors to get "secondary roles as hoods, hoodlums and hookers", they call for action to ensure such talent is no longer marginalised. They say the odds are "stacked against minorities in a profession where the default lead is white unless specifically written for a black or Asian actor". Their research claims "representation of minority ethnic actors is as low as one student a year in some drama colleges", while there are "far fewer opportunities for career-changing lead roles" for them. The report covers theatre across the board. It says "musical theatre has challenged the monoculture", with successful productions such as Motown the Musical, "but the success of these shows has bred another problem. The failure of drama schools to take in enough BAME talent has led to a shortage of actors suitable for the roles and, as a result, touring productions have been cancelled". The findings tally with Lloyd Webber's own experience. In the introduction to the report, he recalls: "When I produced Bombay Dreams over a decade ago and was privileged to introduce the marvellous music of AR Rahman to a West End audience, one of our greatest difficulties was finding enough Asian actors." He says BAME diversity in the performing arts has been high on the agenda this year, notably with "the runaway success" of the US musical Hamilton – a Broadway hit that will transfer to the West End and which was created and performed by an almost entirely non-white company. He also notes Arts Council England's £4.6m funding to boost diversity. But, he says: "Very often the discussion is focused on increasing the representation of diverse ethnicities on stage." While saying this is crucially important, he adds: "I've been acutely aware that one of the biggest issues is the lack of trained diverse talent coming through. Casting directors and theatre producers alike often complain that they'd like to cast more BAME performers, but that they don't get enough turning up to audition." He pays tribute to some of the success stories coming out of his foundation's scholarship programme, including Emmanuel Kojo, an actor of Ghanaian heritage. Kojo spoke to the report's authors after receiving a best supporting performance nomination in the UK Theatre Awards for his part in Show Boat at Sheffield's Crucible theatre. He told them that equality and diversity on the UK stage will only exist when people stop referring to him as a "black actor": "I have always just thought of myself as an actor but, since starting in this profession, I have been made aware that I am a black actor. We won't be equal until there is no prefix when people talk about us." The report says the problem is even greater backstage, with only a handful of BAME senior executives, while makeup artists are not trained to deal with black skin. Among the recommendations are calls for producers, directors and others to "take a lead in encouraging a more culturally diverse workforce", with "colour blind" casting and more plays by BAME writers. It also urges drama schools to make 50% of their places accessible to students from low-income backgrounds and for funding bodies such as Arts Council England to offer resources and initiatives to ease the BAME path into the theatre. Kean said specific data on black and Asian actors appearing in the West End proved "impossible to get". Precise figures for the ethnic breakdown of audiences do not exist, she said, because "there's an assumption that black and Asian people don't go to the theatre". She added: "Companies like Curve [theatre] in Leicester show that that's completely not true ... There's a complete failure to acknowledge the mix of audiences." In the report, Curve's associate director, Suba Das, talks of "a ghettoised perception of what diversity looks like in this country ... because a lot of the gatekeepers think only of the lower economic groups". He adds: "I have lost count of BAME actors and directors who have told me that they have said to agents and directors they are great at Shakespeare, but instead they are told they need to 'develop a London accent' if they are to get work." An unnamed East Asian actor – who is Oxford educated – says that, while white actors are auditioned according to their suitability for a role, casting directors expect actors of colour to represent the perceived "oppression" of their race – whatever the actor's background. "I have been to auditions where I have felt that the director wanted to establish whether I had 'suffered enough' and to prove my class credentials," the actor said. Other productions that have bucked the trend include Dreamgirls, The Scottsboro Boys and Thriller Live. Kean said musical theatre in particular was challenging the monoculture. She applauded Opera North's touring production of Kiss Me Kate, which starred Kojo in a role normally given to "a default white actor". This article was amended on 8 December 2016. An earlier version included a quote from the report and said it was from an unnamed black actor who was public school and Cambridge educated. The actor who contributed to the report, Vera Chok, is East Asian. The report incorrectly described her as South Asian, male, and Cambridge and public school educated.

A national anti-hate crime campaign backed by the government is to be launched on Thursday in response to the rise in incidents after the EU referendum. Home Office figures showed the number of racially or religiously aggravated offences leapt 41% in July, compared with the same month last year, prompting fears that the Brexit vote had fuelled intolerance. As a result, more than 20 community organisations, representing different races, religions, and people with disabilities have joined forces to try to promote what its members say are true British values and give the lie to those who would target minorities. The campaign has cross-party support as well as backing from the prime minister. Theresa May said: "Hate crime has absolutely no place in Britain and I'm delighted to see people and groups from all communities coming together to support the #BetterThanThat campaign. "As I said on the steps of Downing Street, my mission is to make Britain a country that works for everyone and for that to happen hate crime of any kind, directed against any community, race or religion, will not be tolerated." There were 5,468 racially or religiously aggravated offences recorded by the police in July. Other minorities also reported a spike, with the number of homophobic attacks doubling in the three months after the Brexit vote, accordingto Galop, a LGBT anti-violence charity. High-profile incidents included the murder of Polish national Arkadiusz Jóźwik in August, which was being investigated as a possible hate crime, and a series of packages containing white powder and racist messages sent to the Muslim peer Lord Ahmed and other people. However, most offences were mainly harassment and threats of a racist nature Xenophobic graffiti appeared on the doors of the Polish Social and Cultural Association (POSK) in Hammersmith, west London, just three days after the vote. Its chairwoman, Joanna Mludzinska, saidthe #BetterThanThat campaign hoped to channel the outpouring of support PSOK received after the attack, which saw the centre inundated with flowers, cards and letters. "These people [carrying out the attacks] should be made to feel they are in the minority," she said. "They are wrong and most people don't think like they do and don't support them, which I firmly believe through the responses I had." #BetterThanThat was initiated by the Polish Cultural Institute, which drew in other groups including Kick it Out, the Board of Deputies of British Jews and Tell MAMA, which monitors attacks against Muslims. The campaign will be launched at parliament by Conservative MP Sir Eric Pickles, Labour MP Rosena Allin-Khan and Liberal Democrat MP Tom Brake, along with the communities minister Lord Bourne. Brake said the campaign was about promoting positive British values. "Being proud to be British is fine but traditional values are tolerance and freedom of speech," he said. "This is about drawing out the positives of being British." Although, it was not an issue that the campaign would seek to address, Brake said he believedsecuring the status of EU citizens in the UK would be a positive move in tackling hate crime, a position endorsed by Mludzinska. She said: "If the government came out with a very definitive statement to say these people are not going to be removed from the country, they contribute, they pay their taxes, there's no reason they should go 'home', maybe that would be a strong message to people, whether they like it or not."

Millions of people are tuning into the BBC's nature series Planet Earth II because they crave a respite from their concerns about the future of the planet, Sir David Attenborough has said. The documentary series, which is narrated by the veteran broadcaster, has attracted up to 10.6 million viewers on BBC1, rivalling the numbers tuning in to watch blockbuster hits Strictly Come Dancing and I'm a Celebrity ... Get Me Out of Here. In a piece for this week's Radio Times, Attenborough writes that the programme's viewers "are reconnecting with a planet whose beauty is blemished, whose health is failing, because they understand that our own wellbeing is inextricably linked to that of the planet's". The relationship, he says, is a form of "two-way therapy". The presenter compares the enormous audience figures to those of the previous BBC nature series Blue Planet, which premiered on 12 September 2001, the day after the September 11 terrorist attacks. Its audiences far exceeded expectations, Attenborough writes, because "as a nation we craved refuge from the horror and uncertainty". He believes Planet Earth II is "tapping into a similar sentiment". "Of course, there is no single appalling catalyst as there was in 2001, but our concerns for the world, the confusion we have about its direction of travel, are every bit as great." He notes that the original Planet Earth series, broadcast in 2006, is estimated to have been watched by half a billion people worldwide. "We are hopeful that this series will be seen by as many, if not more." Attenborough acknowledges that other factors have contributed to the series' popularity, including advances in filming technology that have allowed unprecedented access to wildlife. The broadcaster, 90, also credits the series score, written by the Oscar-winning movie composer Hans Zimmer, for attracting more viewers aged between 16 and 35 than The X Factor. "That pleases me enormously," writes Attenborough. Zimmer, who composed the soundtracks for Gladiator, The Lion King, the Dark Knight trilogy and many other films, has said of Planet Earth II: "What the series does so extraordinarily and importantly is to draw us humans into this world which we ... must comprehend. What [Attenborough] has been doing has now more relevance than ever before. The truly remarkable thing is that all fiction pales in comparison to the reality [he has] shown us."

MPs have questioned whether private companies should be barred from providing core welfare services after an aggressive attempt to reduce tax credit fraud by US firm Concentrix saw thousands of low-income families wrongly stripped of benefits. The cross-party House of Commons work and pensions committee castigated both Concentrix and HM Revenue and Customs for a series of disastrous errors that amounted to "a gross failure of customer service". The committee's report describes how HMRC and Concentrix adopted a "guilty until proven innocent" approach to claimants, targeting them on the flimsiest of pretexts and stopping tax credit payments on what MPs called a "cut first, think later" basis. Nine out of 10 appeals against decisions to remove tax credits were later upheld, but not before many claimants were left without benefits for months, in some cases forcing them to borrow from payday lenders and rely on food banks. "The human consequences of the Concentrix scandal are all too real. Vulnerable people have been put through traumatic experiences as a consequence of avoidable failures," the report said. The committee said that while it was right that HMRC sought to ensure that benefits were paid only to those who were entitled, officials had made it their "overriding priority" to maximise tax credit expenditure savings at the expense of ensuring the system was fair and appropriate. MPs were particularly appalled by the way in which Concentrix and HMRC described cuts to a single parent's tax credits as a "strike", commenting that "we struggle to marry that with a public service ethos". The committee concluded: "This was a sorry episode for the welfare state. It is imperative that it is not allowed to happen again." An HMRC spokesperson said it would pay compensation to claimants where appropriate. "We apologise to all those who were let down by our contractor. We took swift and decisive action to end the contract early and took back all outstanding cases which are all now resolved." MPs said that HMRC should not escape blame. It was still negotiating a new contract with Concentrix despite being aware for weeks of the contractor's failings. "They [HMRC] only pulled the plug under public, parliamentary and media pressure," the report said. The report described how Concentrix's handling of the contract was chaotic and lacking in compassion and common sense. Staff were often badly trained, rude and lacked basic knowledge, MPs heard. In one farcical case, a claimant was accused by Concentrix of living with the philanthropist Joseph Rowntree, whose largesse had funded the housing association property in which she lived. Rowntree died in 1925. The decision-making system was stacked against claimants, MPs said. People were sent letters telling them their tax credits would be stopped in 30 days unless they could prove they were entitled to them. Many never received the letters and only found out they had been targeted when they checked their bank accounts. The firm's call centre was "grossly understaffed", leading to its effective collapse in August under pressure of queries from claimants. But MPs criticised HMRC for failing to respond quickly to the crisis, pointing out that it had repeatedly praised its contractor even at the height of the call-centre crisis. The committee noted that in purely contractual terms HMRC were "satisfied their contractor was doing a good job". The committee said it had "grave concerns" about outsourcing benefit decisions to private firms, especially when they were financially incentivised to remove benefits. They called on ministers to carry out a root and branch review of tax credit compliance work. HMRC hired Concentrix in 2014 to check 1.5m tax credit claims to see if claimants had fraudulently misled officials about cohabiting partners, work status or childcare costs. The firm, which was given the power to cut or suspend tax credit payments, wrote to 324,000 people. The three-year contract, which was the first time the government had delegated benefit decisions to a private company, was expected to save taxpayers £1bn, for which Concentrix would be paid up to £75m. The contract stated that only the private sector could help government deliver reductions in tax credit fraud. However, by the time the contract was terminated by HMRC in November, total savings were just £193m, for which Concentrix had been paid £32.5m. The work has now been taken back in-house and over 250 Concentrix staff have transferred to HMRC and become civil servants. Committee chairman Frank Field MP said: "The committee was horrified to learn of the 'cut first, think later' approach that was deployed by Concentrix. Our horror was compounded by the company's – and HMRC's – apparent celebration of its 'strike rate' in cutting families' tax credits. "The damage caused to families' living standards by this 'strike rate' is still being felt by my constituents needing to rely on food banks while their claims are reinstated. "Although the committee welcomes HMRC's decision to bring in-house its tax credit compliance functions, we are clear that this will not automatically deliver a better service. Nor are those families driven into debt going to be rescued from the plight into which this sorry episode plunged them."

Only a small minority of people with depression across the world, just one in 27 in the poorest countries, receive even minimally adequate treatment for their condition, a major study has found. Researchers from King's College London, Harvard Medical School and the World Health Organisation (WHO) found that even in wealthy countries only one in five people with depression received adequate treatment. The results also suggest a lack of knowledge – and possible stigma – surrounding the subject, despite it being the leading cause of disability worldwide, affecting an estimated 350 million people. Almost half of people with depression did not think they had a problem that needed treatment. In low-income countries only a third believed they needed treatment, compared with almost two-thirds in the highest income countries and 52% in upper-middle income countries. Given that depression can be reliably diagnosed and treated in primary care settings using psychological therapy or medication, the authors say that more should be done to ensure that proven treatments are widely available. Prof Graham Thornicroft from the Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience at King's College London, who led the study, said: "We call on national and international organisations to make adequate resources available for scaling up the provision of mental health services so that no one with depression is left behind. Our results indicate that much treatment currently offered to people with depression falls far short of the criteria for evidence-based and effective treatment. "Providing treatment at the scale required to treat all people with depression is crucial, not only for decreasing disability and death by suicide, but also from a moral and human rights perspective, and to help people to be fully productive members of society." The study, published in the British Journal of Psychiatry on Thursday, analysed 4,331 people with depression in 21 countries who took part in WHO health surveys. The 10 low- or middle-income countries were Brazil, Bulgaria, China, Colombia, Iraq, Lebanon, Mexico, Nigeria, Peru and Romania. The 11 high-income countries were Argentina, Belgium, France, Germany, Israel, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, Portugal, Spain and the US. Minimally adequate treatment was defined as receiving either pharmacotherapy – at least one month of medication plus four or more visits to a doctor – or psychotherapy, at least eight visits with any professional including a religious or spiritual adviser, social worker or counsellor. Last year, mental health was for the first time explicity recognised within the concept of universal health coverage in the United Nations sustainable development goals. The results of the study highlight that there remains a large gap between provision of mental health and physical health services, despite greater awareness of the disparity and its consequences in recent years. A 2008 study found treatment rates for physical conditions – diabetes (77%), heart disease (51%) and asthma (44%) – in low- and middle-income countries to be much higher. The authors say low quality of care for mental health problems may contribute to low rates of people seeking help if their local services have a poor reputation. But in light of the significant proportion of people saying they did not have a problem that needed treatment, they also call for more support for people with depression and their family members to identify the condition and make them aware that it is treatable.

A book born from sudden inspiration on a journey, akin to the grand plan for a story about wizards that first seized JK Rowling on a train to London, has beaten the Harry Potter author to win the lucrative Waterstones book of the year. The Essex Serpent, Sarah Perry's acclaimed gothic tale of a mythological beast terrorising a Victorian community, beat Rowling's script for Harry Potter and the Cursed Child and was the "overwhelming choice" of the chain's booksellers. A novel of passion, ideas and friendship, Perry's novel saw off an eclectic shortlist that also included Christopher de Hamel's Meetings With Remarkable Manuscripts, Emma Jane Kirby's The Optician of Lampedusa and Beatrix Potter's newly discovered The Tale of Kitty-in-Boots, illustrated by Quentin Blake. Announcing the prize, Waterstones managing director James Daunt said: "The Essex Serpent blazed as the overwhelming choice by our booksellers to be their book of the year. A novel of rare intelligence and utterly compelling to read, it takes complete possession of the reader." Daunt headed a panel that chose the winner from a shortlist nominated by booksellers. Waterstones will be heavily promoting the winning title in the run-up to Christmas. Last year's winner, The Fox and the Star by Coralie Bickford-Smith saw an increase in sales of more than 5,000% across the chain to make it one of the bestselling books of 2015. Until now, prizes have eluded Perry's bestselling second novel, which is shortlisted with three others for the Costa novel award, to be be announced in January. It has been described as a masterclass of gothic prose and Perry has been hailed as the lost love child of Dickens and Bram Stoker. Perry has laughed off the description, although she acknowledged the influence of 19th-century gothic authors on her work. "I like the genre because it is a place where the most concealed parts of the human heart can find expression," she said. In The Essex Serpent, widow Cora Seaborne moves with her autistic son to Colchester, where she hears that a mythological creature – once said to roam the local estuary – has returned and is attacking locals. A scientific rationalist, Cora sets out to discover the truth and meets local vicar William Ransome, who is convinced the stories are the result of moral panic. What follows is a page-turning tour de force of ideas. Perry said that the plot for the novel "walked into her imagination" fully formed as she passed the village of Henham, the real-life model for Aldwinter and home of the legend at the heart of the book. "I was driving past Henham with my husband when he mentioned the legend," she told the Guardian. "By the time we reached home 45 minutes later I had the entire outline of the book in my head, including Cora Seaborne and her son." She likened writing the book, which comes in at more than 100,000 words, to a "possession". "I felt so full of joy writing it. It was as if I had read this book several times and loved it so much that the only way to tell people about it was to write it and let them read it for themselves." Perry's prose has been likened to the iambic pentameter of the King James Bible, which was one of the few books allowed into her childhood home by her parents, who were Strict Baptists. Reading the Bible aloud as a child, she said, has affected her prose style. "I find myself reciting as I write. The King James was written in iambic pentameter so it would be easy to remember. With both my books, I memorised the first paragraph before I wrote them." The novelist, who gave up her job as a legal journalist in order to concentrate on her novels, is now working on her third book, which she describes as "the most gothic I've gone". Set in contemporary Prague, it is about "bearing witness", she said.

Almost 3,500 individuals and companies in the Panama Papers are probable matches for suspected criminals including terrorists, cybercriminals and cigarette smugglers, according to a document seen by the Guardian. The analysis, which was carried out by Europol, the EU's law enforcement agency, sheds more light on the breadth of criminal behaviour facilitated by tax havens around the world. "The main point here is that we can link companies from the Panama Papers leaks not only with economic crimes, like money laundering or VAT carousels, but also with terrorism and Russian organised crime groups," Simon Riondet, head of financial intelligence at Europol, told a committee of MEPs. The Panama Papers, leaked files from the offshore services company Mossack Fonseca, revealed that hundreds of the world's wealthiest and most powerful individuals had used offshore companies to hide their riches. While the use of offshore structures is legal, critics have long alleged that they can also be used to facilitate improper or unlawful behaviour. The memo was prepared for a European parliamentary committee investigating how the offshore world can be used to facilitate tax abuse and international crime. According to the memo, Europol compared a publicly available version of the Panama Papers published by the International Consortium of Investigative Journalists with its own databases of individuals and companies suspected of criminal involvement and identified 3,469 probable matches . It matched 1,722 names in the Panama Papers with entities that had been reported by EU member states as having been involved in potential money-laundering transactions. The majority of matches originated from the UK, although the memo cautioned that this was probably due to the country's status as Europe's pre-eminent financial centre. Of the rest, among others, a further 516 of the matches were connected to eastern European organised criminal gangs, 388 were connected to VAT fraud operations, and 260 to cigarette smuggling operations. It said 116 of the names were connected to "Hydra" – a Europol codeword for Islamist terrorism, according to the document – while 99 related to "Cola", or drug crime. One of the "main schemes" identified by the Europol analysis of the Panama Papers involves the abuse of trusts – legal arrangements whereby the owner of an asset places it under the control of another individual or company – by criminals seeking to obscure their assets. The document identifies "the use of corporate service providers by criminals to acquire large numbers of shell companies (including finding third parties for positions within the company) located in offshore/tax havens (usually under the form of holding companies or trusts)" as one such scheme. That analysis stands in stark contrast with a 2013 letter by David Cameron to the then president of the European council, in which he argued for trusts to be excluded from new transparency measures that would affect offshore companies. "As we clamp down on the misuse of companies, we must take care not to displace illicit activity elsewhere," the then prime minister wrote, adding later in the letter: "It is clearly important we recognise the important differences between companies and trusts. This means that the solution for addressing the potential misuse of companies – such as a central public registries – may well not be appropriate generally." Separately to its analysis of the Panama Papers, the Europol briefing also suggests that Luxembourg, widely known as a major tax haven for multinational corporations, is also failing to tackle money-laundering offences. "Reporting figures across the EU do not always appear to be commensurate with the activities of the regulated sector in particular jurisdictions: notably Cyprus and Malta and Luxembourg receive very few reports given the significance of these jurisdictions in offshore financial service and the online gambling industry," the memo reads. "Furthermore, the vast majority of reports filed with Luxembourg stem from a single electronic bank/payment service provider, in spite of the fact that other sectors, such as private banking and offshore financial services, offer significant scope for money-laundering activities and tax crimes." Europol declined to comment. Separately, Giovanni Kessler, the director general of OLAF, the European anti-fraud office, told the MEPs his agency had opened four investigations into potential cases of fraud against the European Union "on the basis of an analysis of information related to the Panama Papers and of information obtained from other sources".

More than 250,000 people in England are homeless or lack a permanent place to live, according to Shelter. Releasing figures to mark its 50th anniversary on Thursday, the charity estimated that there were almost 255,000 people living in hostels and other types of temporary accommodation, or sleeping rough on the streets. London is the centre of homelessness, according to the research, with the capital's boroughs occupying 18 of the top 20 positions in Shelter's list of the 50 places where people are most at risk of finding themselves without a home. The analysis also identified homelessness "hotspots" in Brighton, Birmingham, Slough, Bristol, Coventry, Reading, Manchester, Luton and Chelmsford. Shelter's chief executive, Campbell Robb, said: "Shelter's founding shone a light on hidden homelessness in the 60s' slums. But while those troubled times have faded into memory, 50 years on, a modern-day housing crisis is tightening its grip on our country. "We all face the consequences when so many in our country grow up without a place to call home. It breaks up communities and wreaks havoc on family life. For the sake of future generations, we must pull together to end this crisis and refuse to rest until every child has a place to call home." Shelter was launched half a century ago after Ken Loach's seminal 1966 television film Cathy Come Home, which dramatised the descent of a young couple into poverty and homelessness. The founders of Shelter envisaged the charity, which lobbied for improved housing conditions, would be needed for only a few years. Shelter says rising homelessness in recent years is caused by high rents, a shortage of housing, cuts to housing benefit and insecure tenancies. Evictions from private rented homes are the biggest single cause of recorded homelessness. Shelter says its figures are a conservative estimate. It does not include the "hidden homeless" – those who have have nowhere to live but do not qualify for, or are refused, formal housing assistance and end up "sofa surfing" in friend's homes. The findings were calculated by Shelter after analysing figures obtained from government data and information from social services after a freedom of information request. However, the Department for Communities and Local Government (DCLG) said it did not recognise the figures and argued that official homelessness was half the 2003 peak, though it recognised that "one person without a home is one too many". A DCLG spokesman said: "That is why the government is investing over £500m during the course of this parliament to tackle homelessness. This includes protecting £315m for local authority homelessness prevention funding, and £149m of central government funding." Shelter found that in Birmingham, one in 119 people have no permanent home; 9,524 people were living in temporary accommodation and another 36 were rough sleeping, taking the number of people it categorised as homeless to 9,560. Meanwhile, Westminster in central London was identified as England's top homelessness hotspot, with one in 25 without a permanent home. Approximately 7,794 people were living in temporary accommodation and a further 265 were sleeping rough, meaning a total of 8,059 people were without a permanent home. Cllr Martin Tett, housing spokesperson for the Local Government Association, said: "Funding pressures are combining with housing and rents continuing to rise above household incomes to leave many councils struggling to cope with rising homelessness across all areas of the country. "Finding emergency housing for homeless people, particularly young or vulnerable people or those with families, is increasingly difficult for councils. There is no silver bullet and councils alone cannot tackle rising homelessness. "It is crucial that the government recognises and addresses the wider factors that are increasing homelessness, such as the lack of affordable housing and welfare reforms." Shelter highlighted the case of a woman named Mandie, who was renting a flat in Luton with her two daughters. After being made redundant, she fell behind on the rent and was evicted. She said: "We stayed in a hotel for months and now we're in temporary accommodation. I don't know where we'll end up next, or when we'll be able to have a home to call our own. "This year, my daughters agreed to cancel Christmas. They're normally hyped about it, but I think they're trying to take the pressure off me. The only thing they asked for was whether we could still have a turkey dinner."



British universities have been warned that Brexit presents a significant risk to their income, after a year in which a bumper crop of postgraduate students, campus construction and rising research income lifted their turnover to £30bn. The annual report by the Association of University Directors of Estates found that while undergraduate numbers remained static in 2014-15, an influx of 10,000 postgraduate research students, higher research fees and a surge in building work pushed up turnover by £2bn in the space of a year. With the consequences of Britain's vote to leave the EU yet to be felt, the organisation said: "It is impossible to predict the level of impact, although opportunities are also likely to emerge." The recruitment of EU nationals as staff and students was identified as one of the major risks, along with rising construction costs and changes to EU funding. "EU research funding generates more than 19,000 jobs across the UK and £1.86bn for the UK economy. This equates to 14% of all UK income from research grants," AUDE said. Staff numbers rose by 2,000; income from research rose by 12% and from teaching and tuition fees by 6%, with a slight fall in undergraduate numbers outweighed by the rise in postgraduates. Trevor Humphreys, the director of estates and facilities at Surrey University and the AUDE chair, said: "Universities have been through a period of significant upheaval and the sector should be commended on its robust management and efficiency strategies, which continue to serve it well. "However, the future remains uncertain as we try to plan for the impact of the higher education white paper currently going through parliament. Brexit is also likely to affect our student demographic, our workforce, our costs, as well as research funding." The campus building boom in Britain continues apace, with capital expenditure in excess of £2.75bn, up by 5% compared with the previous year. The survey found that universities added 200,000 sq metres to their combined estates in 2014-15, for a total of more than 14m square metres. The universities of Manchester, Cambridge, Edinburgh, Oxford and Nottingham each have academic facilities bigger than 500,000 sq metres, not including student residences. Universities have been keen to make the most from their properties. Examples include the University of Hertfordshire boosting income by renting office space to businesses such as Ocado and signing leases with banks and the NHS. The University of Sheffield has built laboratories and office space in a new business park near the M1, expected to generate 4,000 jobs and more than £200m a year to the region when fully developed.



Donald Trump, with over 16 million followers on Twitter, famously follows only 40 people himself. If you take a look at his list, it's like your dad joined Twitter to find out what all the fuss was about, followed his direct relatives and everyone in his book club, then got bored. It has a sudden, inorganic feel, as if it were built in a day; nearly a quarter of the follows are for his own hotels and golf clubs, so a lot of the timeline is filled with pictures of diced vegetables and there are as many links as hyperlinks. The Trumps junior use Twitter like regular people use Facebook, for animals, babies, palm trees and high-value consumer items. Donald follows barely any politicians – none of the Republicans who routinely go out to bat for him (Giuliani, Chris Christie): except Mike Pence, Indiana Governor and now vice-president elect, whose tweets, breathy and banal, read like a bot-generated Enid Blyton character. "Back to work at Trump Tower. Busy morning with important announcements already &amp; more to come." There is method to it though, once you strip out the figures that are probably intended to be "humanising"; it's a tight little list of conservative commentators, marching to the same insistent beat, iterating and reiterating, linking to each other and back again, clustering around words and phrases to give a neologism the ring of a saying, niche positions the status of common sense. They are Laura Ingraham, a primmer version of Ann Coulter, and Coulter herself; Piers Morgan, who needs no explaining to British audiences except to maybe explain that if you haven't been keeping track of his output, it has got a lot worse, and broadcasters/shock jocks Joe Scarborough, Mika Brzezinski, Bill O'Reilly and Sean Hannity. A couple are members of Trump's campaign team – Katrina Pierson, Dan Scavino – but overwhelmingly, they are either media organisations (Fox), platforms (Drudge Report), or media people who, as they would have it, are beleaguered and persecuted outsiders. There is one account of two genuine unknowns – DiamondandSilk, women of colour who say things like "Rosie [O'Donnell] better keep Barron's name out her mouth and concentrate on her own children", then will have a few tweets flogging their special edition Christmas baubles. There is a surprising amount of merchandise and product placement in the mix, a dire warning about ISIS followed by a paean to a turkey deep-frying machine. If social media generally – and Twitter in particular – is known as an echo chamber, the place you go to hear people exactly like you tell you they agree, this is more of a hall of mirrors. Trump's timeline looks a lot like a succession of pictures of himself, as the hallowed tweet one another's articles back and forth. The Drudge report often flags a link to a story with the simple caption AMERICAN TRUMP. Ann Coulter links to her column in Breitbart where she helpfully spells out the extent of what Trump stands for, masking her kite-flying with a pugilistic frame. "Most of his promises can be kept with little trouble: He will appoint good judges, cut regulations, replace Obamacare and renegotiate trade deals. In other words, he'll do all the things any Republican president would do – plus the trade deals. But the moment Trump attempts to make good on his central promise – to remove troublesome immigrants and give us our country back – every major institution in America will declare war on him." These are the two policy themes: the threat of Muslims, and American jobs for American people. The hatred of immigrants in general, and Muslims in particular, is relentless, and international: one in four British Muslims wants Sharia law; one in three immigrants in Vienna is wanted for a crime; a Muslim in Slovenia gets his comeuppance when he's handed a ten-year prison sentence for throwing a rock at a policeman; Barack Obama presided over an influx of Somalian refugees comprising 90% Muslims. All pretence at a differentiation between moderate and extreme Islam has been dropped; the religion is a priori a threat to western civilisation – witness the German refugee camp where the children hate Christianity – and every gathering of Muslims acquires the status of an army. The geographical scope gives the striking impression of a global conspiracy. Breitbart and Fox links feature prominently and circularly, but the predominant sources are actually British tabloids and the Telegraph. The American jobs theme is unabashed triumphalism; Trump's recent deal with Carrier, in which 1,100 jobs were supposedly saved by the promise of a $7m (£5.5m) tax break, is hailed as emblematic of a nation saved. The third leg on the stool is a rather contradictory attack on liberals. On the one hand, everybody – "Occupy, Move on, Black Lives Matter and Obama" – is "alt radical left" according to Hannity. On the other, and this is a particular bugbear of Ingraham but is held in common to them all, the left are unendurably pathetic, weak and infantile. "For the Pajama Boy Generation, every time they don't get their way, they need a "grief counsellor." They're snowflakes, they need colouring books and cry-rooms, their prizes-for-all culture has left them unable to lose; all of this often illustrated with a picture of a spoilt-looking child crying. It is a pronounced and textured scorn, and underlines the porousness between the British and American right. It's very common now when you argue with a Brexiter on TV to get a lot of Twitter traffic calling you a snowflake illustrated with a crying child. I didn't understand it, since "snowflake" was devised to convey someone who melts at the first criticism; in debating, one plainly isn't melting. Yet as part of a cross-Atlantic narrative, in which to hold a liberal view is to be a spoilt child who needs a spanking, it does make sense, albeit atmospherically and not rationally. The word that keeps coming to me, inhabiting this rhetorical community, is unfettered: unfettered by proportionality, consensus, accuracy, restraint, desire for unity. The gloves are off.

The first photographs have emerged of Australian senior Isis member, Neil Prakash, following his capture and imprisonment in Turkey. The photographs obtained by the Guardian show the accused terrorist with a face that has thinned noticeably since he appeared more than six months ago in publicity material as one of the extremist group's chief recruiters. Prakash, whom the Australian government believed had been killed in an airstrike in Iraq's second city, Mosul, in May, was arrested by Turkish border guards on 24 October, in the southern village of Inali, the Guardian has confirmed. At first, Australia's most wanted man claimed to be a Cambodian national named Piseth Doung. However, Turkish officials said they recognised Prakash's Australian accent and formally charged him with terrorism the following day. Since then, he has been held in a prison in southern Turkey, where officials from both the Turkish and Australian governments have interviewed him. Prakash featured prominently in propaganda videos exhorting Australians to join Isis – an ultra hardline group that proscribes as apostates anyone who does not share its hardline read of Islamic tenets. He was believed to have been killed during a US-led attack on central Mosul. At the time, Iraqi officials said Prakash had been in one of the city's banks, which Isis had commandeered and was using to sort cash to be distributed around its so called Caliphate. Prakash was one of three senior Australian members of the group who was thought to have been killed, alongside Mohammed Elomar and Khaled Sharrouf. Australian security officials believe dozens of Australians have been killed fighting in Iraq and Syria. After carving a swath of influence in both countries, Isis is now on the back foot militarily with a sustained US-led campaign of airstrikes and gains by forces on the ground shrinking the so called caliphate by more than 60% in the past year. The loss of territory has seen the group's command and control slowly disintegrate and led its leaders to focus more on controlling populations than geography. The switch in tactics has seen Isis send senior figures to Europe and beyond where they have been tasked with staging spectacular attacks like those seen in Paris and Brussels, as well as lone-wolf strikes like the truck rampage in Nice. Prakash's reported demise in May was at the time heralded by the Australian government as a major victory against Isis. Australia's attorney general, George Brandis, said: "His death disrupts and degrades Isil's ability to recruit vulnerable people in our community to conduct terrorist acts." Prakash has been actively involved in attempts to compel Australians to fight overseas and encouraging individuals to carry out attacks on Australian soil. He entered Syria in 2013 and has featured prominently in propaganda material disseminated by Isis. The child of Cambodian and Fijian migrants, Prakash is originally from Melbourne. He converted to Islam in 2012, and attended the al-Furqan Islamic centre. The centre came to public attention more recently after two 18-year-olds linked to the centre were charged with terrorism offences in 2015. It was subsequently closed. The Australian federal police issued a first instance arrest warrant for Prakash in August 2015. The warrant is still current, and Australia's justice minister, Michael Keenan, has announced that Australia has lodged a formal extradition request with Turkey. But it remains unclear how Turkish authorities will respond to the request. Prakash could also be charged with offences in Turkey, and local authorities may still seek to prosecute him there. Some defence experts have warned against extraditing Prakash, in part because it could lead to him becoming a "totem" for local extremists in Australia.

Liverpool will intensify efforts to sell Mamadou Sakho in January after Jürgen Klopp confirmed the France international is not considered part of his first team squad. The Liverpool manager insists he has no intention of selling Daniel Sturridge or any member of the first team squad when the transfer window opens in January. He was responding to reports that West Ham United are considering a move for the England international. "There is absolutely no thought or idea to sell any player from the first team squad," he said. "I don't think it would make sense. Unfortunately Daniel is not in training now and that is what I am more concerned about than any transfer rumours, but I am prepared for everything you could ask me in January." Klopp's desire to retain the squad that has propelled Liverpool to second in the table, however, does not involve Sakho. The £19m defender has been marginalised since being sent home from a pre-season tour of the United States for disciplinary breaches. Attempts to offload the 26-year-old on loan were frustrated in the summer and Sakho, who signed a new five-year contract at Liverpool only last September, placed further strain on his relationship with Klopp when he contested the manager's claims about his fitness on Snapchat. The former Paris Saint-Germain captain has been training with Liverpool's under-23 squad ever since that late-night outburst in September, though was able to attend a Victoria's Secret fashion show in the French capital this week. Nice, West Bromwich Albion and several Italian clubs have been linked with a move for the defender in January. And Klopp has left Sakho in no doubt over his Anfield future by confirming he does not feature in his first-team plans. He added: "Now you know, I said it: he is not in these plans for the first team. The first-team squad is here [at the training ground]. Do you really think I would have said Sakho will not be sold in winter? Nothing changed. Once again this actual first-team squad is in this dressing room, from this point of view nobody will be sold." Sturridge will miss Sunday's trip to Bournemouth and the chance for only a fifth Premier League start this season in the absence of Philippe Coutinho, who has a calf problem. Coutinho may be out until the new year with ankle ligament damage but Adam Lallana, who has missed the last three games with a groin injury, and Roberto Firmino, who took a kick to the calf against Sunderland last Saturday, are in contention. "I am happy Lallana is back in training," said Klopp. "Adam's first session was on Thursday and it was good but of course we need to see how he reacts to the intensity of the training because it was quite intense for him. Roberto trained yesterday too. He still has a little bit of pain but it is painful, not serious. He's quite a tough guy and came through the session so we will see how he reacts."

José Mourinho has revised his timescale for Manchester United winning the Premier League title, claiming that changing the way a team plays is the most difficult thing in football. On succeeding Louis van Gaal in July Mourinho said his objective was to try to win the league in his first season. Now he concedes that may not happen and even admits the next time United are champions may be after he has left the club. At all his previous clubs Mourinho has managed to get off to a quick start and stamp his personality on the team early. He is struggling to do that at United, he says, because his philosophy is entirely different from that of the last manager and the players need time to adapt. "Sometimes when a manager takes over a new club the differences in approach are not significant," he said. "In that case all it needs is a little touch, just a fingerprint from the new man and you can get a lot from what was already there. Here we are trying to do something completely different. We could probably get better results if we weren't trying to go in an opposite direction. I am not talking about tactical systems here. I am talking about the way this team wants to play and that is the most difficult thing in football to change." Broadly speaking, Mourinho believes Van Gaal promoted too defensive a style, with too much sideways and backwards passing and not enough looking forward to attack between the lines. Most people agree United are playing well at the moment and Michael Carrick went so far as to suggest there were signs of the old club emerging. But what is frustrating Mourinho is that the best performances have occurred in the cups and not the league. United are at Goodison Park on Saturday, one of Mourinho's favourite stadiums, and the manager is hoping for a better return away from home than the sequence of four league draws at Old Trafford that led to his side losing ground on the leaders. "In the league we have not been getting the goals our performances deserve," he said. "There is no doubt we are improving, though. We know where we want to go and our destination is to be champions. Maybe we cannot do it this year. You can never tell in football but the gap might be already too large. I don't know when we will do it, maybe when I am not here, but that is what we are working towards and I think it will happen." Paul Pogba will be back from suspension at Everton, meaning Bastian Schweinsteiger's services are unlikely to be needed, though the midfielder who appeared for the last few minutes of United's 4-1 EFL Cup win over West Ham in midweek could have a future at United after all. "He is another one that can help us and he was ready when we needed him when Pogba and [Marouane] Fellaini were both available," Mourinho said. It was widely assumed the Germany international would move on in January after being shunned by Mourinho at the start of the season but, as the manager now accepts, the player is the one in control. "When you have a contract with a club you are the powerful one," Mourinho said. "We tried to make something happen in summer but he decided to stay and the same thing could happen again. At least he is happier now he is working with the team again. He has always been professional and I like people with determination." Mourinho is also back from suspension after the water bottle incident in the league match against West Ham, philosophical about his punishment but convinced he is being treated differently from other managers. "I am willing to obey the rules but I would like to see the same rules for everyone," he said. "I cannot kick a bottle of water, I accept that, just as I accepted the sending-off and the suspension without complaint. If those are the rules, fine. I just need to be sure they are the same for all the other managers."

Considering Saturday's high‑stakes visit of Chelsea Pep Guardiola was breezy when discussing the challenge of Antonio Conte's Premier League leaders. There was a quip about still having hair "a long time ago", when he played against the Italian in Serie A, and a playful grimace when one questioner confused the former Juventus manager with Carlo Ancelotti, a predecessor at Stamford Bridge. Conte, it is understood, was City's second choice behind Guardiola to replace Manuel Pellegrini and the Catalan was serious when discussing his counterpart's quality as well as a challenging December programme which starts with Chelsea and includes Liverpool and Arsenal following a trip to the champions Leicester City. "This month is so important. We're going to see our level. I'm not thinking about what happens if we win or we don't win the games," said Guardiola. "I'm most thinking about what will be our level and if we will be able to fight until the last moments of the season. I'm curious about how we compete, how our football will be against these three, four really good teams. After that we're going to analyse, to keep going until the end. That is what I am concerned about most in this moment. "I'm not just thinking about three points or drawing or losing the game. I want to see how my team react against the good teams. Against Barcelona for example, in the Champions League, we were OK, we were there, we played good. I'm curious to see my team against top players and top teams. "Conte is without doubt one of the best, maybe the best, coach in the world right now. [Chelsea] were contenders to win the Premier League from the beginning. Now, maybe more than before. It's a good test for us; it is the first time we are going to face each other. It's good to play against him. He did an exceptional job in Turin [with Juventus] and in the national job. It doesn't matter if it is Serie A or the national team, you realise his strengths. "He has started with maybe not good results but they have won their last seven games, conceding one goal. That says a lot about how good they are." Chelsea are a point better off than City, a surprise perhaps, given Guardiola's pedigree and the Blues' travails last season when they finished 10th, having sacked José Mourinho before Christmas. The high regard is clearly mutual between coaches who have yet to face off despite their considerable experience in the dugout. Conte said: "I have great respect for him because Pep likes to study football, to find new solutions always. It's not easy to transfer these ideas to different teams a few times. But he's a fantastic manager doing fantastic work with Manchester City. When you see this team, I recognise his idea of football. Saturday, for us, it will be a very tough test." It will certainly be a contrast in styles; Guardiola's is a ball-hogging philosophy, while Conte's is more pragmatic, hoping to hit teams hard on the break. He said: "Every team has its own characteristics or ideas. All Guardiola's are about possession for many minutes, to find the ball between the lines, to find the one-v-ones on the flank. But I think that every single manager has his own idea of football. Very simply, I'm more straight towards the goal, less possession than in this case. But there are a lot of ways. For this reason I always have great respect for every idea of different managers." Chelsea's results have taken off since the 3-0 defeat by Arsenal in late September. Arsène Wenger's side were 3-0 ahead when Conte pulled off Cesc Fàbregas on 55 minutes and brought on Marcos Alonso. The Spaniard went to left wing-back as the coach switched to a three-man defence that featured Gary Cahill, David Luiz and Branislav Ivanovic. The 3-4-3 shape has been retained ever since, with Cahill, David Luiz and César Azpilicueta lining up as centre-backs. They did not concede a goal until Christian Eriksen's in the 11th minute in last weekend's 2-1 comeback win against Tottenham, as Chelsea reeled off a remarkable seven consecutive league victories. Guardiola has analysed the strategy that has transformed Conte's side. "When they have the ball, they play like a 3-4-3; but they defend with many players behind the ball," he said. "They have conceded just one goal [in their winning run]. They are doing well. When I was at Munich a lot of teams played with four or five at the back, closing the space down in the middle. They allow you to cross the ball from wide because they have five players in the box. "We will be cautious when they have the ball. When we have the ball we will attack as much as possible. They are so good when they arrive in the box; they score goals. They don't need to create too many chances to score goals. They are solid but we are going to play with the quality players we have, attacking the best way as possible. All the guys are so good on the counterattack." Guardiola gave a trademark response when asked whether a draw would be a good result. "It depends on the way we play," he said. "For example the draw against Middlesbrough was not good, the way we played. Sometimes you deserve a draw because you play badly. It depends on the game. But of course we're going to play against the top of the league and it will be our level against that team." Guardiola's levity even extended to Conte's feverish touchline antics and whether these are more influential than his own. "I don't know who moves their arms quicker, him or Pep. Does it help the team? I don't think so. They don't hear you," he said. "I'm not talking about Antonio but I think I [would] confuse them. But I cannot control it. "I don't think it will help a lot to speak with the players; they play, not me. Sometimes you have to take decisions quickly, sometimes you are involved in the game. You want to help them to make it better, you want to see them, correct something. But you have 10 minutes at half-time. OK you can correct something if the game stops. Hopefully in the future I can improve it – be more relaxed and calm – that would be good for me."

Ronald Koeman has said Everton's miserable run has opened his eyes to the changes required at Goodison Park but insisted the club's academy prospects are not yet the solution. Everton host Manchester United on Sunday having won only once in nine matches and failed to respond to their manager's demands for a reaction to poor displays against Chelsea and Swansea City. Koeman's requests for more pressing, greater penetration and more aggressive starts have gone ignored in recent weeks, to leave the manager admitting: "We need at least this winter and we need next summer to make changes in this club." But, despite a dramatic downturn since the start of the season, Koeman believes he will learn more about the squad during this period than had their encouraging early results continued. "I still have the belief we will be successful at Everton," he said. "Maybe we need a little more time, maybe we need to make more changes in the team, maybe we need it for next season. We know it is a new project and everybody knows that takes time. We had a good start, it is a difficult time now but that is football." He added: "It is always difficult when there is a lack of confidence and a lack of belief but it can be good for me to see the reaction of the team in a difficult time. It is better to see that. Of course you like to have a win every weekend because everyone is happy but sometimes, to get your eyes really open, maybe this time is the best to understand what we need to change." Change is unlikely to come from within, it appears, with Everton's academy prospects not ready to step into an ageing team who lacked mobility at Southampton last Sunday. Koeman, who has been linked with January moves for the United duo Memphis Depay and Morgan Schneiderlin, plus the 19-year-old Charlton Athletic forward Ademola Lookman, said: "We analyse our young players. It is about Tom Davies, it is about Kieran Dowell, Dominic Calvert-Lewin the striker, Jonjoe Kenny the right full-back. "The under-23 competition cannot be compared to the Premier League. They train a lot of times with the first team and if there is a moment that they show they are on the level of other players in their position then I will give them the chance. "It is also a physicality question about young players. Every day we have the contact with David Unsworth [the under-23s coach] and they need time. It is easy to say: 'He played fantastic, he needs to play in the first team.' No, they don't understand the level of the Premier League and they need time. We are not playing in Holland – if so, then yes, they are ready. But ready for the Premier League? If I bring a young player in it is not for one game and then I will show the confidence in that young player. Still they are not ready."

In the absence of the injury-hit Héctor Bellerín and Mathieu Debuchy, Arsène Wenger does not plan to turn to the next right-back in his squad, Carl Jenkinson, because he feels the player is suffering a crisis of confidence. On Saturday evening Arsenal are at West Ham, the club where Jenkinson spent a couple of seasons on loan to promising effect, but the player signed from Charlton Athletic in 2011 will be spared. Wenger intends to use Gabriel Paulista or the youngster Ainsley Maitland-Niles instead. "He has lost confidence," Wenger said of the 24-year-old England international. "The Jenkinson you see at the moment is the Jenkinson who can play but is not completely Jenkinson because he has no confidence. That will come back. He will be in and out and, suddenly, after one or two months, he will make the step and play. It is natural and very difficult. Today it is even more difficult because he gets quickly hammered by everybody on social media. I hope he doesn't read all that and focuses on his game." In an uncomfortable moment on Wednesday, Jenkinson's substitution was welcomed by many of the crowd during Arsenal's home defeat to Southampton in the EFL Cup. Jenkinson has looked anxious in recent performances, but Wenger is sympathetic and maintains confidence can be fragile for a player working his way back from several spells out injured. "Jenkinson has not played for a long period," he said. "He had knee surgery after he had two shoulder surgeries and what he is going through at the moment is, for me, normal – but very difficult to live with for a player. "You think you are there ... you play and realise you are not as good as you think you should be and you lose confidence. He is going through that period at the moment. Bellerín is one of the best in his position certainly in Europe but Carl can compete with him. At the moment, no, because mentally he has not found his total level of his confidence." Wenger accepted it might damage that confidence even more for a centre-back playing out of position to be selected ahead of him. "Look, the best way to help is to respect the fact to play them when they are competitive," he said. Gabriel is the favourite to start ahead of Maitland-Niles because of his experience of dealing with an aerial threat. Wenger is conscious of the damage Andy Carroll caused last season when he scored a hat-trick in the 3-3 draw at Upton Park. Bellerín is likely to miss the next three games, at West Ham, Basel in the Champions League and at home to Stoke, and Wenger hopes the Spaniard will be ready to return after that. The bigger conundrum Wenger is trying to solve concerns finding midfield balance in the absence of the injured Santi Cazorla. He has tried multiple combinations in the middle; finding the best blend of ball-winning and creativity has not quite happened yet. "We are close with the balance as Granit Xhaka in midfield is moving upwards," Wenger said. "He has a different influence to Santi. Santi is more of a guy who gets out of very tight situations with a very short techniques, right and left foot, while Xhaka has a pass and is not a dribbler. He passes through the lines." Wenger admitted Upton Park was a favourite place to visit, particularly when he first arrived in England 20 years ago. "I preferred the first version of the West Ham stadium, which was very tight; one the most intimidating stadiums I knew. I must say the atmosphere was always very heated but quite respectful always." Four of Arsenal's next five games are away, and Wenger is urging his team to keep up a resilient run in the Premier League, with their last defeat on the opening day against Liverpool. "I believe that from the strength we have shown away from home, we have the belief that we can do well absolutely everywhere," he said.

The jury in the murder trial of former police officer Michael Slager, who shot and killed unarmed African American Walter Scott as he ran away, is at deadlock after a single juror indicated during dramatic scenes in court they were unwilling to find the 35-year-old guilty. The jury, consisting of 11 white people and one black person, will now continue deliberations on Monday, drawing the monthlong trial in South Carolina into a fifth week. If their decision is not unanimous a mistrial will be declared, leaving prosecutors to decide whether to pursue a retrial. The former North Charleston police officer has been charged with murder and manslaughter after shooting Scott, 50, five times from behind as he ran away with his back turned. The incident, which occurred in April 2015, was caught on video by a witness, propelling the case into the global spotlight. The release footage has been cited by advocates as among the clearest evidence of the fatal consequences of racially biased policing in the US. On Friday, after over 14 hours of deliberations, the jury's foreman indicated in a note to South Carolina judge Clifton Newman that they would not be able to reach a unanimous decision. "It is clear that jurors will not be able to come to consensus," the note read. The jury then returned a second time in the afternoon indicating it was still deadlocked, with a unanimous decision hinging on just one juror. During tense scenes in the courtroom, a note from that single juror was read aloud by Newman. "Judge, I understand the position of the court, but I cannot with good conscience consider a guilty verdict," the juror wrote. "I expect those who hold opposing views not to change their minds because they are good honest people." In a subsequent note sent by the foreperson, it was stated that the juror wanted "to leave" as they were "having issues". Under South Carolina law a jury cannot be sent out to deliberate again after it has returned for a second time with no verdict, unless it requests "further explanation of the law". The jury's foreperson made that request to Newman. Slager's defense team have moved for a mistrial, while the state prosecution urged the judge to provide the jury with the explanation it requested. After a brief recess, Newman indicated he would not declare a mistrial and requested a note from the jury asking precisely what explanation of the law was required. "At this stage of things, with the jury indicating a willingness and interest ... it would be improper for the court to declare a mistrial," Newman said. A foreperson for the jury then told the judge in a note that "they [the jury] are beat and need some time. We will have our questions at the time." The jury's request for explanation likely relates to an earlier application on Thursday made by the jury requesting clarification on the legal distinction between "fear" and "passion", the potential difference between a claim of justifiable self-defense, which Slager's legal team have argued throughout, and a manslaughter conviction, which would find that Slager unlawfully killed Scott in the heat of passion. Newman had declined to provide the jury guidance, telling them on Friday morning that it was "solely for you" to decide. In response to the first declaration of deadlock, Newman called the jury back into the court room and urged them, under a so-called Allen charge, to continue deliberations and push for a decision. "It isn't always easy for two people to agree so when 12 people must agree it must be more difficult," he said. "You have a duty to make every reasonable effort to reach a unanimous verdict," the judge said. "Discuss your differences with an open mind." Newman warned that a split decision would result in a mistrial meaning that "at some other time I will try this case with some other jury where you now sit ... we will go through this whole process again". After the day's dramatic hearing in court, members of the Scott family said during a short press conference that they were hopeful the remaining juror would change their mind. "We feel the prayers. We feel the presence of God. And we know that God has been moving in our favour. It's been a long day. It's been a tough day. But it's not over," said Anthony Scott, Walter's brother. With reference to the book of Psalms, Scott continued in tears: "Joy will come in the morning. Joy will come. We know that we are going to receive our joy, because God say so." The Scott family's attorney Chris Stewart echoed Scott's feelings of hope, adding: "This is not a black family against Michael Slager. This is the world against Michael Slager." On Wednesday, Newman allowed the jury to consider the lesser charge of voluntary manslaughter, meaning an unlawful killing that occurred without "malice" but rather in the heat of passion after provocation. Slager had originally been charged with murder. Voluntary manslaughter carries a sentence of two to 30 years in prison, while a murder sentence carries 30 years to life in prison. The trial has been characterised by an aggressive defence from Slager's lawyers, who unsuccessfully attempted to have the pivotal video struck out as evidence and then accused the eyewitness who filmed it, Feidin Santana, of being ideologically opposed to law enforcement. During closing arguments Slager's lead defense lawyer, Andrew Savage, unleashed a tirade against the media, arguing his client had become a "poster boy" for perceived police brutality around the US and placed blame for the incident on Scott, a father of four, for his "felonious conduct". The prosecution have argued consistently that the evidence contained in the video alone is overwhelming and proves Slager killed Scott unlawfully. Slager has also been indicted on federal charges of violating Scott's civil rights, which also carries a maximum sentence of life.

The acrimonious buildup to England's final autumn Test against Australia looks set to spill over on to the pitch after Eddie Jones warned the Wallabies his side would look to "break them mentally and physically". The lock George Kruis indicated the home team would be looking to "target their puppet masters" and extend their unbeaten run to a record-equalling 14 Tests. Jones, depicted as "a creepy clown with a dark side" in the newspaper the Australian, is wary of a Wallaby backlash following their 3-0 home series defeat in June but is backing his team to go an entire calendar year unbeaten. "If we win this Test then we create history, so we're aiming to create history," he said. "It's their last chance of redemption because they've had a tough year and if they win this Test they can go home happy. "To beat them we've got to break them mentally and physically. We know they're going to come out in the first 20 minutes like there's no tomorrow. We've practised, we're equipped to handle it and we'll win the game in the last 20. But I don't think fear is an element of our team makeup. The players are sharp and on it. They want this game, it's a big game for us. I don't think you have fear when you have clarity and confidence about the way you want to play and confidence from how you've prepared." Kruis said there had been "a lot of niggle" in the summer Tests which England's players have not entirely forgotten. "They are probably left with a bit of a bitter taste from the summer and I think it will be flying. It is one of their last games so they will leave everything out there. You always target their key players, their generals, their puppet masters. It is definitely a plan." There has been plenty of verbal sparring this week, too, between Jones and his opposite number, Michael Cheika, although the former remains adamant he was fully entitled to focus attention on Australia's scrummaging: "We made some comments about the game which were justified. Then Michael's decided he wants to get the machine gun out. That's his choice. I think he bought one between June and coming here." Cheika opted not to return eve-of-game fire, insisting the "fun and games are over" but did criticise the newspaper's decision to publish a mocked-up clown image of Jones. "I don't think that's funny, I think that's bad form," he said, similarly unimpressed when he was depicted as a clown by the New Zealand Herald in October. It was the same Cheika, though, who has described Jones as having "a chip on his shoulder" and criticised Dan Cole's scrummaging technique, remarks which have been cheerfully noted by his ex-Randwick team-mate. "There are plenty of chips in England. Whenever you buy a meal there are chips on the side. I don't have to go looking for chips too hard." According to Jones, his team are equally keen to get behind the prop: "The players are upset by the comments about Dan Cole but in a positive way. To single out a player is maybe not the right thing to do. "Everyone makes a choice in life about what they say and how they behave. If that is how he [Cheika] wants to behave that's entirely up to him. We are comfortable how we have behaved and comfortable how we have represented rugby. Rugby is a respectful game and we want to behave in a respectful way. Defeat always hurts and there will be someone hurting tomorrow but you have to carry that defeat and make sure we keep the game in its proper state. The great games of the world - golf, tennis and rugby - stand alone because they have a standard of behaviour."

Can a ballet production from 1978 still be relevant today? The Australian Ballet believes so: its final production for 2016, which opened on Friday, is a restaging of the company founder and first artistic director Peggy van Praagh's interpretation of Coppélia – nearly 40 years later. Coppélia is a tried-and-true crowdpleaser – the classic tale of an inventor and his lifelike dancing doll that captivates the heart of a local village boy, Franz, causing him to jilt his betrothed, Swanilda. But the ballet's artistic director, David McAllister, explains that this particular interpretation is also a piece of company heritage. The company performed Coppélia in 1962, the year it was founded, then revived the work in the late 1970s "from a different angle". Taking the modern standard choreography and adding some her own, van Praagh worked with the prolific theatre and film director George Ogilvie and the reclusive but renowned designer Kristian Fredrikson to create what McAllister believes is a "timeless" production. Audiences may well agree: the company has restaged van Praagh's version repeatedly over the past four decades, the last time in 2010. That it continues to succeed upon revival is a testament to its aesthetic endurance – but at the same time, it raises questions about the diversity of programming. One of the biggest challenges facing the heritage performing arts companies in Australia today is the need for broad appeal: many of Australia's major companies have their origins in the 50s and 60s; the audiences that grew up with them and, in many cases, still make up the bulk of their subscriber base, are now older and often much wealthier than their younger counterparts. The need to retain these audiences appears to push companies towards conservative programming choices, thereby alienating younger audiences. But the ballet's audiences, McAllister says, have proven to be less predictable. "A number of years ago we did a lot of research on who comes to what programs," he says. The results flew in the face of expectations. "The older audiences had seen all of those classics 25 million times, and ... there was a real appetite in our older audiences for the new works, and new productions of big titles." At the same time, classics like Swan Lake and The Nutcracker were functioning as gateway works for the younger demographic, whom the company had believed were their primary audience for contemporary material. McAllister has been with the Australian Ballet "for a hundred years" (or, more precisely, 33 – he joined as a dancer in 1983). Given that he has been part of the company for more than half its lifetime, what is his vision for it over the next decade? "Excellence," he says. "That we continue to push the envelope on what we perform ... I want every person in Australia, even if they don't have any desire or knowledge or understanding about ballet, to have pride in the fact that we have a national company that's as good as our Olympic team, our cricket team, our rugby team." The word "excellence" has accrued new baggage in the Australian arts community ever since funds were stripped from the Australia Council in 2014 by the then-arts minister, George Brandis, to set up the National Program for Excellence in the Arts (since rebranded as Catalyst). Much of the discourse at the time viewed "excellence" as a conservative policy buzzword which, in the context of arts funding, as Ben Eltham argued, "means the performance of the western canon by performing arts companies ... [favouring] the dead, the white and the male over the living, the not-white and the female". The Australian Ballet has been criticised on this score before: the bulk of its work is classical or classically derived, and productions are regularly recycled or revived, sometimes just two or three years apart. But McAllister doesn't believe that "excellence" necessarily means defaulting towards conservative choices. "On one hand, yes, because we are a ballet company and the big, narrative classical ballets are the ones that the dancers train to dance and they love doing ... and there's a high recognition factor [with audiences], so they love coming to see them," he says. "But every year we do a contemporary program ... and there's a growing audience for that new, more athletic contemporary work." Still, McAllister admits, this year's production of John Neumeier's contemporary full-length ballet Nijinsky was "a bit of a gamble" – the Australian Ballet was only the third company in the world to produce it. "I said, 'Guys, this isn't Sleeping Beauty, it's not going to be little girls in pink tutus waiting out the front, but it's a really important work and it will develop the artistry of the company.' And that's exactly what happened." And what of local choreography? The resounding success of the 2015 triple-bill 20:21 – and in particular, the critical acclaim for Australian choreographer Tim Harbour's commissioned piece, Filigree and Shadow – is evidence that audiences are yearning for diversity and want to see new, homegrown works on their stages. The current major change, however, comes down to access: specifically in the cinema screenings of the company's works, following the lead of the Met Opera in New York, and further inroads made by the Royal Ballet in London, and Russia's Bolshoi and Mariinsky. After Sleeping Beauty in October and Cinderella in November, Coppélia will be the final act in a triptych of live Australian Ballet performances shown in cinemas across the UK and Europe. This month the company will also play host to a megastar of both American Ballet Theatre and the Bolshoi Ballet, David Hallberg, in a post-injury return to the stage for four performances during Coppélia's Sydney season. It's the continuation of a tradition of international collaboration that perhaps most famously saw Margot Fonteyn and Rudolf Nureyev dancing in Australian Ballet productions in the 60s. "I think that you've got to continue to push those boundaries," McAllister says. "You can't just sit back on the classical repertoire and get flabby ... We have to create the classics for the future." Coppélia is playing in Sydney until 21 December and will screen in the UK via CinemaLive in April 2017

The man who shot and killed former NFL running back Joe McKnight in New Orleans on Thursday fired three rounds from inside his vehicle in what police said "represented the culmination of a road rage incident". McKnight, a college standout at USC who played with the Jets and the Chiefs, was shot dead in the New Orleans suburb of Terrytown following an altercation with Ronald Gasser, 54 at about 3pm on Thursday. Gasser was taken into custody on but was released without charge. On Thursday, police confirmed Gasser was the shooter. "The only thing we know right now – everything else is conjecture – is that Mr Gasser did in fact shoot Mr McKnight," Jefferson parish sheriff Newell Normand said. Normand said at a news conference on Friday that Gasser fired three rounds through an open window. He said all three rounds struck McKnight, who was standing outside Gasser's car. McKnight was struck in the chest, right shoulder and left hand. But police declined to bring charges. Asked why Gasser was released, Normand said that in Louisiana there were some "relative statutes that provide defenses to certain crimes." He continued: "The easiest thing for me would have been [to say] 'Book 'em, Danno'. But the fact of the matter is in trying to flesh out these details. We chose not to do that." McKnight is the second former NFL player this year to die in New Orleans in incidents linked to road rage. Former Saints player Will Smith was killed in April in a shooting that was sparked over a traffic altercation. Police confirmed Gasser handed a semi-automatic handgun to officers who arrived at the scene of the shooting. Normand said witnesses saw a "heated verbal exchange" between Gasser and McKnight beforehand. Normand said there were no indications the shooting was a hate crime. "Everyone wants to make this about race," he said. "This is not about race." He said the investigation into McKnight's death would be thorough. "We will leave no stone unturned. We've had as many as 30 to 40 officers working this investigation through the night." A unnamed witness told the Times-Picayune she saw a man shouting at McKnight, who was trying to apologize. The man shot McKnight more than once, the witness said. She said he shot McKnight, stood over him and said: "I told you, don't you fuck with me." Then the man fired again, she said. But Sheriff Normand disputed that claim and said Gasser had fired from inside his car, a blue Infiniti sedan. "I strongly suggest you stop believing what you're reading," he said at the news conference. Local NAACP officials said they were planning a peaceful demonstration against McKnight's killing. "We think a black man was lynched yesterday," Morris Reed, the president of the New Orleans branch of the organisation, said. "We are demanding some answers." Barbara Franklin, McKnight's grandmother, told the Associated Press that relatives are "trying to find out our own selves" more about what happened. "He might be released now, but God is going to bring about justice in it," Franklin said of Gasser's release. Antonio Cromartie, who played with McKnight for the Jets, tweeted: "I don't get it. How in hell do you release someone who killed my brother, my friend a father a son a brother without charging him. Bullcrap." McKnight, a New Orleans native who went on to a decorated collegiate career at USC, was chosen by the New York Jets in the fourth round of the 2010 NFL draft. He played three seasons with the Jets, followed by a one-year stint with the Kansas City Chiefs and brief comeback attempts with the Edmonton Eskimos and Saskatchewan Roughriders of the Canadian Football League. "We send our deepest sympathies to Joe's family, friends, and all those impacted by this tragedy," Roughriders general manager and coach Chris Jones said on Thursday. Reggie Bush, who played with McKnight at USC, offered his condolences on Twitter, "RIP my brother Joe McKnight," he wrote. "This one hurts bad." The Jets posted a photo of McKnight with the words "Joe McKnight 1988-2016" on their official Twitter account. "Rest in peace, Joe McKnight," the team said. "Our thoughts and condolences are with his loved ones." "For a life to be lost so senselessly is just beyond description," said JT Curtis, McKnight's high school coach. "Right now it's pretty devastating." "He was just a good kid," the coach added.

The failure to enact the 25-year-old recommendations of the royal commission into Aboriginal deaths in custody is "unforgivable" and overshadows modern efforts to reform the justice system, the acting Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander justice commissioner has said. Speaking about the release of the Human Rights Commission's Social Justice and Native Title Report 2016 this week, the deputy commissioner, Robynne Quiggin, said the lack of action was disrespectful to the work the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people put into the commission, which ran from 1987 to 1991. "It's really unforgivable, I think, that we have seen the failure to commit to implementing the recommendations of the royal commission into Aboriginal deaths in custody," she told Guardian Australia. "We were starting to see change after the royal commission and that has just fallen away and fallen away until we have the shameful statistics now." The Indigenous imprisonment rate has doubled in the years since the royal commision handed down its final report, from 14.4% in 1991 to 28% in 2016. Quiggin said it would be "more than disheartening" if the recommendations from the royal commission into youth detention in the Northern Territory – established after a Four Corners program showed graphic images of abuse at Don Dale youth detention centre – were similarly ignored. Mick Gooda left his role as Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander justice commissioner in August to act as one of the royal commissioners in the NT, after heavily criticising the Territory government. Quiggin said the federal government urgently needed to set justice targets and support evidence-based diversionary programs, like Justice Reinvestment, to prevent further incidents like the ones at Don Dale. She said the 28 recommendations made in the Human Rights Commission's report urged the federal government to adopt an "Indigenous-led, policy-based approach that is lead by evidence". They included urging the Turnbull government to adopt the Redfern Statement, a joint policy statement made by a number of Indigenous organisations in response to the lack of substantial debate about Indigenous policy in the 2016 federal election, and seeking bipartisan support for extending the Indigenous ranger program beyond the current funding cutoff of 2020. The report also called for an independent review of the cashless welfare card program, which is being trialled in Ceduna, South Australia, and the East Kimberley region of Western Australia. It compared the program as it currently exists to the history of Indigenous stolen wages, in that both had an impact on the self-determination of Indigenous peoples. Quiggin said the scheme was a "blunt instrument when it comes to trying to drive change in the social and economic determinants of poverty", and that people should be allowed to opt in or out. "What we would like to see is an opt-in approach where communities that choose to participate in the program can choose for it to be for the individuals that are having problems with how they spend their money, rather than a blanket approach for everyone on any kind of income support," Quiggin said. Reviews of the program should focus on whether it reduced the specific problems it was created to address and not broader sweeping community judgements, she said. The prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull, has indicated the program could be rolled out to other communities, claiming it has made a "positive difference" at the two trial sites.

Legal submissions were made in Michigan, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin by Republicans – including Michigan AG Bill Schuette – arguing that the election recounts requested by Jill Stein should not be allowed. Trump allies fight election recount An aide to Philippines president Rodrigo Duterte said he had spoken to Donald Trump by phone and Trump invited him to the White House. Meanwhile, spotted in Trump Tower: the Naked Cowboy, again. Trump announced retired General James "Mad Dog" Mattis as his nominee for secretary of defense. Mattis has got support in the military and Congress, and there's some establishment hope he that can rein in Trump. Trump picks Mattis Steven Mnuchin, Trump's nominee for treasury secretary, was once known as a "foreclosure king" based on the behavior of OneWest Bank, which he formerly ran. "I'm just thoroughly disgusted," one man whose home was foreclosed said of his appointment. Read his story Trump's first stop in his so-called "thank you tour" was marked by familiar chants of "lock her up" and "build the wall" as the president-elect waxed nostalgic about Hillary Clinton and the "dishonest media". Same old Trump ... But his backing for the controversial scheme "has nothing to do with his personal investments and everything to do with promoting policies that benefit all Americans", according to his transition team. Trump supports Dakota oil pipeline Earlier this week, Donald Trump said he will step aside from his businesses. But little is known about how he plans to do this. Will he actually be able to do it? Trump followed through on a key campaign pledge on Thursday.

A gunman is thought to be on the loose in Paris after police raided the travel agent's office he was believed to be trying to rob. They released six hostages - but found no one else inside. The city's police force said it carried out the operation on the Boulevard Masséna, in the south-east of the city, at about 6.30pm on Friday. About an hour later, the force tweeted that the operation was over, adding: "Six people brought out. The armed robber was not there." Earlier unconfirmed reports had suggested that seven people were being held and AFP cited anonymous sources as saying that the number "found safe and sound" after the hold-up was actually seven. Police sources had earlier told the news agency that the robber was armed with a handgun. Drivers had been warned to stay away from the area. Police were positioned at the site and a security perimeter was established in the neighbourhood near the ring road around Paris. The incident came as fears over security remained high in France, following three major terrorist assaults over the last two years including the November 2015 Paris attacks, which left 132 people dead. The capital is under tight security, with troops patrolling the streets daily, under a state of emergency imposed by President François Hollande after the attacks.

A feature in last Saturday's Guide about the rise and fall of the TV panel show (The last laugh?, page 14) referred to one hosted by Charlie Brooker as Have You Been Watching. The programme's title was actually You Have Been Watching – those being the words that appeared at the start of the closing credits of Dad's Army and other sitcoms on which the writer, producer and director David Croft worked. Another feature in last Saturday's Guide (X marks the spot?, page 44) omitted to credit one of the two co-directors of the short film Project X, Henrik Moltke. A book review (The Underground Railroad, 12 November, page 11, Review) described WEB Du Bois's 1903 book, The Souls of Black Folk, as a "seminal novel". It is a collection of essays. One of Chris Maslanka's Missing Links puzzles last Saturday (page 57) contained a homophone. It asked for a word which would follow "head" and precede "leaver" to make a fresh word or phrase. The answer "gear" only works with head and lever.

Like tidying your sock drawer instead of studying for exams, the backpacker tax distracted the final week of parliament because it seemed like a task that could be achieved. It didn't turn out that way, but it was supposed to be easy – one of a couple of things that would allow the Turnbull government to be seen to "Get Things Done" in the promised "Year of Delivery". But in the grand endeavour of getting the tax system to deliver enough revenue the new measure is still not much more significant than tidying the sock drawer. The final version of the bill, which ended up requiring the support of those supposedly fiscally irresponsible Greens, will raise a few hundred million dollars over the next four years. While voters watched with bemusement and dismay as the grand theatre of their democracy spent days bickering over the exact rate of tax working holidaymakers might pay on their fruit-picking earnings, and whether assorted crossbench senators were rotten scoundrels for welching on their deals about it, a couple of truly big ideas got much less attention. They're not finalised and still to be subjected to the full blowtorch of big-business lobbying but the two ideas inched forward by the treasurer, Scott Morrison, this week could – if they survive – make a real difference. The first is the so-called diverted profits tax – the Google tax – similar to the tax introduced in the UK in 2015 to stop multinationals coming up with convoluted schemes to shift their profits to low-tax or no-tax jurisdictions – the kind of schemes that mean companies including Google and Facebook have paid very little tax here. So far we have an exposure draft of the legislation, with submissions due by Christmas Eve, which doesn't leave a lot of time to bring it in before the scheduled start date in the middle of next year. The government is counting on getting only about $100m a year from that tax, choosing to err quite dramatically on the side of caution, but depending on how it is enforced by the tax office and interpreted by the courts it could raise a great deal more than that. The second is the government's long-overdue concession that something is very, very wrong with the amount of revenue it collects from offshore gasfields. As campaigners at the Tax Justice Network have been pointing out for a long time, there's something amiss when Australia will become the world's largest gas exporter in 2020 and is forecast in that year to get just $800m in revenue for its resource, while Qatar – the country we will be overtaking – will be getting $26bn. The money that can be reaped from multinationals paying their fair share of taxes could be more than $400bn over the next 20 years, according to the Tax Justice Network's calculations. But that assumes the tax can be applied retrospectively, which the treasurer appears to be indicating is unlikely, but without which the whole exercise is a bit pointless. The government plays up the backpacker tax because it assumes – often correctly – that it will be judged on short-term wins and losses, on whether it ends the year "on a high" and whether the prime minister can be seen to be notching up some "wins". But voters are seeing through those kind of measurements of success and failure. They know the incremental scorecards that assume such importance in the corridors of Canberra are often based on second-order things and that the real stakes are much higher. And they're right. Forcing backpackers to pay some tax is welcome, as far as it goes, but not nearly as important as making sure the government follows through with its plans to properly tax multinationals. That's before we get to the argument about how the additional cash should be used – the crucial, central policy fight we almost had in 2016 election campaign before it drowned in a sea of slogans. Should any additional revenue make up for that forgone with the Turnbull government's $48bn in company tax cuts – the ones that were going to be the "first order of business" for the new parliament before it was clear they were unlikely to pass in their entirety – or should it be used to ensure the continued provision of quality health and education, adequate payments to the unemployed, adequate care for the disabled? Will Morrison prevail with his argument that we absolutely have to keep up with other developed countries – Donald Trump's plan to reduce US company tax to just 15%; Theresa May's promise to take the UK tax rate to 17% – to maintain investment and economic competitiveness? Or will Bill Shorten be able to articulate and explain Labor's message of inclusive growth – that spending on health and education to prevent rising inequality is a prerequisite for growth, not something that could be afforded after the benefits of tax cuts "trickled down" through the economy. That's the argument were were supposed to have in 2016 and it has an importance beyond even its far-reaching economic consequences. The low-tax trickle-down economics of the US and the UK must bear at least some of the blame for the rising inequality and the voter backlash that has pushed politics in those countries to destructive, divisive extremes. A lot is at stake if the Australian parliament gets around to the really big arguments next year. Or it could stick to the sock drawers.

Facebook has agreed to invest $20m in affordable housing initiatives after facing intense criticism for failing to help low-income residents in Silicon Valley where the technology boom has exacerbated displacement and gentrification. The corporation, which is pushing forward with a massive campus expansion in northern California, announced on Friday a partnership with community organizations aimed at funding affordable housing construction and assisting tenants facing eviction. Housing activists who have long been critical of Facebook and its role in accelerating income inequality in the region said the investment marked an "unprecedented" collaboration between Silicon Valley corporations and advocacy groups and that the project could push neighboring tech companies to better address local poverty. "I'm hoping this fund will be the thing that starts to move the rest of the region," said Tameeka Bennett, executive director of Youth United for Community Action (Yuca), a non-profit in East Palo Alto that helped negotiate the new agreement. The housing shortage has reached crisis levels in Silicon Valley, which is also home to Google, Apple and many other wealthy technology firms. Rapid job creation combined with a lack of new housing has created an estimated shortfall of 22,000 homes, with the region building only 26% of the housing needed for low-income people, according to non-profit group Public Advocates. That means only the wealthy can afford to live near their Silicon Valley jobs, forcing an estimated 70,000 low-income workers to commute more than 50 miles to work. Facebook, headquartered in Menlo Park, has contributed to the problem in direct and indirect ways. The company sparked backlash after it began offering generous bonuses to employees if they live near campus, which advocates say has hastened gentrification. Local real estate managers have evicted low-income tenants en masse, explicitly marketing units to Facebook employees. The funding announced this week is not simply a philanthropic donation from Facebook, which is valued at $350bn. The corporation is legally required to fund certain community benefits as part of its ongoing expansion project, and activists have spent months pressuring the company to make substantial investments. Facebook plans to add 126,000 sq ft to its campus and bring 6,500 new employees to the area, increasing the Menlo Park workforce by 20%. Development laws mandated that the corporation contribute $6.3m to below-market-rate housing. Still, non-profit leaders said the housing fund could have a significant impact and noted that Facebook executives have relied heavily on the input of local advocates with the kind of intensive collaboration advocates rarely see from corporations. "The community groups that have the expertise really were equal players," said Sam Tepperman-Gelfant, senior staff attorney at Public Advocates, which had raised formal objections to Facebook's expansion proposal. "I hope having one large prominent Silicon Valley company leading the way on this will be a wake-up call for all the other global corporations that the Bay Area is hosting and the need for them to work locally," he added, "rather than just thinking of themselves as global corporations that exist online." In addition to investing $18.5m toward the creation and preservation of affordable housing, the company has offered $500,000 toward legal and rental assistance to tenants threatened with displacement. A Facebook spokesman told the Guardian that the company doesn't have projections on the number of housing units the partnership could fund, but noted that the $20m is an "initial contribution" and said the company hopes to "attract additional public, private and philanthropic entities to contribute to the fund". Kyra Brown, Yuca's social justice program director, said it was critical that Facebook do a better job diversifying its workforce and hire locally in East Palo Alto, a historically black city. African American employees make up only 3% of the corporation's senior leadership in the US. "Silicon Valley is known as this very innovative place when it comes to addressing everyday issues," she said, "but my hope is that we also take that same innovation and apply it to social issues." Brown, who grew up in East Palo Alto, said the announcement was an important first step in the tech sector helping to address inequities in the communities they've entered. "I'm glad that Facebook is thinking about the legacy it wants to leave particularly when it comes to communities of color," she said.

Steven Gerrard is closing in on a return to Liverpool after the club's under-23s coach Michael Beale prepared for a move to São Paulo. Beale, who has been at Liverpool since 2012, is close to becoming assistant manager to Rogério Ceni, according to Rio's O Globo newspaper. The 43-year-old former goalkeeper has identified Beale as the man he wants to be his No2 with a deal expected to be completed next week in Brazil. The pair are believed to have met at an English Football Association course for coaches in Liverpool last September. Beale's impending departure is not directly connected to Gerrard's return but a vacancy would mean a reshuffle at the Kirkby academy. Gerrard has long been linked with a return to Liverpool after leaving LA Galaxy last month and the Anfield legend, while working towards his Uefa badges, seems ready to work within the academy. The former Liverpool and England captain announced his retirement from football last month, ending his 19-year playing career. Gerrard made 710 appearances for Liverpool, scoring 186 goals and winning eight major trophies, including the Champions League in 2005, before joining LA Galaxy in 2015. O Globo reported that Beale has already travelled to Brazil and watched his new side with Ceni last Sunday in an under-20s tournament. Beale's exit represents something of a blow for Liverpool after helping to bring through Ben Woodburn, the 17-year-old who became the club's youngest goal-scorer in the 2-0 EFL Cup win over Leeds United.

It's a fable for our times. Someone creates a tool that flags fake news on Facebook with big red warning signs. Someone else installs said tool, forgets about it, and then mistakenly assumes that the red warning signs are evidence of Facebook's own efforts to tackle the problem. A reputable technology website then writes a story about Facebook's new experiment without doing any fact checking, thus generating its own piece of fake news. The icing on the cake? The fake news detector fails to recognize it as fake news. "I thought it was the most meta thing I've ever seen: a fake news article about a fake news detector," said Daniel Sieradski, who created the BS Detector browser plug-in to alert users to unreliable news sources. He immediately contacted the TechCrunch authors to point out their mistake, and they updated the article. Sieradski, a 37-year-old activist and independent journalist from Syracuse, created BS Detector as a reaction to Facebook's failure to acknowledge any responsibility for the spread of misleading and false information on its platform. "The proliferation of misinformation has severely impacted people's ability to make informed decisions when it comes to politics and other issues," he said. He was irritated by Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg's claims that fake news was a difficult problem to solve and so built BS Detector to prove that it's possible. "This is how anti-semitism surges in a public sphere instead of staying in the dark corners of the internet. These conspiracy theories move into mainstream discourse and become adopted as factual beliefs," he added. BS Detector, which Sieradski claims has been downloaded more than 25,000 times, works by cross-referencing news links with a database of questionable news sources. If there's a match, it injects a red warning sign flagging that the website is not a reliable news source. There are different classifications for fake news, satire, extreme bias, conspiracy theory, junk science, state news or hate groups. Sieradski continuously updates the database and provides a way for websites to appeal the classification. "Ultimately we could connect with media watchdog groups and work with them on an actual methodology to back our product," he said. Today, in a final twist in the tale, Facebook blocked people from linking to BS Detector citing security reasons. When the Guardian attempted to post a link to bsdetector.tech, a pop-up appeared stating "message failed". "Obviously it's not a security risk because there's no security related behavior of the plug-in. It doesn't affect the integrity of Facebook's operations, it just inserts an HTML element into the page. It's not doing anything mischievous. My suspicion is that they didn't like the TechCrunch article." The Guardian contacted Facebook to find out why the link was blocked from the social network, but the company didn't initially respond. Hours later the link could be posted once again – as predicted by Sieradski himself. "This is how Facebook rolls. I expected nothing less than a quiet unblocking. It's routine for them at this point. Drop a banhammer unjustly, get called out in the press, pretend it wasn't on purpose," he said. A Facebook spokeswoman later issued this statement: "We maintain a set of systems to help us detect and block suspicious behavior on our site. We temporarily blocked people from sharing the domain bsdetector.tech because of other abuse we have seen from the .tech top-level domain. We have corrected the error."

The ashes approach. A hundred flags wave, a thousand camera phones click, veterans salute and the chants go up of "Yo soy Fidel" ("I am Fidel"). Then, within seconds, the procession has passed, the crowd breaks up, the roads reopen and people go back to their normal lives. The scene has been repeated the length of the Cuba over the past three days, as the 900km (560-mile) funeral procession for the island's rebel commander-in-chief, Fidel Castro, retraces the journey he made in 1959 after arguably the most audacious and inspiring revolution of the 20th century. Now, as then, the parade is labelled La Caravana de la Libertad (the Caravan of Liberty), but freeing Cuba has come to mean something very different after 57 years of authoritarian one-party rule. The first major town on the route of the procession is Cienfuegos, an industrial centre that highlights the lofty ambitions, poor execution and bad fortune of the Castro government. It was near here that Cuba – with the help of technicians from the Soviet Union – attempted to build a nuclear reactor to ease energy shortages and power industrial development. Billions of dollars were invested, thousands of workers were employed, but it never generated a single kilowatt of electricity. The project, which started in 1981, was scuppered after the fall of the Berlin Wall. Today, all that is left is a giant hulk of the abandoned reactor – the same model as the one that melted down in Chernobyl – and the nearby "Nuclear City", a community of Soviet-style tower blocks. "This was seen as the city of the future in the beginning, but nobody thinks that now, not at all," said a local shopkeeper. The failure of the project did nothing to dim her affection for the leader who commissioned it. "I cried yesterday. I love Fidel. I've been watching his speeches all day on TV." History is now in danger of repeating itself. After the Soviets left, Cuba turned to Venezuela for support and energy. Castro persuaded Hugo Chávez to supply 96,000 barrels of oil a day, most of it processed at the refinery in Cienfuegos. But with Venezuela now in the midst of its own crisis, this has fallen by more than 15% in the past year and more cuts are expected. In July, street lighting was dimmed by 50% and state enterprises were told they must reduce energy consumption by 25%. "There have been interruptions at the refinery," said Dagmara Quirós, whose family works inside. For her, it was not a big deal; in recent decades, Cubans have grown used to intermittent supplies of fuel, electricity and basic goods. She and her daughter were more concerned about completing a paper chain to drape outside their home, before the funeral procession arrived. "I love Fidel. He's done a lot for my family," said Quirós, a hospital cook. In the city centre, public buildings are draped in giant flags. Houses and businesses have signs and photographs of Castro. The streets are lined with crowds three deep waiting for the procession: medical staff in white, the military in khaki and children in school uniform – some with the word "Fidel" painted on their faces. Education manager María Elena Martínez says this is a historical moment, though she does not expect it to usher in big changes. "I don't think there is any Cuban who isn't sad," she says. "But even with Fidel gone, there is [President] Raúl [Castro] and then another revolutionary will take over from him." She is not blind to the problems facing her country, and would like the economy to improve. Her monthly salary of 890 pesos (about $35) is higher than average but she says she is still short of everything. Martínez shrugs at the prospect of renewed tensions with the US, after Donald Trump's threat to reverse Barack Obama's diplomatic rapprochement. "We have to fight in this historical time. I am used to that. I was born in 1962 so my whole life has been revolution." Castro's ashes spent Wednesday night at the mausoleum of Ernesto "Che" Guevara in Santa Clara – a final farewell for two comrades-in-arms. We next catch up with the procession at Sancti Spíritus, a city famed in revolutionary history for one of Castro's most democratically idealistic speeches, given at 2am in the pouring rain during the original Caravan of Liberty on 6 January 1959 to a huge crowd eager to find out what the nascent revolution would mean for the country. Castro reassured them that they would not see more of the same oppression they suffered under Fulgencio Batista. "Will we ban freedom of the press? No. Will we ban freedom of association? No!" he thundered in a rhetorical question-and-answer. Seven years later, the same city was the site of mass executions as the communist government battled an insurgency. Supporters say Castro needed to be ruthless to cement his rule. But there were also Cuban casualties overseas as the president took the armed struggle on to the global stage. Roberto Garit, a community leader in Sancti Spíritus, is veteran of battles in Africa, where thousands of Cuban soldiers died fighting colonial and white minority regimes. Castro, he says, is like a father and a brother to him. "The greatest leader, an inspiration to the world." As the official convoy approaches, he is in an emotional mood. "Listen to the silence," he says. "I can hear my own heart beating." As the ashes reach his position, he waves a flag and yells "Viva Fidel!" ("Long live Fidel!"). Then dozens of his comrades – some standing to attention and saluting –echo back: "Viva Fidel." It's a chant they must have uttered thousands of times over the decades, a fervent wish now contradicted – at least materially – by the casket passing in front of their eyes. To get back ahead of the slow-moving procession, we have to take a detour of close to 100km (62 miles) through the economically stagnant hinterland of the island. The road is rutted. Some of the fields alongside are used for tobacco and sugar cane crops, but most is scrubland. There are more oxcarts and donkey rigs than cars. The next province is Granma, the site of the landing by the boat of the same name that carried Castro and 81 other revolutionaries from Mexico. It was a truly extraordinary expedition: all but 12 of them were massacred in their first encounter with the army of Batista, but Castro went on to build a rebel army in the Sierra Maestra – and then seize power in just three years. In the city of Bayamo, there are countless billboards and memorials to this history of revolution. But many in the younger generation are more interested in the latest news and gossip in their email inboxes and Facebook timelines. According to official statistics, 30% of people on the island have access to email, much of it through a restricted domestic intranet rather than the world wide web. But wider access is possible from the growing number of Wi-Fi hotspots in every city park, where the benches are now full of people staring at cellphone, tablet and laptop screens. On Facebook – which is now ubiquitous among students and journalists – an intense discussion this week focused on whether individuals should choose their own way of marking Castro's death. One widely shared clip was of an accidentally broadcast argument between two newscasters who were disputing whether it was appropriate to open the show with the words "Good Morning", which might seem too cheery in the current period of mourning. In Bayamo's central park, most people echoed the official line which can he heard on every TV and radio channel in blanket coverage throughout the day. "It's impossible to get any better than Fidel," said Beatriz Licea, a medical student, as she checked her email. "He was an incredible man. Very intelligent. Incomparable." A more nuanced tone was struck by Lionel Ortega, who moved to the US two years ago and is now back visiting his family. "I'll go to the procession. Fidel was the greatest president of all time. But he did good things and bad things. I'm neutral. Politics is ugly here, like everywhere," he said. "I'd like a few less restrictions. If there were a little more liberty in Cuba, this could be the perfect country." We arrive in Santiago late at night. This is the city of revolution: many of the biggest battles in the 19th-century war of independence against Spain and the 20th-century revolt against Batista were fought here. The Santa Efigenia cemetery is the resting place of independence hero José Martí. And on Sunday, this is where Castro's ashes will be interred. Yet, along with the widespread and mostly genuine grief, some hope this might be a turning point. With the passing of the revolutionary commander-in-chief, Cuba has an opportunity to rebalance the way it looks at the past and the future. Without forgetting the extraordinary courage of the rebels and the achievements in healthcare and education, there could be less of a fixation on recent history and revolutionary heroics, and more emphasis on economic development, technological advances and political opening. Ask anyone today what they want in the future and the stock response is "a continuation of Fidel's ideas". But press a little more about their hopes, and some open up. Carmen Pérez (whose name has been changed to prevent repercussions) is a black housewife in her 30s, who intends to take her son to the memorial. A child of the revolution, she says she loves Castro as a father but also knows there is a time when children must come out of the shadow of their parents. "I'd like to see a lot of changes. I'd like a vote to choose my leader. I'd like a free press and freedom of expression. Now if I say what I think I could go to jail," she says. "Lots of people think like me, but many pretend to be something they are not. Some of those who cry for Castro are shedding crocodile tears." She puts her faith in the next generation of Cuban leaders. Raúl Castro has promised to stand down as president in 2018. The first vice-president, Miguel Díaz Canel, is favourite to succeed him and continue the rule of the Communist party. No alternative is currently allowed. The pro-democracy movement – much of it in the pay of rightwing Miami exiles – has little scope to campaign, though the opposition Unión Patriótica de Cuba (Unpac) is strongest here in Santiago, ever the contrarian city. Pérez does not want another revolution. She would prefer a gradual move towards democracy. Her feelings are contradictory, as is often the case for those in mourning. "I can't imagine a better leader than Fidel," she says. "It's complicated. I love him like a father. But we need change. And that can only happen when there is no Castro in power."

The chief constable of the force investigating claims that Sir Edward Heath sexually abused children has vowed not to buckle under "unacceptable" media pressure, insisting the investigation into the late prime minister is not a "fishing trip" or a "witch-hunt". A "significant number of individuals have disclosed allegations of abuse", the Wiltshire police chief, Mike Veale, said on Friday in an extraordinary 1,600-word statement that sought to rebuff media criticism and keep the 15-month investigation on track. The Guardian understands that at least 15 people have made allegations to the police around the country claiming Heath, who died in 2005, was involved in the sexual abuse of children. Multiple sources say the Wiltshire-led Operation Conifer remains live and the claims are regarded by police as credible, with inquiries continuing into whether they can be shown to be true or disproved. Police are describing the complainants as "victims" in private. One police source said the fact police were continuing the investigation demonstrated the belief in the credibility of the complaints. "If we did not believe that, we would have shut the investigation down. The fact is we are continuing." Police have taken advice from the Crown Prosecution Service, and a senior officer from Wiltshire has been moved into a role with full-time oversight of the inquiry into Heath and others. Veale's three-page statement, rare during the middle of a high-profile investigation, came after months of attacks in the media on Operation Conifer, which began in August 2015. The chief constable criticised the undue pressure on his officers and said police were under a greater duty to investigate because Heath had held the highest office in the UK. "Sir Edward Heath was an extremely prominent, influential and high-profile person, who was arguably one of the most powerful people in the world commensurate with the publicly elected office he held. "It is clear that I am expected to conduct a proportionate investigation which will result in a distinct outcome or report and the closer the suspect is to the state the greater the obligation and the more probing the investigation should be." Heath was prime minister from 1970-74. A world-class yachtsman in his spare time, he took Britain into what was then the European Economic Community. His time in power was beset by industrial strife, and confrontations with the then powerful trade unions plunged Britain into a three-day week. He was elected leader of the the Conservative party in 1965 and won the 1970 election. He lost the premiership in 1974 to Labour's Harold Wilson and lost the Conservative party leadership the following year when challenged and defeated by Margaret Thatcher, of whom he became a bitter and vocal critic. Heath, who never married, died at home in Salisbury in July 2005, aged 89. Dr Rachel Hoskins, an expert on ritual sacrifice who has been asked by detectives to examine claims made against Heath and others as part of Operation Conifer, has been highly critical of the investigation. Veale said: "This is not a 'fishing trip' or 'witch-hunt' – both of these terms have been unfairly levelled at us." He cited the constitutional principle of policing being free of undue influence from the state, as he pledged the investigation would continue. "I take my responsibilities of operational independence, which is the bedrock of British policing, very seriously indeed. Therefore I will remain operationally independent and will not be influenced by inappropriate and unacceptable pressure from people who don't know the detail of this case. "I will not be buckling under pressure to not investigate or to conclude the investigation prematurely." Veale said even though Heath was dead, detectives might be able to track down any accomplices and support any victims. "There remains the likelihood that witnesses that can serve to corroborate or, equally as important, negate the allegations, are still alive. If abuse has occurred then it remains relevant to support those affected and seek to bring to justice any person still living who may have committed associated criminal offences. It is important to identify any vulnerable individuals who require safeguarding today." Several police forces across Britain have received claims about Heath. The investigation is being co-ordinated and led by police in Wiltshire, where Heath had a home in Salisbury. Veale said a thorough inquiry could exonerate Heath and that some claims had been dropped by detectives. The media debate about the investigation has characterised it as unfounded, but within policing the view is largely different. Public faith in police competence around investigating historical sexual abuse claims against high-profile individuals has been rocked by the fallout from a Scotland Yard inquiry, Operation Midland, which examined claims from the 1970s and 80s. A report earlier this month castigated police for falling for false claims made by a complainant called "Nick". In that case, police chiefs were among the last to realise the inquiry, which wrongly targeted establishment figures, was beset by failings. Veale said "Nick" had not been spoken to as part of the Wiltshire-led investigation. In the Met inquiry he is believed to have made claims, widely thought to be false, about Heath. Other police investigations into historical sexual abuse claims have led to convictions. Police have also faced accusations that they have covered up or failed to investigate abuse claims against powerful people. At the end of their investigation, Wiltshire police plan to write a report assessing whether the evidence gathered would have been sufficient to charge Heath, put him on trial, and convince a jury beyond reasonable doubt of his guilt. Two people have been arrested as part of Operation Conifer. Police will only say the arrests are related to "child protection issues" and that the two, who have been bailed, are suspects but are not directly linked to the Heath investigation. Wiltshire's police and crime commissioner, Angus Macpherson, who has strategic oversight of the force, backed its right to investigate the claims and said public interest was adding to pressure on officers. "I believe the root cause of this pressure is a legitimate concern that the reputation of a former prime minister may be tarnished without there being credible evidence of guilt," Macpherson said. "The chief constable and I are of one mind: the police cannot act as judge and jury in their own cause. Once the police have conducted the investigation to a conclusion, there must be an alternative avenue to assess the credibility of any evidence that has been gathered." The Guardian understands that Det Supt Sean Memory, who was Wiltshire's head of crime, has been moved from his post to oversee the inquiry into Heath full-time, as well as another inquiry into historical allegations which emerged during the investigation into Heath. Wiltshire police said: "Further to a restructure of portfolios Det Supt Memory is the new head of Legacy Investigations and continues in his role as senior investigating officer for Operation Conifer." The CPS confirmed it had given advice to the police investigation. In August 2015 Memory made a public appeal, controversially outside Heath's Salisbury home, saying: "This is an appeal for victims in particular if you have been the victim of any crime from Sir Ted Heath or any historical sexual offence, or you are a witness, or you have any information about this, then please come forward."

Theresa May's decision to pursue a hard Brexit is driving Conservative-supporting remainers to desert the party, the Liberal Democrats' newest MP said in the aftermath of her sensational win in the Richmond Park byelection. In an interview with the Guardian, Sarah Olney said her victory over Zac Goldsmith on a 21.5% swing was secured thanks to voters who felt the prime minister was only focusing on the part of the population that voted to leave the EU. "What I found when I was talking to voters is an awful lot of people who've never voted anything else but Tory said they were going to vote for us," she said, arguing that people back the Conservatives for "stability, security and economic competence". "The referendum result and Theresa May's response to it has blown all that out of the water – people no longer trust them." Olney, who overturned a majority of 23,000 to become the MP for Richmond Park and North Kingston in south-west London, accused May of "pandering" to people such as Nigel Farage, who she said were guilty of "stoking up division to serve their own political ends". "One of the things that concerns a great deal of people in this constituency is ... the Conservative government seems to be shifting very rapidly towards the right," she said, claiming May was trying to appease "Ukippy members of parliament". "I think what this result shows us is that's not what a majority of Tory voters want." Olney argued that her 1,800 majority, secured with just under 50% of the vote, was a cry from the 48% of remain voters to be listened to and for a more "moderate, consensual, unifying approach" to Britain's EU exit. It was a bad day for Labour, which did so badly in Richmond it lost its deposit. Professor John Curtice warned that the party was right to worry about the risk of losing socially conservative voters who were likely to back Brexit, but warned it had an even bigger amount of support among pro-EU liberals. "The nightmare scenario is that while Paul Nuttall [the Ukip leader] mobilises people at the other end of the spectrum, the Lib Dems eat at the socially liberal vote," he said. Although Goldsmith was standing as an independent after resigning from the Conservative party to fulfil a promise to his constituents over Heathrow, Olney argued that the vote was not "against him personally" but instead about his leave support and May's leadership since the Brexit vote. The Conservative MP Anna Soubry, who has become a vocal critic of a hard Brexit, agreed as she praised the Lib Dem's "sensational" result. She told the Guardian: "This is about those people who voted not to leave the European Union, who aren't trying to thwart the will of the people or undo the vote, but who are saying 'we've been sidelined, we've been ignored, we've been scorned, we've been called remoaners ... but we are entitled to have a say'." She warned that the election upset was because of the "terrible mistake" of ignoring those who backed remain, and claimed voters were angry about the behaviour of the foreign secretary, Boris Johnson, in "insulting other countries". Soubry called on the government to publish a white paper for politicians to discuss leaving the EU. Her colleague Nicky Morgan said it was a "wake-up call for those pushing hard Brexit", saying those who opposed the direction of travel were making themselves heard. The result was also noted in Brussels, where the chief Brexit negotiator, Guy Verhofstadt, said: "Europe is watching and we are proud," triggering an angry exchange with the former cabinet minister Iain Duncan Smith. The Brexit-supporting MP said the official should "mind his own bloody business", adding: "How dare an unelected apparatchik comment on an election first and foremost." Verhofstadt tweeted in reply: The Richmond Park result was dismissed as irrelevant by a senior Conservative who said: "You've got a Conservative government building a country that works for everyone, and the Lib Dems who say they are liberal but their leader doesn't support equal marriage, and claim to be democratic but want to ignore the result of the referendum." Nevertheless, the victory – which could make Conservative MPs in seats such as Twickenham, Kingston upon Thames and Lewes in East Sussex nervous – came at the end of a week in which the government appeared to soften its position over access to the single market. Olney, who will vote against article 50 and wants a second referendum on the Brexit deal, stumbled in one of her first media outings, having to be pulled off air by an aide during an interview on Talk Radio. Asked repeatedly by Julia Hartley-Brewer if there ought to be a rerun of the Richmond byelection as well, the MP argued the referendum was based on "no clear manifesto" before going silent and then being replaced by an adviser who said: "I'm really sorry but Sarah has to leave now." Speaking to the Guardian, the MP was critical of both out and in campaigners in the June referendum, arguing that the then prime minister, David Cameron, had wrongly opted for "project fear". She called for a positive case to be made for close economic links to Europe, and argued that she had a "big personal mandate" to oppose Brexit in the House of Commons and to push for a public vote on the final deal. Asked if MPs in Brexit-supporting constituencies should also block article 50, Olney suggested they should. "That's a paradox for them. It's an easy decision for me but ultimately MPs need to vote for what they think is in the best interest of their constituents and if they think the best interest of their constituents is served by remaining in the EU then that is how they should vote," she said. She added that the "will of the people is for a stable and prosperous society and it is my personal belief that we can't deliver that by leaving the European Union". She also rejected the notion that the referendum had delivered a majority vote for Brexit. "It wasn't a majority at all, it was something close to 25% because so many people didn't vote. I just want the whole thing to be more carefully considered. "It's like 52% of people who expressed a preference want to leave the EU – 'off we go then'. It is going to be the most enormous economic, constitutional, social, upheaval that we face for a generation – it feels to me that's not adequate basis for making that decision." She also accused leave campaigners of misleading voters with claims of £350m for the NHS and a promise to those from the Indian subcontinent that it would be easier for their relatives to get visas. And she questioned May's interpretation of the result as being largely about immigration. "When I talk to people who've voted to leave I think a lot of them have been driven by nostalgia ... for some mythical lost time that they want back," she said. "There are lots of reasons people voted to leave, it wasn't all about immigration and I disagree with Theresa May choosing to interpret the referendum result in that way." Olney said she believed immigration was positive overall but that large numbers of people moving "suddenly into one area" could have a negative impact on community relations and needed to be managed. Asked about Tim Farron's suggestion that up to 30% of Tory switchers to the Lib Dems had actually voted to leave, Olney said she did not have the figures and that she did not meet many Brexit supporters on the campaign trail. "I met one or two – one called me a fascist because [he said] I wanted to overturn democracy. So I assume he wasn't going to back me." The Lib Dems' position over Brexit has not been mirrored by Labour, where a number of MPs think the response must be action on immigration and a vote for article 50.

The company building the UK's first new nuclear power station for decades is facing questions over the health of its fleet of French nuclear plants after an investigation which has left the country with the lowest level of nuclear power for 10 years and the prospect of power cuts during a cold snap. Thirteen of Électricité de France's (EDF) 58 atomic plants are offline, some due to planned maintenance, but most for safety checks ordered by the regulator over anomalies discovered in reactor parts. The outages have prompted warnings of potential planned power cuts and pushed up wholesale power prices, boosting coal and gas operators but squeezing small energy suppliers. Carbon emissions will possibly rise too as France, which last year forged a historic climate change deal in Paris, has to import more fossil fuel power. The problems stem from a fault identified last year by the Nuclear Safety Authority (ASN) in the as-yet-unfinished reactor at north-western France's Flamanville plant – the same design approved for Hinkley Point C in the UK. Pierre-Franck Chevet, president of the ASN, told Le Figaro the situation was "very worrying" and the discovery had led to "unprecedented" checks at all the country's nuclear plants, which provide 75% of France's electricity and normally help it export power to other countries. The issue is higher than expected carbon concentrations in steel reactor components, which could make them vulnerable to cracking. EDF insist its French fleet, much of which dates back to the 1980s, is safe and that its reactors will start coming back online within weeks. And while experts do not expect the episode to result in a big financial hit to EDF, they believe it could turn up the pressure on a company which is already stretched. "The longer than expected outages at some of EDF's nuclear plants place additional pressure on the company at a time that it is already under significant financial stress," said Jim Watson, research director at the UK Energy Research Centre. "It has already taken a big risk in pursuing the Hinkley C project in the UK because other reactors using that design [in Finland and France] have suffered from delays and large cost overruns." Peter Atherton, associate at analysts Cornwall Energy, said the failure of earlier inspections to pick up on problems was "a very serious thing, a bit of a stain on the whole French programme". A spokesman for EDF – which has already cut its nuclear electricity output target and its profits expectations for this year – said the company was confident the reactors would reopen by the end of December. "Safety is our top priority," he said. "EDF as operator is responsible for nuclear safety, and we have the presence of an independent and strong safety authority (ASN)." But the most immediate concern is the possibility of power cuts in the world's fifth biggest economy. French grid operator RTE said the low nuclear output and France's unusually high reliance on electric heating meant a cold snap could result in "exceptional measures". Those include lowering the voltage and, as a last resort, rolling power cuts around the country for two hours or so at a time. The outages have also pushed up European wholesale power prices. Henry Edwardes-Evans, an energy trading expert at Platts Power in Europe, said the reduced nuclear output and rising coal costs over the summer had been a "double whammy" that has driven up wholesale prices, which have been low in recent years. The higher wholesale prices have also caused problems for smaller energy suppliers. "The nuclear outages played a significant role in GB Energy going bust," said Atherton, referring to the three-year-old UK supplier with 160,000 customers which ceased trading last weekend, blaming "swift and significant increases in energy prices". Nuclear critics believe the situation shows the need for France to diversify away from nuclear and invest more in renewable sources such as wind and solar power, which account for less than 4% of electricity generation, compared with 25% in the UK. Charlotte Mijeon, of the anti-nuclear group Sortir du Nucléaire (Get Out of Nuclear), said there was a "chain of responsibility" for the crisis in France's nuclear industry which ranged from the government at the top to subcontracted private suppliers. "The system of nuclear safety in France has always been limited," she said. "It starts from the premise that the industrials are honest and the moment there is a problem they will flag it up to the safety authorities and it will be sorted out."

On most nights, New York's Richard Rogers theater is buzzing thanks to its current tenant, Hamilton, the hit musical phenomenon that took over the space in July 2015 and subsequently took Broadway and the culture at large by storm. On Thursday afternoon, the buzz was no different as the theater's stage was home to a special promotional performance of the Hamilton Mixtape, an ancillary album filled with pop and R&amp;B stars crooning their interpretations of songs from the hit musical. Streamed live online to fans around the globe, the Hamilton Mixtape performance was an extension of Hamilton's famed Ham4Ham weekly show held Wednesday afternoons outside the theater, which was first meant to build buzz but later morphed into a thank you to fans who have supported the musical and can't manage to get actual tickets. Ahmir "Questlove" Thompson and Tariq "Black Thought" Trotter of the Roots – two executive producers of the album – took the stage to MC the festivities and noted that the album took over a year to put together. Of course, the entire project was masterminded by Hamilton creator Lin-Manuel Miranda who broadcast a special video message inside the theater thanking fans and invited guests for attending. Currently in London preparing for an upcoming remake of Mary Poppins for Disney with Emily Blunt as the titular nanny, his other collaboration with Disney, the animated Moana, is currently No 1 at the box office. In addition, Miranda just announced he's producing a television version of the popular fantasy novel series, The Kingkiller Chronicles. Inside the Rogers, the performance recruited stars from the album to boast their tracks from the Mixtape. Grammy nominee Andra Day was no doubt the highlight of the event receiving a standing ovation after an emotional rendition of the angry ballad Burn, originally sang in the show by Hamilton's wife after she discovers her husband's affair. Regina Spektor was also on hand to croon her version of Dear Theodosia, an ode sung in the show by Aaron Burr and Hamilton as love letters to their children. The performance's grand finale was a buoyant duet of the show's bubbly R&amp;B number Helpless from late 90s stalwarts Ashanti and Ja Rule. Though not on hand, other artists featured on the album range the gamut from throwback acts to current stars and novelty names. Rappers Chance the Rapper, Wiz Khalifa and Nas all pitched in for the mixtape's hip-hop tracks, while the likes of Kelly Clarkson, Alicia Keys, Sia and John Legend handled the pop ballads. Jimmy Fallon is even featured with The Roots, delivering his comedic take on King George's bitter anthem You'll Be Back. Two weeks ago, the show about 1700s American politics found itself in the middle of the current conversation thanks to a visit from vice-president-elect Mike Pence, who was greeted with a mix of boos and cheers upon entering the theater for a Friday night performance. Brandon Dixon, the actor who currently plays Aaron Burr, later delivered a message to Pence that went viral, saying that he truly hopes "this show has inspired you to uphold our American values and work on behalf of all of us". Thanks to the new wave of publicity, Hamilton set a new sales record the week after the affair grossing $3.3m over eight performances, the most money ever made on Broadway in a single week. Perhaps it's a mix of fate and perfect synergy, then, that the Hamilton Mixtape has a song titled Immigrants (We Get the Job Done), featuring rappers K'naan, Snow Tha Product, Riz MC and Residente and opens with the staticky voice of a reporter. "It's really astonishing," he notes. "In a country founded by immigrants, 'immigrant' has somehow become a bad word."

The Gambia's autocratic president, Yahya Jammeh, who once claimed a "billion-year" mandate to rule, has conceded defeat after a shock election loss to a real-estate developer who once worked as a security guard in London. Jammeh had kept the tiny west African country under an iron grip for more than two decades, and there were fears that the eccentric 51-year-old would use violence or fraud to maintain power. Instead he became a rare dictator to accept defeat in a democratic election, agreeing to hand power to challenger Adama Barrow, a softly spoken businessman who previously had little public profile. Barrow told the Guardian that Jammeh had called him to concede defeat with the words: "Congratulations. I'm the outgoing president; you're the incoming president." The father of five used his lack of political baggage to woo voters desperate for change, claiming 45.5% of the vote to Jammeh's 36.7%. If Jammeh sticks to his word, Barrow will become only the third Gambian head of state since the country's independence in 1965. In a televised statement, Jammeh said the vote had been "the most transparent election in the whole world," adding that he would not contest the result. "I take this opportunity to congratulate Mr Adama for his victory. It's a clear victory. I wish him all the best and I wish all Gambians the best. As a true Muslim who believes in the almighty Allah I will never question Allah's decision. You Gambians have decided," he said. The prerecorded message then cut to a shot of Jammeh phoning the president-elect. "Hello, are you hearing me?" Jammeh asked Barrow, grinning widely on his mobile. "I wish you all the best. The country will be in your hands in January. You are assured of my guidance. You have to work with me. You are the elected president of The Gambia. I have no ill will and I wish you all the best." Barrow said he was confident Jammeh would stand down. "Power belongs to the people. It's the people who have spoken. He cannot hang on," he said. "We won the election clearly so there's nothing he can do about it." Barrow said his priority was to name a cabinet. "I'm very, very happy and excited. I'm happy that we won this election." Even the head of the electoral commission, Alieu Momarr Njai, seemed stunned by Jammeh's rapid concession. "The president is magnanimous enough to accept that he had lost the election, and he will call the new president to congratulate him as well as to pray for peace and tranquility," he said after announcing preliminary results. "It's very rare that this present situation now, in Africa, that this happens." . Internet and international phone services cut off for "security" during the poll were restored soon after Njai's announcement and, as news of the election result spread, the country erupted into celebration. The streets of the capital, Banjul, deserted until that point, began to fill with cars screeching their horns and blasting out music. Children sang, men stripped off their shirts and punched the air, and others went online to celebrate using the hashtag gambiadecides. Several said the historic change had moved them to tears. One Twitter user, Muhammad Sanu Jallow, said: Gambians abroad joined the celebration, with several saying they were planning to return or expected friends and relatives to head back. The country's poverty and repressive political climate means many Gambians live overseas, particularly in Europe, even though it is one of Africa's smallest states with only 2 million people. Casting his vote on Thursday, Jammeh said he was confident of winning "a bigger landslide" than the Gambia had ever seen, and refused to say whether he would concede if he lost. This year's election was the first time since 1994, when Jammeh seized control of the country in a coup, that he faced a serious challenge to his rule. Over that period he consolidated power in a series of presidential elections, and skilfully exploited tribal and other divisions among multiple opposition parties. Opposition politicians, journalists and activists were arbitrarily arrested, thrown into jail, tortured and killed during Jammeh's tenure. Njai had been about to announce the latest batch of results when he received a call on his mobile phone. He told waiting observers and press that the president knew the result and was ready to concede. The interior minister, sitting in a magnolia office cubicle and trembling behind his sunglasses, called on all to remain calm. "Keep the peace and tranquility," Modou Bah said. "People should go for their lawful businesses. We should not allow politics to divide us." Meanwhile, those hosting the live broadcast of election results on state television could not hide their astonishment. "Have all the people loyal to the president migrated?" asked Malick Jones, presenting an all-night broadcast of Gambia Decides, when he realised Jammeh had lost the capital. Outside Barrow's house, crowds gathered, some celebrating and some in shock. Anger at Jammeh for his decades of repression bubbled up in others. "We'll put him in jail. We want him to go to the [international criminal court]," said Adama Faye, an 18-year-old student. "He killed my father – I promise you, he did. Since I was born, I haven't felt this kind of happiness." Jubilant crowds sang, whistled, cheered and stormed Barrow's compound in celebration trying to get in and shake his hand, as a man with a basket-hat and a posse of bouncers tried to keep them out. Inside, the first lady-elect, Fatou Bah, the first of Barrow's two wives, arrived in a blue dress and large gold earrings and was blessed by a close family friend, Catholic priest Bruno Toupan. Barrow is a devout Muslim, and Toupan said his decision to call a Catholic to bless the family was proof that he would be a president for all Gambians. "We have great hope in the Gambia," he said. "It's a great relief, as Jammeh was planning to bring in sharia law. I would have been a second-class citizen." Cheering crowds also gathered outside the home of Ousainou Darbo, the opposition leader who was sentenced to three years in prison in April, giving rise to Barrow's candidacy. His court hearing will be on Monday and the crowds were calling for his release. Amnesty International added its voice to these calls. "An immediate first step for this new government is to release political prisoners and those who have disappeared," Sabrina Mahtani, from Amnesty International, said. "We've seen how important the rights of freedom of information and freedom of assembly are over the last few weeks – it's important that the new government reforms repressive laws."

Max Verstappen The most exciting driver in Formula One and almost certainly a future world champion. But he is under contract at Red Bull and Christian Horner would be incredibly unlikely to let him go. That, however, has not stopped the 19-year-old from mischievously tweeting a screengrab of his phone screen which showed, in what is presumably mock-up, the Mercedes chief Toto Wolff giving him a call. Fernando Alonso Under contract at McLaren until the end of 2018, he has long been unsettled at a team who have seriously underperformed in recent years. One of the most skilled drivers in Formula One and a move to Mercedes would give him a car to match his talents but would mean a reprise of the turbulent relationship he endured in 2007 when team-mates with Lewis Hamilton at McLaren. Sebastian Vettel Endured another disappointing year at Ferrari in which he did not come close to adding to his four world titles. A move to the German constructor would suit him, and the thought of him and Hamilton finally racing in cars which match each other for performance would be mouth watering. Under contract at Ferrari until 2018. Pascal Wehrlein The simplest solution for Mercedes would be to promote a driver who is already on a development contract with the team. Though he spent 2016 racing for Manor, he has filled in for Nico Rosberg and Hamilton in testing and has been identified by Mercedes as a future star. The 22-year-old German could be offered a one-year deal to fill the seat until Alonso or Vettel's contracts come up. Jenson Button Another decent short-term option. Button is, officially, on a year-long sabbatical from McLaren with a return to the team left open. However, he has acknowledged he is unlikely to return. A safe pair of hands to keep the seat warm for Alonso or Vettel while also picking up points for the constructors' championship. Spent three years as Hamilton's team-mate at McLaren and while they were not close, neither were they openly hostile. Esteban Ocon A Mercedes development driver, who made his debut alongside Wehrlein at Manor this season. However, he has agreed to drive for Force India in 2017 and, at 20, is young and inexperienced. A complicating factor could be that Mercedes supply Force India with engines so, should the German team pinch their driver, it could lead to bad blood. Valtteri Bottas The Finn has signed up for another year at Williams but is a reliable and solid driver who could be the sort of under-the-radar team-member Mercedes could pair with the combustible Hamilton.

Doctors are urging Philip Hammond to raise the price of alcohol to tackle the "scourge" of drink-related harm after it emerged that crime, ill health and lost productivity cost up to £52bn a year, far more than previously thought. They want the chancellor to increase the price of cheap, potent drinks such as high-strength white cider, which are mainly consumed by heavy drinkers, homeless people and underage drinkers. Forty-three doctors, medical groups, campaigners, and public health, religious and children's organisations have written to Hammond asking him to use his first budget in spring 2017 to increase the duty on certain alcohol products. "Targeted pricing policies such as minimum unit pricing [MUP] and tax increases on the cheapest high-strength drinks would reduce the amount of alcohol-related death and disease in our country, and would place alcoholic products out of the financial reach of children," said the signatories, which include many medical royal colleges, cancer charities and the Salvation Army. The plea comes after a government-commissioned review of the evidence of alcohol-related harm and what to do about it recommended that ministers abandon their opposition to MUP and start planning to implement it. The review was undertaken by Public Health England (PHE) and leading academic and medical experts on alcohol. It found that the true cost of alcohol-related harm, which had usually been cited as £21bn a year across the UK, has been "generally underestimated". The overall economic burden is due to be between £27bn and £52bn in 2016 (1.3%-2.7% of GDP), the researchers said. Prof Ian Gilmore, the chair of the Alcohol Health Alliance, said: "Ordinary drinkers will not be penalised. MUP will leave pub prices untouched and tax on the cheapest, strongest drinks will be targeted at those drinks that are preferentially consumed by harmful and dependent drinkers." Jeremy Swain, the chief executive of London-based homelessness charity Thames Reach, said: "Among the homeless people we work with, our figures indicate that super-strength beers and ciders at 7.5% to 9% ABV [alcohol by volume] are doing more damage than both heroin and crack cocaine." In 2012, the Conservative-Liberal Democrat coalition government pledged to bring in MUP, but then decided against it in July 2013, which led health bodies to accuse David Cameron's administration of giving in to alcohol industry lobbying. On Friday, the Treasury said the possibility of the policy being introduced in England and Wales remained under review and it would consider carefully the evidence collected by PHE. A Treasury spokesman said: "While no one would want to interfere with the right of adults to enjoy a drink responsibly, PHE's report shows clearly that the abuse of alcohol can cause significant health problems. "The independent UK chief medical officers recently released new guidance on the risk alcohol can pose so people can make informed choices." Henry Ashworth, the chief executive of drinks industry body Portman Group, said PHE's 241-page report "does not contain any new policy ideas, nor does it fully reflect the significant declines in harmful drinking in the last decade. Alcohol policy is on the right track and is consistent and proportionate".

Hundreds of tickets to see Adele in concert next summer have appeared on resale websites for up to £9,000, despite a concerted effort by the singer to battle touts. Tickets for the upcoming dates at Wembley stadium appeared at huge mark-ups as experts warned that plans to clamp down on industrial-scale touting, by outlawing the "bot" software used to harvest tickets, will do little to stop fans being ripped off. Viagogo and StubHub, so-called "secondary ticketing" websites used by touts, are advertising tickets for the singer's London concerts next June. Some appeared online earlier this week even before they went on advance sale on Adele's official website. GetMeIn and Seatwave, both owned by Ticketmaster, are understood to have refrained from listing Adele's tickets amid growing scrutiny of the ticketing world. Adele also worked with Songkick, a company that uses technology to try to ensure tickets end up in the hands of real fans. Industry sources said the arrangement had curbed the number of tickets on Viagogo and StubHub to around 5,000, below what is normal for the most in-demand events. But hundreds were still available at huge mark-ups. The new evidence of the grip touts have on popular events emerged as music industry figures raised concerns that proposals designed to address the problem were inadequate. MPs are considering criminalising the use of bots – readily available software that can harvest hundreds of tickets for touts in a matter of seconds. But industry figures say cracking down on bots may do little to prevent fans being exploited. Music manager Ian McAndrew of Wildlife Entertainment said he feared that some managers and promoters were passing tickets directly to resale websites, bypassing the official sales altogether. "I have often been approached by one of the big four resale sites asking to enter into an arrangement where I give them inventory [tickets] in return for participation in the resale profit," said McAndrew, who has managed acts including Arctic Monkeys. "That is a proposal I have refused on a number of occasions. I can understand how that would be a temptation to some who want to maximise profits for a show." Security consultant Reg Walker told a select committee hearing last month that someone linked to singer Michael Bublé had sent tickets directly to secondary platforms, although he did not suggest this was for financial gain. "In my opinion, I believe that was done potentially without the artist's knowledge and it makes me wonder if there are other artists out there that this is happening to, that they are unaware," he told MPs during a hearing of the department of culture, media and sport select committee. Walker, whose security consultancy Iridium helps identify and block attacks by touts, told the Guardian that outlawing bots was not a "magic bullet". "I'm concerned that we'll get one piece of legislation that blocks a certain amount of the problem but fails to tackle other problems, such as artists or managers doing back-door deals with secondary ticketing platforms." Walker said he has seen an increase in touts simply outsourcing bot activity overseas in anticipation of their use being banned in the UK. And he warned that touts might simply return to the "old-fashioned ways" of getting tickets, some of which were revealed in a Guardian investigation earlier this year. Alternative methods include employing people to trawl ticket sites manually, or using multiple credit cards to subvert limits on the number of tickets that can be purchased. Walker said any legislation would have to take into account technology not classed as a bot, including specially modified internet browsers designed to harvest tickets. "With the speed at which things evolve, legislation has difficulty keeping pace. A lot of this will hinge on the definition of software they're intending to block," he said. While British MPs have so far been wary of over-regulating the ticket market, other countries have been less shy. Secondary ticketing is illegal in Belgium and strictly limited in France, while Italy recently moved to outlaw it after Live Nation, which owns Ticketmaster, admitted passing tickets directly to Viagogo. While touts have a free rein to do business in the UK, they are facing a full-blown investigation into their tax affairs by HMRC, amid allegations that their company accounts do not match up with their sales via ticket resale sites. Touts have also repeatedly been shown to be breaking laws designed to protect consumers from being ripped off. Anyone masquerading as a consumer to buy tickets they intend to resell for profit is in breach of the Consumer Protection from Unfair Trading regulations. And touts who sell via secondary platforms without listing details of their business, or the row and seat number of the ticket, are in breach of the Consumer Rights Act 2015. National Trading Standards is meant to enforce these laws but has yet to launch a full-blown investigation. The Competition and Markets Authority is also looking into ticketing and is due to release a report later this month.

It may be a crisp winter's afternoon in south London but the staff at Sparrows Lane have a spring in their step. The Charlton Athletic training ground has finished with its sessions for the day and lunch is being served. Players are exchanging tips on clothing and cologne. On one wall of the small reception hangs an inspirational quote from Vince Lombardi. Opposite are architectural plans for the club's new "integrated training facility". Meanwhile, upstairs, squeezed between a dartboard and a babyfoot table, is Karl Robinson, the man charged with making sure this good feeling extends beyond the training ground, on to the pitch and, just as importantly, into the stands of The Valley. "I don't know what length of contract I've signed," the new Charlton manager says with a broad smile. "I don't need to know that because I need to win games. I need to make people believe in me, make the players believe in each other, make the fans believe in the team and the board. If we do all that ..." It's certainly no small ambition. This week Robinson became the seventh Charlton manager since the Belgian Roland Duchâtelet bought the club in January 2014 and following the takeover The Valley has been a place of instability, insurrection and bad football results. After relegation from the Championship in the summer, Russell Slade was hired to help the club bounce back. He was sacked after 21 games. There have been constant, often creative, protests from large sections of a dwindling crowd. Last week's 1-1 draw with Sheffield United was briefly suspended after a hail of rubber taxis were thrown on the pitch. Charlton are perhaps the most discomfited club in English football. You wouldn't get that sense from the training ground though and you certainly wouldn't get it from listening to Robinson. The scouser, 36, has filled out a bit since he joined MK Dons seven years ago to become the youngest manager in the Football League. But as well as a fashionable haircut he retains a youthful enthusiasm, and it comes out whenever he talks about the game. "I love this game. When people hear that they'll call it spin, but I think you can see it's not. To get my pro licence when I did, to be coaching [with Blackburn Rovers] in the Premier League at 26 with some of the greatest players in the world. To be managing at 29. I count myself as very fortunate. I've learned an awful lot, I've worked hard. I've managed so many games for 36 and I want to get over 500 before a certain age." What age is that? "I want to get there before I turn 39." Robinson left MK Dons, who his side face in the FA Cup second round on Saturday, last month, with his total at 346 games in management and 147 wins. Charlton might seem an odd bet to get to 500 but Robinson makes no bones about the fact he considers Charlton a big club (he turned down three other jobs before accepting this one) and he has been impressed by the Addicks' controversial owner, Duchâtelet, and the club's chief executive, Katrien Meire. Robinson met Duchâtelet in Paris last week to seal his appointment. On returning to the UK he went straight to the training ground where, after midnight, he met Meire, too. "The owner was very, very good in what he said to me," he says. "Katrien has been phenomenal in everything I've asked. All the things I'd heard about [before I came], haven't been the case. I think if you asked them both they'd say maybe they underestimated how things worked in England and that's where things fell down a little bit." Supporters might not be as understanding; distrust of the Duchâtelet empire runs deep at Charlton. But alongside a commitment to progressive football ("I've had a goalkeeper playing out from the back for the past seven years. Sam Allardyce said I should change my name to something continental"), Robinson has a flair for personal relations. One of the main challenges of his first week, he says, has been working out how each player best responds to information and adapting his message accordingly. As for the fans, Robinson states three times in our interview that he wants to meet them for a pint. "If we win some games then maybe I can get to sit down with the fans, talk to them, have a beer and a chat," he says, explaining the hopeful next stage in his Charlton charm offensive. "I'll ask honestly and they'll answer honestly. Let's talk. Let's have an educated conversation. There's a lot of very educated people round here who support this football club. As you can see I'm sort of in the middle a bit here. The owners have been fantastic to employ me but I want to do my job for the fans as well and I'll do my damnedest to try and bring this football club to the next level and beyond, if we can."

The lawyer for Gary Johnson, the former Chelsea footballer who was paid £50,000 to settle his claim for serious sexual abuse by the club's chief scout in the 1970s, and required to keep the settlement secret, has urged other clubs to be more open and not impose "gagging clauses" on victims. Richard Scorer, of the firm Slater Gordon, who acts for hundreds of historical sexual abuse victims, said it was also important for organisations to support victims, and not treat their allegations simply as a legal claim to be defended. Johnson, who joined Chelsea on schoolboy terms as an 11-year-old in 1970 and was part of the club's first team squad from 1978 to 1981, waived his anonymity in the Daily Mirror, to describe serious sexual abuse by the then chief scout, Eddie Heath, which he said "ruined" his teenage years and "haunts" his life. More recently, after he brought his claim against Chelsea following the publicity about sexual abuse generated by the Jimmy Savile scandal, Johnson has been medically diagnosed with post traumatic stress disorder and according to the psychiatrist who examined him, "the intensity of the flashbacks have increased". Yet Johnson said he was angry that when he finally approached the club years later to report the abuse he suffered, Chelsea took a confrontational approach, treating him as a legal claimant with a case which they settled, imposing a strict confidentiality clause. It required Johnson not only to keep silent about the fact he had received £50,000 from Chelsea, but also to agree that: "the underlying facts of the dispute and the terms, existence, or any other detail of [the settlement] Agreement shall be kept, and will remain, confidential to the parties and their advisors." Victims of sexual abuse who have spoken out in recent years, and the former footballers who have done so over the last fortnight, have mostly suffered in secret for decades and now emphasise the importance and benefits of being able to talk publicly about it. Around 350 victims of abuse have come forward to police within the last fortnight, while an NSPCC hotline has taken more than 860 calls amid what has been described by the Football Association chairman Greg Clarke as the biggest crisis it has faced. Scorer, whose firm is representing many sexual abuse victims giving evidence to the independent inquiry into child sexual abuse, said he could not discuss the specific details of Johnson's case or settlement, but urged other clubs to be more open. "It is very important that organisations are open and honest about abuse so that it can be properly dealt with and investigated, and gagging clauses should not be imposed to prevent organisations being open and honest about abuse which has occurred and addressing it properly," he said. Chelsea have not commented on the case publicly but are understood to have treated Johnson as a litigant because he made a legal claim, and referred it to the club's insurers, who agreed the £50,000 payment and gagging clause. The club itself had to approve that settlement, and have declined to say whether they informed the Football Association or Premier League about Johnson's evidence of sexual abuse by Heath, or conducted any investigation into Heath's wider activities. Johnson has said there were other victims and that Heath had him "perform in threesomes with other boys" but has not named anybody else, saying it is up to them to decide if they want to come forward. Scorer said that it should be irrelevant if a victim first reports abuse in the form of a legal claim, and that football clubs and other institutions should be sympathetic. "When an organisation receives details of an abuse allegation, whether through a legal claim or because a victim has approached directly, they need to be sure they see it not as a legal case to be dealt with, but as an opportunity to learn what may have gone wrong in the past and learn from it, and what they can do to help the victim." Johnson said he was not offered any help or support by Chelsea, and instead was angry at the lengths he was taken to in order to prove that his abuse took place, including evidence being sought from his 84-year-old father, who is living with dementia. Many football clubs are covered by similar public and employer liability insurance as Chelsea, and one club source said that there has been active settling of sexual abuse claims recently with confidentiality clauses, but no other clubs have been identified to have done so. FA chairman Clarke has said that it would be "morally repugnant" for clubs to have effectively bought the silence of potential victims. The insurance company RSA said that "like every other leading insurer" it has offered insurance in the market which would cover claims for historic sex abuse, "leaving us with a potential exposure for any cases which might arise." RSA is understood not to require confidentiality clauses in settlements, and the Association of British Insurers said the clauses are requested by the organisation insured, or a victim, and it was not aware of "any insurers which currently request them." Johnson has said he felt he had no option but to accept the settlement, after the police decided not to investigate because Heath is dead. He also said that the Professional Footballers Association, the players union, had not returned his call, but the PFA said an official had talked to Johnson in 2013 and advised him to go to the police. Chelsea declined to respond to any questions about the past sexual abuse by Heath or the club's handling of Johnson when he came forward, saying they now have their own investigation being carried out by an external law firm.

It seemed too soon, and the metaphor was too crude. In the third week of November, less than two weeks after the election, they were already erecting some new structure across the street from the White House. They had fenced off most of Pennsylvania Avenue. Visitors wanting to take pictures of the White House were impeded by a giant cage, in which the structure was going up. Dozens of construction signs decorated the fence and sent a clear message of exclusion and foreboding: Danger, Warning, Keep Out. On one of the signs, as if noting the sheer obviousness of it all, someone had written: "Is this art?" The workers had gone home for the day, and inside the chain-link fence the site was a mess. There were stacks of metal risers. There was a portable toilet. The construction thus far looked crooked and chaotic, and from Pennsylvania Avenue whatever was growing inside seemed taller than the White House, though that might have been a trick of perspective and light. The day, a Monday, had been sunny and warm, but when the sun set the temperature had dropped precipitously and a blue-black darkness had fallen over the city. The White House, looking grey, stood silent, as if bracing itself. "It feels surreal to be back," my friend said. We were a block away from the White House, in a restaurant, looking at the frozen people rush by on the sidewalk. He had just come back from Marrakech. For weeks he'd been part of a US delegation at the annual climate change conference – Marrakesh being the first since the Paris agreement. The election had happened while he was in Morocco. There had been tears from some attendees, and condolences from others, and worry that all the work they had done would come to little or nothing. The incoming US president had repeatedly said he did not believe in climate change. In a tweet from 2014, he had asserted that the notion was a hoax perpetuated by the Chinese government. He has promised to cancel the Clean Power Plan and pull out of the Paris agreement. "I'm tired," my friend said. He had flown in the night before and he missed his kids. They were young and were worried. They were members of a minority group, and couldn't guess at the plans the president-elect had for them. The youngest was seven years old, and was talking about the election as he would a nightmare. For him, the president-elect of the United States was a wild, mean-spirited bully who might sanction, or incite, racial violence. But maybe not. Since the election, some days brought new revelations, new softenings from the president-elect. Perhaps there was some connectivity between global warming and human activity, he said one day. Perhaps an erstwhile rival could be secretary of state, he mused. Perhaps it was not prudent, necessary or good to pursue the criminal prosecution of his opponent now that he had vanquished her. One day he had appeared humbled by the office he'd won, expressing amazement over how many people he needed to hire. The next day he was defending his vice-president against musical theatre. Every time we allowed ourselves to be even remotely optimistic, some new reminder arrived that we, an immature electorate, had elected a child. Outside, the dark structure was visible in the gloaming. We couldn't figure out what it was. It wasn't the inaugural proscenium – that would be on the Capitol steps. Finally we realised it was the reviewing stand for the inaugural parade. But why so soon? My friend has worked for the US government for almost 20 years, but he could not remember anything like this going up so early. It seemed a predatory encroachment of territory and time. Earlier that day, I'd spoken to a number of White House staff members, most of them members of Michelle Obama's education team. No one seemed to know exactly what they would do after inauguration. One mentioned moving back to Ohio. The staffers spent the afternoon hosting an event, a college essay writing workshop in the old executive office. Three dozen local high school students sat with an equal number of adult tutors, and together they worked shoulder to shoulder for three hours in an effort to give the students, almost all of them African-American, some semblance of a level playing field. I asked one of the staffers whether the first lady would ever run for office. It had been a yearning common among American liberals for years, and over the course of 2016 had grown into a full-throated invocation. During the campaign she had demonstrated, more than ever, that there was no human – least of all the candidate she was entreating her audiences to support – who connected more authentically and naturally with virtually any audience. The staff member ruled it out emphatically. "No, no," he said. "No chance. Never." We agreed that Michelle Obama's refusal to run made us admire her more. A human would have to be insane to endure an 18-month campaign, that kind of madness and scrutiny. But her husband had done so, and managed to remain both sane and dignified. It was remarkable and nearly unprecedented. In eight years in the White House there had been an uninterrupted stretch of calm and decency. In eight years there has been no scandal, not even a whiff of scandal, coming from the White House. That is a profoundly difficult thing to do, especially with the two houses of Congress in Republican hands and the president's every move or hope met with biblical opposition. For eight years we have been able to look to the White House and see a president who thinks and acts with cool deliberation, whose every sentence is well-considered. Anyone can disagree with President Obama's policies but it cannot be denied that the first family acted with unerring decorum and amenity. People of all affiliations must admit that the period of calm dignity at 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue is fast approaching its end. Whatever his capabilities, Donald Trump is not a man of serenity. He is loud and brash, he is not above spreading rumours and falsehoods, and controversy follows him as surely as dusk follows day. There are currently 75 lawsuits outstanding against him. They range from employees at his buildings suing him for personally sexually assaulting them to an architect who claims he was never paid for the work he completed. Trump has been married three times, and has filed for bankruptcy five times, in each case emerging unscathed while his creditors receive pennies on the dollar. A few days after winning the electoral college, the president-elect settled a class action against him, wherein 7,000 people sued him for fraud. These 7,000 individuals had paid up to $35,000 to learn at Trump University and, according to all of the 7,000 people, none came away with any tangible knowledge or benefit. After winning the election, the president-elect paid $25m to settle their claim. It has been reported that most of the plaintiffs will receive about half of what they lost. We are in a time of extraordinary relativism, when the incoming president was sued for fraud by 7,000 different people and this was not seen as a disqualifying fact. The president-elect was accused of defrauding thousands of their life savings, and now, across from the White House, we're building a structure wherein he can watch a parade in his honour. No one is sure what shape this presidency will take. Just as during the third debate he promised to keep us in suspense as to whether or not he would accept any result other than his victory, now we live in a different and more foreboding kind of suspense. Which Donald Trump will govern the country? If past is prologue, we can be sure that the Trump who shows up on 20 January for the inauguration will be awed and humbled by the office of the presidency. He will recite the oath properly and, if he employs the same writer who penned his victory speech, will probably deliver a well-worded inaugural address. But which man will show up on 21 January? We don't know. But we do know that the days of decency are gone. We had almost 3,000 such days in a row, and it will soon come to an end. That we have traded Obama's unshakable composure for Trump's undivinable mayhem is not a matter of debate. We can agree that Trump was elected. We can agree that his election has sent the Dow to a new high. We can agree that he very well may rebuild the nation's infrastructure – and if he does, he will have the backing of most of the country. But we must also agree that this president has the bearing and impulses of a nine-year-old boy – a troubled nine-year-old boy. He wants most to be liked and admired, and when he isn't, he lashes out with insults and aggrieved demands for apologies. He has no patience and little self-control. He cannot spell and does not read. He is our new president. For the next four years, the highs will be high and the lows will be low, and the embarrassments to our democracy will arrive with great regularity. Remember George W Bush trying to give an impromptu massage to Angela Merkel? Remember Bill Clinton receiving oral sex in the Oval Office? Remember the totality of Richard Nixon? All were difficult to bear. Having one's president behave worse than anyone you know is wounding to the soul. Prepare yourself for more. In 2008 badges were made that said No more Drama, Vote Obama. This year the electorate, or a meaningful portion of it, voted for drama. Constant drama. Lawsuits. Feuds. Threats. Denials. Insults. Speaking before deliberating. Tweeting before thinking. The use of exclamation marks with unprecedented frequency. At six o'clock, my friend had to go back to work. There was still a lot of catching up to do. In the city, the dark was absolute. We walked back along Pennsylvania Avenue, towards the White House, and hashed out a plan wherein Trump would be given a phone, and with it he would be invited to tweet to his heart's content. But the phone would not be connected to anything. As with a child given a toy phone, the government of the US – in hope of preserving some last vestige of dignity – might give Trump a similar nonfunctional device. He could respond every day to every slight; he could repeat every last conspiracy theory floated from his alt-right sites. But the tweets would remain in his play phone, and the nation would be spared the daily and unfathomable shame of his misspelled petulance. At Lafayette Park, we looked towards the White House one last time. Because we are an optimistic people we want to hope that the White House, with its humbling history, might tame the raging indiscretions of the candidate preparing to occupy it. But this seems unlikely. Instead, the structure growing before it, both rickety and hulking, feels more the style of the president-elect: fenced in, unwelcoming, rising quickly, not built to last.

The Liberal Democrat victory in Richmond Park was a triumph for Sarah Olney, her campaign team, and the strategy of the leader, Tim Farron, who declared in his conference speech in September that the party could win as the voice of the 48%. It is also a compelling example of what can be achieved if pro-European Tories, Labour, Greens and Lib Dems work together. And while Ms Olney's defeated rivals will take comfort from the nature of the byelection – in a prosperous, pro-European corner of south-west London that might have been tailored for a Lib Dem revival – there is no hiding from the fact that it was a personal humiliation for Zac Goldsmith. It was his second defeat of the year, close on the heels of his shameful campaign to become London mayor. It should, at the least, give the prime minister, whose working majority is now just 13, reason to reconsider her divisive rhetoric. And Labour, which won fewer votes than it has members in the seat, must bang heads together to get a clear, less contested approach to Brexit. After the rout of the 2015 general election, many Lib Dems gloomily anticipated years of rebuilding. They may still be right. Yet even if Richmond Park, a seat they held from 1997 to 2010, could hardly be bettered as a battleground for them, it remains an extraordinary achievement to win it with a 20-point swing from the Tories. The party's once-formidable byelection machinery had been well-oiled and successfully trialled at the Witney byelection in October. Party activists and past leaders turned out in impressive numbers to support a strong local candidate, who – new to politics – was untainted by association with the coalition years. In her victory speech in the early hours of this morning, Ms Olney sounded exactly the right note of unity and conciliation over Europe, ending on the rousing pledge that "we will not let intolerance, division and fear win" – an overture all the more attractive in the light of the bilious response to the result from the Brexiters. In their heyday, Lib Dem byelection triumphs were often built on squeezing the Labour vote, and that was certainly true in Richmond Park. Labour's national poll standing might be uncomfortably low, but it is not the 3.6% share of the vote they won on Thursday, any more than the Lib Dems' is 49%. Yet the result, even in a seat where it would never win, does highlight Labour's uncertain signalling about Europe. While the shadow Brexit minister Kier Starmer and his one-person team methodically devise ways to pin down the government's negotiating position, the shadow chancellor races far beyond the agreed party line, declaring last week that leaving the EU presented "enormous opportunities". The result also looks like a more general warning about the fragmentation of the left. While the Tories, attracting back Ukip defectors, appear in command of the right, the left faces a threat of uncertain scale from Ukip's new, working-class, pro-hanging Liverpudlian leader, Paul Nuttall, who has made replacing Labour his main mission. Meanwhile the Tories, sheltering behind Zac Goldsmith's status as an independent, downplay the significance of the result. But although Mrs May might take comfort from her current high standing in the polls, a significant number of her MPs – many with majorities over Lib Dem challengers that are much smaller than the 23,000 in Richmond – will be looking nervously behind them. Yet the Lib Dems cannot afford too much jubilation. The assertion that a hard Brexit won't now happen when many people still hope that it will risks jumping way ahead of popular opinion. Remain is still losing rather than winning support. There is no appetite for a second referendum. The urgent job in hand is to work out what a soft Brexit looks like and start to build a coalition across parties that can hold the government to account for delivering it. Only if it ends with a wide perception that it has failed can there be an honest campaign to try to stop it.

The surprise would have been if François Hollande had decided to run for a second term in 2017. Even so, the socialist president of France's announcement on Thursday that he will not run again in the spring is another milestone in Europe's political crisis. This weekend, attention will shift to Italy, which holds its much-anticipated constitutional referendum on Sunday, as well as to Austria, where the presidential election re-run may result in Europe's first far-right head of state since 1945. The sense that the old order is under serial threat across large parts of Europe is palpable. Mr Hollande's unpopularity and withdrawal both stem from his manifest inability to provide an effective route out of the aftermath of the financial crisis, as well as fears exacerbated by migration and terror attacks. France's growth is still sluggish at best, while unemployment, is still stuck at about 10%. Yet he has no clear successor. Whoever emerges with the socialist nomination after planned primaries in January will struggle to make it into the second round of next year's election, probably leaving François Fillon and Marine Le Pen to fight it out on the right. Mr Hollande has been a personally undistinguished president, but the crisis is not his alone. The French left as a whole is divided and weak, bereft of leaders, confidence and ideas for tackling France's social divisions. Yet Mr Holland's departure, coming soon after David Cameron's in Britain and Enda Kenny's skin-of-the-teeth return to power in Ireland, marks something wider. With some exceptions, notably Germany's Angela Merkel, the leaders who offered western European nations new starts following the financial crisis are themselves losing out in the face of low growth and perceived social and cultural unease caused in part by immigration. This week it could be the turn of Italy's Matteo Renzi, who has staked his future on the outcome of Sunday's constitutional reform referendum, thus turning a relatively arcane issue into a personal vote of confidence. Mr Renzi's reform bill overhauls a third of a 1948 Italian constitution that is full of checks and balances designed to prevent the return of authoritarian rule. After nearly 70 years, however, these increasingly seem to prevent any effective government at all, rather than just the emergence of another Mussolini. Mr Renzi wants the upper house, the senate, to have its powers curtailed, with effective power largely vested in the chamber of deputies, in which the winning party would have a guaranteed and enhanced majority. He proposes to sweep away regional powers on subjects like infrastructure and energy and to compensate regional interests by making them the basis of the senate – an idea that Britain could look at too. Renzi's law contains enhanced powers, critics say, that could be misused by a future populist leader. But Italy is a country in need of economic reform. It remains divided between north and south and is subject to strong separatist pressures. Productivity rates are stuck at late 20th century levels, while reform of its banking, industrial, labour and tax sectors is gridlocked by a political system that has given Italy more than 60 governments since the second world war and, following reforms in the 1990s, has produced no outright majority-elected government, including Mr Renzi's, since the fall of Silvio Berlusconi in 2011. Italians should vote for Mr Renzi's reforms. To reject them would be to reject more than just the constitutional package. But the possibility that he will lose is strong, not least because he has threatened to resign if he does. That could trigger not just another new government but a bond market and banking crisis that may threaten the eurozone. As Britain is learning the hard way, referendums can create problems in distressed times rather than resolving them. Italy is next in line to face this challenge to the old European order, and Italy may not be the last.

Michael Bay was in Oxfordshire recently to shoot The Last Knight, the final instalment of the mighty Transformers franchise. The maker of the highest grossing movie of 2014 – Transformers: Age of Extinction, which took over $1bn – was up to his old tricks, stomping on British sensibilities by converting beautiful Blenheim Palace into a Nazi HQ. But, in another wing of the franchise, the shape-changing robots have been venturing into much less likely territory, exploring such weighty issues as social mobility, personal identity and various corrosive ideologies – while also establishing the world of Transformers as a homonormative society. Fans of Chromedome and Rewind may be touched to learn that the two are now in a romantic relationship. Launched in 2012, the comic-book series Transformers: More Than Meets the Eye tells the story of a group of robots journeying across the universe on a quest to find the mythical Knights of Cybertron (the original children of Primus and the other four gods of the Guiding Hand, in case you didn't know). The series is written by Guernsey-based James Roberts, whose background is in the civil service. But, such is the churn of the comics industry, the title was wound down in September at issue 57, the plan being to relaunch it this month as Transformers: Lost Light. The hope is to create a jumping on point for new readers, though Roberts's radical take on the 30-year-old toy brand will continue apace. "I always wanted to give the franchise as much depth and weight as possible," he says. "One of the easiest ways to do that is to politicise it." As a fan of the clunky robots since childhood, Roberts has always had a sense of entitlement when it comes to messing with their core concept – specifically, the act of transformation. "In More Than Meets the Eye, I explored the idea that, millions of years ago, the Transformers existed in a system with a 'functionist' doctrine – meaning the thing you turn into determines your status. The more commonplace a device you became, the fewer privileges you had." In a move that would doubtless intrigue Bay, Roberts brought in the concept of "municipal eugenics": a type of Transformer could literally be made redundant, because there's no longer a use for its newly shifted shape. "Maybe," says Roberts, "there's an analogy here in terms of how disabled people are treated in some quarters by governments. If they're not producing, they're not making the necessary contributions to society, and so they're devalued." Roberts has even dared to rehabilitate the classic Transformers bogeyman Megatron, going back to his early days and depicting him as a young radical. "Originally, Megatron was an incredible thinker who advocated non-violent resistance. He was in the Tony Benn mould, an international socialist. He campaigned for emancipation and equality, but eventually concluded the system had been engineered to withstand any form of dissent – other than force. "As is the case with grand tragedies, he travelled away from the goals he had in the beginning and walked that well-trodden path from communism to totalitarianism." But Megatron's journey didn't stop there. Recent issues saw him teaming up with the Autobots, against whom he once waged a four-million-year war. "He's been tested," says Roberts of the one-time leader of the villainous Decepticons, able to change into three different types of gun. "And now he's renounced violence." Some may doubt the Transformers concept can bear such weight. But Roberts believes the line's longevity and the success of the Bay movies have encouraged Hasbro to give him his head. "It's a mature franchise and it's doing very well in various iterations. So Transformers can encompass different types of stories, in the same way a property like Batman does." Surprisingly perhaps, one strand of the story has met no resistance: the portrayal of same-sex relationships as the norm for this robot society. "When they were created, Transformers were exclusively male. They used the male pronoun and, in the 1980s cartoon series, they had male voices. I wanted to tell romantic stories. If two characters were in a relationship, the probability was they were both going to be men." Step forward Chromedome and Rewind, both from the original toy line. "They were close," says Roberts. "You could have read it as them being best friends. Had there been any pushback, that's how it would have stayed. But about a year into the series, I became more overt, depicting them as essentially husbands, giving them a storyline where the emotional highpoint was one saying to the other, 'I love you.' "It wasn't a big deal to them or those around them. There's never been any scene – nor will there be – where other Transformers remark upon them being together." Nonetheless, says Roberts, "it felt like a big deal to me" – so much so that he drafted a letter to Hasbro justifying its inclusion. But there was no opposition, despite the current polarisation in comics between a loud conservative sector of the readership and the so-called "social justice warriors" promoting a more liberal ideology. In October, Marvel writer Chelsea Cain quit Twitter following harassment about her decision to depict Shield agent Mockingbird in a T-shirt bearing the slogan: "Ask me about my feminist agenda." The fuss left Roberts staggered. "People say there's no place for politics in comics, but comics have been political from the start. If you don't think X-Men has been telling a story about marginalisation and ostracisation for the past 50 years, you've been reading a different title to me." His work seems to be going a lot further than T-shirt slogans. Does he ever worry it will catch fire in a similar way? "I do, but anything that sparks a bigger conversation about progressive politics is good." Transformers: Lost Light is published by IDW on 14 December.

On a warm evening in a Barcelona suburb 24 years ago, the air thick and heavy, the light-grey and gold, Cuba and the USA met in a baseball game that was as much a contest of ideologies as an Olympic semi-final. As the two teams lined up to shake hands before the semi-final, each Cuban presented his opponent with a commemorative pennant. The Americans had come empty-handed. The USA team consisted of college boys, some of them on the brink of Major League-careers. The Cubans were veterans of their domestic league, unbeaten in almost 70 internationals. After a scoreless first hour, it was barely a contest. In the fourth inning, in front of 7,000 spectators, Orestes Kindelán smashed a pitch from Ricky Helling over the left-field wall for a bases-empty home run that began a cruise to a 6-1 victory. Helling, a Stanford University student, was on his way to a professional career that would reach its climax when he helped pitch the Florida Marlins to a World Series title in 2003. On the way he dropped the "y" and became Rick, while picking up a large amount in salary. Kindelán's homer was one of the 487 that made him Cuba's most prolific hitter. He would win three Olympic medals, two gold and one silver; at the 1996 tournament, as he and his team proceeded to a second triumph, he hit nine home runs in nine games. In 2000, the year the USA finally pipped Cuba to the top step of the podium, his cousin, the lightweight boxer Mario Kindelán, won the first of two gold medals, before going on to beat Amir Khan of Britain in the 2004 final in Athens. The 17-year-old Khan was one of four future world professional champions – the others were Félix Trinidad, Miguel Cotto and Andreas Kotelnik – whom Kindelán would beat during their amateur days. Like the heavyweights Teófilo Stevenson and Félix Savón, each a three-time Olympic champion, he became a legend at home. Baseball and boxing were two of the principal sports that provided a stage for the sporting heroes of Fidel Castro's Cuba. To beat the USA at baseball represented a big statement at a time when the Yanqui economic blockade was still in force. Those 73 boxing medals – 37 of them gold – constituted another. Long before the singers and musicians of the Buena Vista Social Club beguiled audiences around the world, the sporting heroes of revolutionary Cuba enjoyed global renown. Barely six months after Castro's guerrillas marched into Havana, a 12-strong team set off for the 1960 Olympics in Rome. Enrique Figuerola finished fourth in the 100m and four years later he became the first post-revolutionary Cuban male to win a medal when he took the silver behind Bob Hayes in Tokyo. At Mexico City in 1968 Cuba's women won their first medal with a 4x100m silver behind the Tennessee Tigerbelles. The first gold medals came in the 1972 boxing tournament, for Stevenson at heavyweight, Emilio Correa Sr at welterweight and Orlando Martínez at bantamweight. The first gold for a female was secured in the 1980 javelin competition by María Caridad Colón, also the first non-white athlete of either sex to win an Olympic throwing event. Stevenson was the first poster-boy for Cuban sport. He was as handsome as Muhammad Ali and a couple of inches taller at 6ft 5in, and like the American he took his first Olympic title at an early age (Ali was 18 and Stevenson 20). What a match-up it would have made, had they not been born 10 years apart. Turning down a fortune offered by American promoters for just such a fight, he said: "What is a million dollars compared to the love of eight million Cubans?" Castro's regime fell short of perfection in many important respects, but no Cuban athlete ever needed to stage a podium protest to highlight discrimination on grounds of colour in his home country. Stevenson visited Ali in the US in 1995, and repaid the hospitality the following year. In Havana, already muted by Parkinson's disease, Ali presented Castro with a framed photograph of himself and Malcolm X walking along a Harlem street in 1963, a time when the boxer and the Cuban leader were both in their prime: Castro with the Bay of Pigs victory and the missile crisis behind him, and Ali looking ahead to the first Liston fight. Alberto Juantorena, the man with the 9ft stride, burst into the spotlight in 1976 to take the 400m and 800m gold medals in Montreal, and later became Cuba's vice sports minister. Anier García and Dayron Robles in the 110m hurdles, Javier Sotomayor in the high jump and Iván Pedroso in the long jump, Yumileidi Cumbá in the shot put, Maritza Martén in the discus, Osleidys Menéndez in the javelin, and a whole bunch of Greco-Roman wrestlers, pistol shooters, judokas, Taekwondo exponents and, of course, boxers also brought gold. And no list would be complete without Ana Fidelia Quirot, the 800m runner part-named after El Comandante en Jefe. Having missed the 1984 and 1988 Games through boycotts, she took the bronze in 1992, a year after winning the first of her three world championship medals. She returned to take the silver in 1996, having undergone 21 operations to treat the third-degree burns that covered 38% of her body when a kerosene heater exploded as she washed clothes while seven months pregnant with a daughter who died days after an induced birth. Some athletes felt compelled to escape the world Castro had made. Dozens of baseball players went on to make their livings with Major League clubs, none more lucratively than Rusney Castillo, who signed a seven-year contract with the Boston Red Sox worth $72.5m in 2014. The boxer Guillermo Rigondeaux won two Olympic gold medals at bantamweight before defecting in 2007, turning pro and becoming the world super-bantamweight champion. Maybe, as the writer Jeré Longman suggested in the New York Times this week, Castro was never quite as much of a baseball fan (or player) as the propaganda suggested. Perhaps he really preferred basketball and soccer. But the many athletes who chose not to defect knew that they were benefitting from his belief that sport and exercise in general were good for the nation's health as well as its pride, even when times became tough and the swimming pools were drained and the floodlights switched off to save power. And there was, so far as I can discover, never a hint of the sort of organised doping programmes that other regimes, including those friendly to Cuba, developed to boost their illusory prestige.

An interest rate rise in the US looks a near certainty after another solid month of job creation in the world's largest economy. In a boost to Donald Trump as he prepares to move into the White House next month, government figures showed the unemployment rate dropped to a nine-year low in November and employers hired new workers at a faster pace as they banked on a rebound in economic growth. Behind the upbeat headline figures were signs that some US workers have yet to feel the gains of an improving labor market as wages fell and as many Americans gave up looking for work. But that is unlikely to deter policymakers on the Federal Reserve's Open Market Committee (FOMC) from raising interest rates at their meeting later this month, economists said. "On the back of largely positive economic data throughout autumn, a rate rise is widely expected for the December meeting of the FOMC. The positive employment data from November are probably the last piece of confirmation the members of the committee were waiting for," said Kay Daniel Neufeld at the consultancy the Centre for Economics and Business Research. The final US jobs report of 2016 recorded 178,000 new jobs added, close to economists' expectations of 180,000 for November. The unemployment rate dropped to 4.6% from 4.9% in October and was the lowest since August 2007, before the global financial crisis struck. Deputy labor secretary Chris Lu said that President-elect Trump was inheriting a far better economy than the one outgoing president Barack Obama had inherited from George W Bush, but "the unfinished business was wages". "I think the working-class and middle-class Americans who voted for the president-elect are expecting not only for their jobs to stay here but for their wages to go up, and we know what the policy solutions are," Lu told the Guardian. "The tighter job market is pushing up wages as businesses compete for workers, but the process is gradual," he said. The figures from the US labor department showed hourly wages declined by 3 cents an hour to $25.89. Augustine Faucher, analyst at the bank PNC, called the wage dip "a big soft spot". Faucher also noted the drop in unemployment was not entirely good news. "It fell in part because of a contraction in the labor force of 226,000, with the labor force participation rate declining to 62.7%, its lowest since June," he said. James Smith, economist at the bank ING, said there were reasons to think the wage dip was a one-off and that pay would soon rise again. "That weak wage figure will probably raise a few eyebrows among some of the more dovish Fed voters. But it would have had to have been a really disastrous jobs report to have derailed the FOMC's plans to hike in December," he said. "In fact, assuming that the latest wage growth figure was a blip, we still think that the labor market is strong enough to support two hikes from the FOMC next year." Trump secured the presidency after campaigning on a platform of anti-globalization and pledges of job creation for US workers. He also vowed to increase spending on infrastructure, something many economists believe will give the US economy a significant boost next year. If the billionaire Republican delivers on his spending promise, inflation is also viewed as likely to pick up, which would push the US central bank into more rate rises next year. Fed policymakers, investors and analysts alike would now be closely watching the new president to gauge how much of his campaign talk would become policy, said Nancy Curtin, chief investment officer at Close Brothers Asset Management. "If, as expected, we see a swing towards fiscal stimulus, this may give the Fed greater scope to hike rates further in 2017. Fed decision making will no longer be solely data dependent, but policy dependent also," said Curtin. The prospect of higher inflation has also raised fears for living standards being squeezed further if wage growth does not keep pace with costs. Many workers still report they cannot make ends meet even with multiple jobs. "I take one day off from home health, but when I do that I do deliveries all day long," said April Shabazz of Merriam, Kansas, who protested with Fight for 15 workers this week as part of calls for fairer minimum wages nationwide. "I've been in home health since I was 15, so 30 years," Shabazz said, adding that she works every day of the week, sometimes as a delivery driver for GrubHub, sometimes as a home healthcare worker. "The cost of living is going up, but our pay is not going up," she told the Guardian.

I am from Lincolnshire originally but grew up in various towns in England and Wales as a result of my dad's career. My husband and I moved to the West Midlands in the mid-1990s when our children were very young and we have lived in the same street ever since. My elder son has bought a house two minutes up the road, and all three work in the local area. I work as a lecturer in English at Loughborough University, having returned to education as a mature student. Returning to study wasn't always easy with young children, especially since my youngest child has additional needs. My course included modules on 17th-century literature, which inspired me so much that I followed this up with a master's in early modern writing and a PhD in the same. Growing up I'd always wanted to be a doctor, and though that didn't happen, my research into the ways women's reproductive health is discussed in early books allows me to marry my interests in health and literature, and did lead to me becoming a doctor (of philosophy, if not medicine). My first academic book, Menstruation and the Female Body, came out in 2013 and will always be a standout moment. For hobbies, I enjoy long country walks with our dog, visits to historical buildings, swimming in the sea on holidays, and I go to the theatre about once a month. I've been a regular reader of the Guardian for around a decade. The move to the more compact format helped to win me over. I have always been interested in politics and remember, for example, staying up late all night watching the general election results in 1992 despite having a fractious toddler in the house. Obviously I was up until the early hours for the referendum results and the US election this year. I was briefly a single parent on social security benefits under the tail end of Margaret Thatcher's government and am very concerned about the lack of social housing to help young women in my situation nowadays. It is so shortsighted to begrudge people help in rough times. I am also very concerned about what is happening to the NHS: having watched paramedics and A&amp;E staff save my daughter's life on more than one occasion I have seen first-hand the difficult work they do with compassion and good humour. I have the Guardian alerts on my phone and this keeps me up to date with breaking news. Mainly I follow the news and key commentators. I read the live blogs when breaking news is happening or for things like PMQs. I enjoy the book section, and the higher education section for work-related topics. My Twitter timeline is filled with Guardian articles tweeted by friends. I used to enjoy reading the below-the-line comments and viewed them as part and parcel of an article, but it is all a bit too fractious there now, so I seldom read them.Columnists such as Marina Hyde keep me reading. Her referendum commentary was outstanding. I also like the gentle, self-deprecating humour of Tim Dowling and look forward to his pieces on the weekends. If you would like to be interviewed in this space, send a brief note to good.to.meet.you@theguardian.com

BHS has been placed into liquidation following pressure from the Pension Protection Fund, which argued that closing down the business would produce the best outcome for the failed retailer's pensioners. It also emerged that lawyers picking over the carcass of the BHS collapse are looking at the validity of a £35m floating charge held in the name of former owner Sir Phillip Green. This ranks Green as a secured creditor of BHS and entitles him to get all his money back from the administration proceeds. Duff &amp; Phelps, one of BHS's joint administrators until this week, had already judged Green's claim to be valid. But it is thought that lawyers working for FRP Advisory, which is now in sole charge of the liquidation process, had demanded that the sum be returned from an escrow account at Green's legal firm. The PPF, a government-backed lifeboat for troubled pension schemes, is the company's biggest creditor and had rowed with Duff &amp; Phelps over the next step for the failed business. In the summer it pressed for FRP Advisory's appointment after it was argued that Duff &amp; Phelps was too close to Green. Duff &amp; Phelps were accused of being the retail tycoon's "ponies" by Dominic Chappell, the former bankrupt who bought BHS for £1 in 2015. Labour MP Frank Field, who has locked horns with Green over BHS's fate, said liquidation – where a company's remaining assets are sold off – offered the best chance of recovering cash for the collapsed retailer's pension scheme. BHS's scheme had a deficit of as much as £571m at the time of the retailer's collapse in April this year. "This is another milestone in the collapse of BHS that Sir Philip Green sailed away from," said Field. "At this stage, though, it is welcome. It gives the PPF's preferred administrator – rather than Sir Philip's – the best chance of salvaging some money for the pension schemes." The administrators' duties include scrutinising the actions of BHS's former directors. However it is understood that, seven months on from BHS's collapse, this investigatory work, which would provide the basis for any legal action to recover funds, is not yet at an advanced stage. The administrators' report reveals that forensic accountants and lawyers are wading through 4,000 boxes of hard copy records and nearly 200 terabytes of data from BHS's servers and company laptops. "We believe the liquidation is the right way to secure the best possible recovery for the pension schemes and other creditors of the insolvent company," said Malcolm Weir, head of restructuring and insolvency at the PPF. "The liquidator will now be able to progress all remaining issues, including the leases and the ongoing investigatory work." As liquidators FRP Advisory have more power to take decisions, including handing back stores to landlords, and in doing so, mitigating the rent that can be claimed out of the general pot for creditors. Even though all BHS stores are empty the company remains liable for monthly rental payments. At present BHS's unsecured creditors have been told to expect a maximum of 8p in the pound from the sale of BHS's assets. "We will be continuing our process of making recoveries through liquidation on behalf of all creditors and continuing with our statutory duties," said a spokesman for FRP Advisory. A parliamentary investigation into the demise of the retailer found that BHS had been systematically plundered under its former owners Green and Dominic Chappell. Green, his family and other BHS shareholders collected at least £580m from the retailer, while Chappell's company Retail Acquisitions was paid an estimated £17m. The Topshop owner is still in talks with the Pension Regulator over how to resolve the shortfall in the BHS pension fund. Last month its chief executive, Lesley Titcomb, told MPs that Green's assets, including his £100m superyacht, could be seized by the courts if he refuses to comply with a legal demand to cover the £571m deficit. Titcomb told the work and pensions select committee a court would determine how to raise funds from the billionaire tycoon, including possible seizure of assets, if he does not pay up when a legal demand is issued, or reach a settlement with the regulator.

An intriguing theory has recently taken hold, fast calcifying into received wisdom. Hillary Clinton, so it goes, lost the US election because she "played identity politics". This idea has been enthusiastically endorsed by, among others, Bernie Sanders ("It is not enough for somebody to say, 'I'm a woman, vote for me,'" he said, as if Clinton ever – even once – argued this), and Mark Lilla in the New York Times (who described as "a strategic mistake "Clinton's tendency "to slip into the rhetoric of diversity, calling out explicitly to African-American, Latino, LGBT and women voters at every stop"). Like I say, it's a fascinating theory, in its underlying insinuations and its demonstrable wrongness. (To point out that – in the vast, vast main – the identity politics sceptics are white men, whose articles are filled with quotes from other white men, doubtless sounds like I'm playing the identity game, too; and yet it is one of those awkward things called "facts".) Leaving aside that far more people voted for Clinton than Donald Trump (an inconvenient truth for any sweeping argument about why Clinton lost), the real issue is not that Clinton lost the election. On the contrary, it's that playing identity politics is precisely how Trump won the election. Anyone who can't see that is revealing that they think the white straight male as the baseline norm. Thus anyone else – women, people of colour, LGBT people – is merely a niche distraction, a gimmicky aberration, a game ("as if the centuries'-long push toward enfranchisement, civil rights, equal pay, and reproductive autonomy, and against domestic, sexual, and police violence were a game", Rebecca Traister recently wrote). They are not, as the political phrasing goes, real people. It boggles my brain that this even needs pointing out: political elections have always played identity politics. The difference is that the game was heretofore entirely weighted towards the white straight male, which I guess is why it comes as such a shock to that demographic when they are not at the absolute forefront of every single political discussion now. Lilla, for example, in his much-discussed article, suggested that the politicians who "very skilfully" bridged identity divides were – wait for it – Ronald Reagan and Bill Clinton. Ah yes, this would be Reagan, who enthusiastically blew the racial dog whistle by referring to "a Chicago welfare queen" and "a strapping young buck" who used food stamps to buy steaks. And Clinton, who to prove that he was tough on crime interrupted his own 1992 campaign to return to Arkansas to preside over the execution of Ricky Ray Rector, an intellectually impaired black man. Both reinforced discrimination against LGBT people. But this was not divisive identity politics, apparently, because white straight voters don't have an identity – they are just people. This, I guess, is why some seem unable to see that Trump (and his new BFF, Nigel Farage, this country's most expert practitioner in the sport) ran campaigns this year entirely predicated on identity politics. No, no, Trump's campaign was about the economy, his defenders cry! And indeed it was, in that Trump promised the old manufacturing jobs would come back to the overwhelmingly white rural areas (which almost certainly won't happen), and massive tax cuts to the white super-rich (which almost certainly will). See if you can spot the common denominator in those demographics. Discussions about identity politics are the new arguments about political correctness, which, as Moira Weigel detailed at length in this paper this week, have long been a means for the male, white and right mainstream to shut down any suggestion that others are worthy of a voice. For Clinton even to acknowledge that she was the first female candidate of a major political party – which is very different from saying people should vote for her because she is a woman – was, according to the sceptics, to play the identity game. What is less acknowledged by these people – and can be fatally forgotten by some on the left – is that class is as much a part of identity politics as race, religion and sexuality. This has been Sanders's point since the election: "Yes, we need more candidates of diversity, but we also need candidates to be fighters for the working class," he says, which is all well and good. But the working class is not an ethnically homogeneous group, and within those divisions there are distinct differences and needs. As Jamelle Bouie wrote this week, "not all inequality is created equal. On average, inequality and poverty among black Americans (as well as native groups and undocumented Americans) is of a different scale and magnitude than inequality and poverty among white Americans." And yet 88% of African-Americans and 65% of Latinos voted for Clinton. That Clinton lost the election is further evidence that the electoral college system is itself bogged down in identity politics, given its bias towards white voters, with one vote in the white rural states worth as much as three votes in states such as California with racially diverse big cities. The so-called alt-right – which I think is Latin for "old racism" – movement likes to suggest that identity politics are just about overly sensitive minorities whining over hurt feelings: college students protesting against the cultural insensitivity of serving sushi in the school cafeteria, say. It is to the left's detriment that it has allowed these absurd extremes to obscure the real point, which is that where one begins in life – and how far one can generally go – is still determined by identity: racial, economic, gender and sexual, in pretty much that order. In general, a white man automatically has an economic advantage over a woman or person of colour from the same class, although God help anyone who dares to point that out to certain white men. As writer Ta-Nehisi Coates tweeted on Thursday, "Notion that white dude's issues are 'economic' and everyone else is just trying to discuss their feelings is, well, sorta deplorable." Identity politics sceptics ask why we can't just emphasise what we have in common instead of focusing on the differences. And what a delightfully kumbaya vision of the world that is. Sadly, that's a little tricky, given that white American voters just elected a man whose campaign repeatedly insulted Muslims, Jews and women, and whose cabinet choices unanimously oppose LGBT rights. So when people say identity politics exacerbates differences, it's hard not to suspect that what they're objecting to is not the acknowledgement of differences but the existence of differences, full stop.

More than a quarter of Britain's police forces are now investigating the sexual abuse of children in 55 football clubs, after one man, Andy Woodward, punched a hole in the wall of silence. Brave men have been sobbing on camera in the fortnight since, as they explain how their lives have been blighted by the sexual attacks they endured as children. And despite some voices insisting that this is all in the past, recent attacks have been reported – as has a three-year-old attempt to hush things up: Gary Johnson says Chelsea FC gave him £50,000 to stay quiet. The Football Association, which pulled all funding from a review of its child protection policies in 2003, has now commissioned an NSPCC hotline for those who have been sexually abused in the sport, which received more than 850 calls in its first week. The police have been contacted by 350 people claiming they were abused. The government's so far utterly hapless public inquiry into institutional child abuse in the UK is now considering whether it should add this latest scandal to the list of scandals it is failing to investigate. It'll be years, I guess, before we find out whether there might be some kind of problem. Is it at all possible that people who wish to abuse children make a beeline for institutions that offer them access to children? The nation waits with bated breath. Could it be that a country that chortled its way through the 20th century, joshing about rampant sexual abuse in public schools, giggling behind the scoutmaster's back, exchanging knowing glances about the weird clown who turned up at the children's party, and rolling eyes at the pretty choirboys, had no inkling that adult sexual abuse of children was even a thing? A public information film in the 1970s warned us kids against men with sweets or puppies. It's quite something, growing up in a country in which allusions to "kiddie-fiddling" were routine, only to find as an adult that apparently the only response is shocked, pearl-clutching paralysis at the great revelation that it was really, actually happening. Who, after all, could have guessed that dark, perverse sexual crimes lurked at the heart of professional football in Britain, when it has always been clear that if there's one thing all footballers are brilliant at, it's comporting themselves with an uncanny level of respect for the responsibility that their own sexual power brings and ever mindful that it should never be abused? This is not to say that every footballer who has taken part in lurid, tabloid-friendly sexual exploitation was abused himself. It is to say that a general unwillingness to face up to the idea that football is seen by some as a passport to appalling sexual behaviour has long been apparent. If anything marks Britain's endless waves of revelation about organised sexual exploitation, it's the charade of knowing/not knowing that always accompanies them. Barely a word is said against marvellous national treasures, then suddenly everyone knows that Jimmy Savile was a hideous creep or that Clement Freud was not actually at all well-liked. There are even people who seem to believe Britain had no problem with paedophiles at all until mass immigration began. And the most ghastly thing of all? This charade of knowing/not-knowing is set to continue. Somehow, after the disgust and horror has died down, the last man standing is always someone bleating on about how outrageous it was that accusations against him were taken seriously. Of course that's an ordeal. Being investigated for any crime you did not commit is an ordeal. Yes, the police are awful at handling it, like they are awful at handling masses of stuff. Like the sexual abuse of children. But how anyone can ever cast themselves as a more innocent victim than sexually abused children is pretty staggering. Already people will be persuading themselves that a lot of those 860 NSPCC calls were from hysterics, time-wasters, malignant attention seekers. Maybe some are. So what? It's not as awful as sexually abusing vulnerable people who are in your care. It's tempting to retreat into denial, especially when there is so much invitation to do so. People don't choose denial because they're bad people, but because it's so very painful, knowing that ruthless, exploitative, empathy-free people walk among us every day, pretending to be what they decide to be in order to get what they want – denying, excusing and blaming others for the damage they cause. Denial is not what the trusting folk of the world need. It's simple education in how to spot a bad lot, and there isn't enough of it about.

Following its victory in the Richmond byelection (Report, theguardian.com), I write to suggest that the Liberal Democratic party should change its name to The European Party. We of the forgotten 48% are surely more numerous today, now that Brexit's rudderless fiasco is becoming as obvious as the shameless lies earlier told by its advocates. Even the lead rat of the leavers has signalled his inclination to leave the sinking ship and become a migrant to America. Today, we of the swelling 48% are cheering the Lib Dem victory in the byelection. This was a genuinely democratic, constitutional victory (Britain is a parliamentary democracy not the mob-rule "democracy" conjured up by David Cameron for the purposes of internal Tory politics). And it is widely agreed that the byelection was fought mainly on the issue of Brexit. The Lib Dems, along with the SNP, are the only major party with the courage to stand, unequivocally, against Brexit. Unfortunately, as anyone in marketing will attest, their brand is tarnished by association with the first Cameron government. The Lib Dems need to change their name. And the obvious name is The European Party. No need to change policies. Just the name. And no long-winded "Liberal Democratic and European Party" stuff. Just "The European Party", plain and simple. I venture that huge numbers of the growing 48 percenters would flock to join, in a great revival of party fortunes. Probably some Labour MPs threatened with deselection, too. Maybe even some principled Tories. And I'm sure I'm not the only former supporter of the Liberal Democrats who would gladly make a generous donation to help the newly named European Party on its way. Richard Dawkins Oxford I would like to congratulate Sarah Olney on becoming our new MP in Richmond Park, and give my commiserations to Zac Goldsmith. Zac may have triggered the byelection over Heathrow, but it became about so much more than that. It was about democracy and electoral equality. As a party we took the difficult decision to step aside in order to facilitate this result, and we have been vindicated. We gave momentum to the Liberal Democrats and encouraged Labour supporters to vote for them. We would have much preferred an alliance of all the progressive parties, and given that Labour lost their deposit, they must now seriously consider not standing in other byelections to allow the Greens or Lib Dems the chance to beat the Conservatives. Lib Dems similarly must also be prepared to step aside. This result is a clear signal that voters understand progressive alliances and want grown-up politics. All the progressive parties must actively work together to select unity candidates to beat the government in the next general election and then enact proportional representation so people can vote for their party and know that it will be truly reflected in the result. Pressure groups like Compass, Common Ground and More United now have Richmond Park to use as a positive example for this concept. A political revolution has been started in south-west London. Andree Frieze Green party candidate in Richmond Park, 2015 general election As a Labour party member who voted Lib Dem in the Richmond Park and North Kingston byelection, I awoke on Friday to the best bit of electoral news (aside from Sadiq Khan's victory) since Obama's triumph in 2008. But how much sweeter the result would have been if the Labour party leadership had listened to local supporters and put up no candidate rather than sending someone down to instruct them that a candidate had to be selected whatever. The result was that Labour voters voted tactically anyway, the excellent Christian Wolmar lost his deposit and Labour came away looking more interested in boneheadedly imposing its centralised will than in helping to win a significant victory over this heartless and clueless government. Mike Hine London I have been a resident of Richmond Park approaching 50 years and an active liberal/Liberal Democrat for much longer than that. I started off as a parliamentary candidate for various constituencies over three decades but advancing age has left me as an origami specialist: I fold paper in the local party headquarters. My own first analysis is that we owe Sarah's win to the More United approach and the support of Caroline Lucas, the local Greens and other groups outside our own tent. I hope the Labour vote, surely the lowest vote of an official Labour candidate for generations, has been noted in moderate Labour circles. I could see myself folding paper for Hilary Benn in the right circumstances Stephen Jakobi London In her byelection campaign, Sarah Olney made a specific pledge that she would oppose the invoking of article 50. It cannot possibly be argued that she is bound by any previous decision, whether referendum or parliamentary vote. Does this not strengthen the case for an early general election, in which parties and candidates can state their views on the issue, and which would supersede any previous decision? Those of us who reject the legitimacy of referendums in our parliamentary system would then have no cause to "remoan" at the result. Apart from anything else, it might remove the cause of Theresa May being kept awake at night. Alan Pavelin London The Lib Dem victory in Richmond reflects the post-Brexit crisis of British politics and particularly of the Tories, who now have an even smaller parliamentary majority. There will no doubt be criticism of Labour's decision to stand which resulted in a rare lost deposit, but from the left that is surely misplaced criticism. If Richmond was meant to be a trial for a progressive alliance, it concluded with Tim Farron proclaiming the outcome as a result for a moderate alternative to the Tories and Labour. That doesn't sound very leftwing to me. The reality is that while the Tories and Lib Dems have differences, they are not so great that they could not spend five years in government together. Labour stands for a different kind of politics, albeit often imperfectly: one that is based in workplaces and communities and not in boardrooms. That still matters. Keith Flett London A lost deposit for Labour, its supporters abandoning it for the Liberal Democrats. Is anything more needed to drive home the desperate need for the supposed main party of opposition to cast aside its incompetent leader whilst there is still time and replace him with one who is up to the job? Stephen Bailey Mansfield, Nottinghamshire It is apparent that the voters of Richmond Park did not really understand the issues. Further, they were misled by false information from the Lib Dems. It is surely imperative to call a second byelection to reverse the result. Paul Ormerod Richmond, Surrey Sarah Olney only won the Richmond Park byelection for the Lib Dems because the Greens stood aside to facilitate the defeat of a rightwing, hard Brexit supporter – and because the Labour vote collapsed. Given the deep imperfections of a first-past-the-post electoral system that is neither fit for purpose nor democratic, there is a strong chance that in the next byelection in Sleaford, the Tories will romp home because other progressive candidates will not stand aside in favour of the candidate of the progressive left most likely to defeat the Tory – in this case, the Labour candidate. We have a government elected by less than a quarter of the electorate pursuing deeply unpopular and extreme rightwing policies. It is too important for the progressive left to engage in the luxury of righteously fighting each other instead of focusing on areas of agreement and working together. Opposition candidates only need to win half a dozen byelections and this government will lose its majority. John Harris said it all in his article on 21 November. The threat from the extreme right means that the progressive left must unite, and in the process, stand up for a fairer voting system. More than anything else, Labour needs to understand this. I have been a Labour member for 45 years and, like so many other party members, I want to see a Labour-led government with Jeremy Corbyn in Downing Street. So why does Labour continue to challenge the Tories in seats it will never win? If Labour stood aside in these seats, it could then stand on the moral high ground and challenge Lib Dems and Greens to step aside in favour of Labour in seats where Labour is the main challenger. But there are signs of hope. My local Labour party in south-west Surrey just a week ago voted to work with Lib Dems and Greens to secure a progressive alliance for the county council elections next May, and I have no doubt that other Labour parties will follow. Democracy stands at the crossroads. We need a Progressive Alliance – and it is Labour that needs to lead the charge. Steve Williams Godalming, Surrey Can you let Tim Farron know that I cast a tactical vote on Thursday against the Conservatives and pro remain. My action should in no way be considered a vote of support for the Lib Dems who let so many people down so badly when they were in the last government. Alan Laird Labour party member (if they'll still have me), London Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters

As a relatively new owner of a Nissan Leaf, I support entirely the need for adequate provision of charge points (Letters, 29 November). The ecotricity charging points at motorway services are great, even if they are now not free. But you can now only pay using a mobile phone app – not much use for my wife whose phone is too old to run the app, and not much use for anyone if their phone is lost or broken. What is wrong with a swipe card, as offered by Charge your Car at other charging points? But the biggest absurdity, as employed by all charging points, is that you pay by charging session, not by the amount of electricity you use. In a petrol or diesel car in an area with few fuel stations, you will top up whenever you have the opportunity even if it means putting in only, say, a quarter of a tank. Electric car users may need to follow that routine, but will have to pay the same however much electricity they need. Dr Robin Shipp Bristol Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters

We read with interest Jane Martinson's article (Paul Dacre to step down as chair of journalists' code of practice committee, 1 December). The article notes that culture secretary Karen Bradley has launched a 10-week consultation into press regulation. As teachers and researchers in media and journalism we are deeply concerned about the terms of the public consultation on whether two elements of the Leveson reforms should be abandoned. These are section 40, which will create a new right of access to affordable justice in libel and privacy, while giving news publishers incentives to join a recognised independent regulator; and part two of the Leveson inquiry, designed to probe press criminality and police collusion. The consultation appears so skewed to serve the interests of the big newspaper corporations that it obscures the fundamental point of the Leveson reforms: to bring news publishers into a system of independent, effective self-regulation that will encourage high ethical standards, while protecting the public from the consequences of unethical behaviour. The consultation document barely acknowledges the concerns of victims of press abuse about access to justice and the problems with the industry complaints body, Ipso. Rather, the aim of the document appears to be designed to garner support for Ipso, a regulator set up by the big newspaper corporations against the express intent of Leveson recommendations. This is wholly inappropriate. Indeed, the consultation as a whole is inappropriate, given these reforms were the result of a rare cross-party agreement, endorsed by every party in parliament, which did everything possible to exclude politicians from future involvement in press regulation matters. When Karen Bradley gives herself powers of decision over the terms of press regulation she is flouting this principle and compromising press freedom. We urge the government to ensure that the public can have complete confidence that this consultation does not succumb to the immense power of newspaper corporations and that it genuinely delivers what it promises – press regulation that works for everyone and not just the privileged few. Prof Natalie Fenton Chair, Media, Communication and Cultural Studies Association Prof Peter Golding Secretary, MeCCSA Prof Steve Barnett University of Westminster Prof Raymond Boyle University of Glasgow Prof James Curran Goldsmiths University of London Prof John Downey University of Loughborough Prof Des Freedman Goldsmiths University of London Prof Jonathan Hardy University of East London Prof Justin Lewis University of Cardiff Prof Maire Messenger Davies University of Ulster Prof Toby Miller University of Loughborough Prof Julian Petley Brunel University Prof Greg Philo University of Glasgow Prof Karen Ross University of Newcastle Dr Justin Schlosberg Chair, Media Reform Coalition, Birkbeck University Prof Jeanette Steemers King's College London Dr Einar Thorsen Bournemouth University. Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters

A Bronx Tale, the musical adaptation of the Chazz Palminteri play and film, is a love triangle between a boy, his dad and the gangster next door. Nine-year-old Calogero (Hudson Loverro) and mafia man Sonny (Nick Cordero) meet when Sonny pops a man feet away from Calogero's stoop and the kid refuses to rat him out. Great romances have been built on less, but a great musical requires more. A Bronx Tale is a reasonably enjoyable period piece, which opens on Belmont Avenue in 1960, where next year's Frankie Vallis croon in the alleys ("While the Carmelite sisters/ Scream at their transistors/ Every time the Bombers score"). But whereas some shows swing for the fences, this is one doesn't aim much further than second base. This is a premiere that feels more like a revival and comes shrink-wrapped in its own nostalgia. After a few songs to establish the characters and setting and the push-pull for Calogero's soul, the action jumps ahead eight years when Calogero (Bobby Conte Thornton), renamed C and wearing a lot more pomade in his hair, is hanging out with Sonny's crew of toughs. A complication arises when C falls for a girl from the wrong side of the Metro North line, an African American woman named Jane (Ariana DeBose). The musical doesn't think much of this relationship; witness the short shrift it's given in the finale. Yet neither does the struggle for C's soul feel particularly urgent. If the show's creators wanted to make the question of which man C will choose appear more necessary it would help if they gave dad Lorenzo, Richard H Blake, a niftier song than the pablum-ish Look to Your Heart. Directors Jerry Zaks and Robert De Niro (who made his directorial debut with the 1993 film adaptation), composer Alan Menken, and lyricist Glenn Slater pad out Palminteri's semi-autobiographical book with a dash of Jersey Boys and a smidge of West Side Story. Most of the pop, ballad and doo-wop numbers are satisfying, though forgettable, designed to tickle the ear one moment and vanish from memory the next. The exception is a swaying, if rather patronizing Sinatra-esque number about the great loves of a man's life, One of the Great Ones. There's not much that's surprising in the show's look or its dance sequences, though the occasional violence carries a surprising jolt. Mostly the piece is too convinced of its own easy dictums. It is well served by its leads, particularly the rumble-voiced Cordero. After a scene-stealing turn in Bullets Over Broadway and a more joyless one in Waitress, he gets to unwind with a couple of more playful numbers, One of the Great Ones and Nicky Machiavelli: "Forget about love!/ Choose fear!" That's advice that's hard to take. In his last several shows, his characters have racked up a crush of felonies, but with his sad eyes and furtive flair, Cordero is still an actor to love.

I am writing to ask those people who set out their concerns so passionately about Walsall council's proposal to end local authority funding to its art gallery (Letters, 30 November) what they would do if they found themselves in the horns of such a truly awful dilemma. Funding to all authorities in the Black Country has been hard-hit by swingeing budget cuts since 2010 and it's been hard for all of them to choose which services to cut and which to carry. The situation in Walsall, however, has been made worse by three changes in administration in 27 months which has made long-term planning in relation to the arts, among other "non-essential" services, impossible for the present incumbents. These are not excuses. They are realities. I am a passionate defender of the arts and I get completely the incalculable benefits that exposure to them brings – especially to the less advantaged, of which there are many in the borough. But I cannot see how the council can choose the gallery over continuing to provide services to very needy adults and children. I don't have the answers and so I will wait with bated breath to hear the outcome. It all saddens me deeply and is made worse as the real villains of the piece – the Tories, supported for five years by the Lib Dems - seem to be getting off scot-free. Tell me what is the answer? Barbara Cassidy Former lead member for children's services and councillor Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters

Following Castro's death, perhaps we can now acknowledge the role that British-made aircraft played in defending Cuba from the CIA-sponsored Bay of Pigs invasion. The Cuban Air Force Hawker Sea Furies were instrumental in preventing the full invasion force from landing, which was the last time Sea Furies were ever used in action. A remaining plane is displayed at the Bay of Pigs Museo Giron. Martin Griffies Bristol "British remainers must be EU reformers," writes Martin Kettle (2 December). We all saw what David Cameron's fundamental reform effort came up with. The EU isn't reformable. And does he seriously think that the EU will take a blind bit of notice of us once we've crawled back? Simon Hunter Brookmans Park, Hertfordshire John Redwood writes "when we have our own fishing policy we could move back to being net exporters" (Opinion, 1 December). Easy to see the holes in that. Harold Mozley York Shirazeh Houshiary put a Christmas tree upside down in the Tate Britain stairwell, painted the roots gold and designated it "art" (Front-page picture, 2 December). Obviously Tate Britain has a colony of cats. I've always understood the reason for hanging Christmas trees from the ceiling is to stop cats climbing into the branches. David Hurry Hurstpierpoint, West Sussex My experience was rather different from Chris Seidel (Letters, 1 December). It was my first wife who hid behind the Guardian at the breakfast table. I had the temerity to suggest she might share the newspaper. Her hands moved from the sides of the paper to the top, either side of the centre fold. She tore the paper in two and handed me one half. We separated, like the newspaper, shortly afterwards. Great style, though. Andrew McCulloch Collingham, Nottinghamshire Saturday's Guardian is a great disappointment as there is no Suguru. Please find a little corner. I really, really miss it. Jan Godfrey Esher, Surrey Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters

Donald Trump's rally in Cincinnati on Thursday night was almost identical to any of the hundreds of public speeches he has held since announcing he was running for president in June 2015. He aired grievances and launched broadsides against political rivals and the media. The crowd chanted "lock her up" when he mentioned Hillary Clinton, and "build that wall" when he talked about immigration. But there was one difference. Trump was holding the rally as president-elect, nearly a month after the general election was held. The Cincinnati event represented the first stop of Trump's unorthodox "USA Thank You Tour", which is expected to take in campaign-style rallies in a number of the swing states whose support won him the White House in November. But instead of thanking voters who supported him, the president-elect devoted much of his energy to targeting those who had stood in his way. In addition to a familiar tirade against the "dishonest media" – whom Trump particularly blamed for not calling his win in Pennsylvania in a timely manner on election night, as well as for reporting that Trump might lose in states such as Utah and Georgia where he eventually won – he also bashed former rivals. He took veiled shots at Ohio governor John Kasich for not supporting him in the general election, and derided Evan McMullin, a conservative third-party candidate who ran a competitive campaign in Utah, as "some guy". He seemed nostalgic for his old foe Hillary Clinton, remarking to the crowd: "We did have a lot of fun fighting Hillary, didn't we?" He did not directly criticize the former Democratic nominee, although the crowd responded with the chant of "lock her up" that had frequently punctuated his campaign rallies. The president-elect also returned to the nationalist and nativist rhetoric on which he had based his campaign. "There is no global anthem, no global currency," he said as he pledged yet again to put "America First". He blamed terrorist attacks in the US on the admission of refugees by "stupid politicians", and claimed that an unidentified foreign leader told him "I truly respect the United States again" because of his election. The former reality television star also resorted to some of his usual showmanship. The president-elect, who has been parading potential cabinet appointments like contestants on a dating show, announced his nomination of former marine corps general James Mattis to be secretary of defense seemingly unprompted from the stage. "I don't want to tell you to this, I refuse to tell you, don't let it outside of this room," he told the crowd. "I will not tell you that one of our great, great generals, don't let it outside, we are going to appoint 'Mad Dog' Mattis as our secretary of defense and we're not announcing it until Monday, so don't tell it to anybody." Although the Washington Post had first reported Mattis's appointment earlier in the afternoon, Trump transition spokesman Jason Miller had firmly denied it, insisting on Twitter only hours before Trump took the stage: "No decision has been made yet with regard to Secretary of Defense." As preoccupied as ever with television ratings, Trump boasted that the election had driven down viewing figures for the NFL because "this business is tougher than the NFL. It's crazy. The people liked it." The president-elect went on to brag of the election results: "The bottom line is we won. We won. We won big," with a glee that might have drawn him a penalty for excessive celebration had he been a football player on the gridiron. The crowd, dressed in shirts and hats that proclaimed their desire to "make America great again" or attempted to reclaim Clinton's description of some Trump supporters as "deplorables", seemed optimistic about the president-elect's chances of bringing change to Washington. Joe Terry of Cincinnati, a middle-aged man with a old-fashioned buzzcut, saw Trump's election as "the beginning of a grassroots movement" to reform US politics, which he currently saw as being defined by "a lot of talk and nothing getting done". Terry was confident that Trump would cut taxes, bring jobs back and "make Washington work again". Supporters voiced only one concern about the president-elect: the possibility of 2012 GOP nominee Mitt Romney joining the administration. Jacob Hicks, a student at the University of Cincinnati, said: "It's the one thing that is kind of upsetting me." Hicks's friend Justin, a student at the University of Northern Kentucky who declined to give his last name, echoed these concerns. "Mitt Romney is part of the establishment. He wants to take over Donald Trump and thinks he is better than Donald Trump." But Trump was more than willing to make big promises to his loyal supporters. "People are constantly telling me and telling you to reduce our expectations – those people are fools," he said, adding: "Anything we now want for our country is possible."

A scheme designed to parachute "elite teachers" into struggling schools, launched with much fanfare last year, has been scrapped by the government after just 24 teachers were placed through the programme . The national teaching service was announced last year by the then education secretary Nicky Morgan. It was supposed to help solve the perennial problem of schools in difficulty being unable to recruit the experienced teachers they needed to thrive. But despite offering £10,000 in relocation expenses for teachers with three years' experience, few appeared to be willing to take the plunge. Freedom of information requests revealed that only about 100 teachers had made enquiries, and just 24 had accepted places in schools. The cost of the ill-fated scheme ran to £200,000, according to government figures released after questions raised by the Labour MP Lucy Powell. The Department for Education confirmed that what it described as a pilot scheme would be shut down. A DfE spokesperson said the department had been "pleased" with the level of interest in the pilot, and in the calibre of candidates it attracted. "However, following a review of the outcomes, we can confirm that we will not be progressing with the further rollout of the national teaching service. "We recognise that it is vitally important that schools, particularly in challenging areas, can recruit and retain excellent teachers, and we are determined to continue to support them to do this. "We will use the lessons learnt from the pilot to secure a better understanding of how to support schools in the future, and will set out future plans in due course." The news comes a day after the outgoing Ofsted chief inspector, Michael Wilshaw, criticised the government for being fixated on structures, such as grammar schools, and failing to maintain a good supply of teachers. Wilshaw said that in some parts of England with severe teacher shortages, such as the north-west, he had heard of "auctions" taking place when an experienced staff member became available, with schools bidding for qualified candidates. Russell Hobby, general secretary of the National Association of Head Teachers, agreed that the government was failing to get the basics right over teacher supply and recruitment. "I think we have learned now that we cannot rely on schemes that only transfer people from one part of the country to another. We must help local areas develop, support and retain their own staff," Hobby said. "One reason the scheme has not delivered is that there are simply not enough teachers in the system. We have to get the basics right – proper starting pay and good working conditions." When originally launched by Morgan, the scheme was intended to place 1,500 teachers over four years, to help schools that were struggling because of their location or status to recruit staff. In launching the scheme in November last year, Morgan said: "Too many young people aren't being given a fair shot to succeed because of where they live. That's why today I'm announcing the creation of a national teaching service, sending some of our best teachers to schools in struggling areas." As recently as January this year, Morgan said: "We have already received hundreds of expressions of interest and I want to encourage even more top teachers and middle leaders to apply and be part of our mission to extend opportunity to young people across the north-west from September 2016." But the government's figures suggest that Morgan was over-optimistic: only 116 applications were received under the scheme, and only 54 of those were able to take part. By August, the deadline for acceptances, just 14 had agreed to posting. The deadline was extended and a further 10 teachers accepted places.

The pound has closed at its highest level against the euro in three months after nervous currency traders adopted a cautious approach ahead of Italy's constitutional referendum on Sunday. With the poll in the eurozone's third-biggest economy too close to call, fears that a no vote would risk a fresh economic and political crisis pushed sterling to a fifth successive week of gains against the single currency, the pound's best run in nine weeks. The pound was up by more than half a cent against the euro to trade at just under €1.19 and was also up against the US dollar, despite a fall in unemployment. Investor sentiment towards the pound has strengthened in recent days after the Brexit secretary, David Davis, said the UK might pay to secure future access to the European single market and nervousness grew about the outcome of the Italian vote. Tsvetoslav Tsonev, an economist at Fathom Consulting, said: "Concerns about Italy's constitutional referendum and its implications are weighing on markets. They are right to be concerned. "If the outcome results in another economic downturn, causing sovereign bond yields to spike, it could prove to be the straw that broke the camel's back, triggering a banking crisis and eventually Italy's exit from the euro area." Investors in shares and bonds preferred to adopt a wait-and-see approach ahead of the Italian referendum, which supporters hope will simplify the country's lawmaking system by reducing the authority of one of its parliamentary chambers. Matteo Renzi, the prime minister, has said he will resign if he loses the vote, but hard evidence of public opinion has been hard to gauge because opinion polls are banned in the final two weeks before the referendum. Shares on Milan's stock market were barely changed on the day, with bourses in Paris and Frankfurt showing small losses. London's FTSE 100 closed 22 points lower at 6730.72.

Slaven Bilic has confirmed that Andy Carroll is ready to return to the West Ham squad and have an "impact" in Saturday's Premier League match with Arsenal. Carroll, 27, has been missing from the side since August after suffering a knee injury. A mooted return against Manchester United in the EFL Cup on Wednesday failed to materialise as the Hammers lost 4-1 at Old Trafford. But now Bilic is ready to call on Carroll in a fixture the England striker dominated last season, scoring a towering hat-trick in a 3-3 draw. "He will be in the squad so he's ready," said Bilic. "His absence was a very long one. It happened at the beginning of the season, so it's been three months, so he's definitely not ready to play 90 minutes but he's ready for an impact." Not for the first time in his 18 months as manager the Croat went on to praise the England striker and said he played a central role in the Hammers' seventh-place league finish last season. "He is one of the reasons, along with Dimitri Payet, why we were so prolific last season in front of goal, why we were so versatile and, at end of the day, why we scored so many goals and finished so high in the table," Bilic said. "We had spells when he played a few games for 90 minutes," he went on. "We also had spells when he made an impact from the bench and this was especially the case against Arsenal. It was basically him who brought us back in that game. The whole team had one of the best 45 minutes of last season then and that's what he's capable of." Bilic said he was also confident of welcoming another striker, André Ayew, back to his squad with the £20m summer signing returning to training on Friday. But there was also bad injury news for the Hammers. Aaron Cresswell and Michail Antonio – both of West Ham's wing-backs in their 3-4-3 formation – will miss the Arsenal match. "Ayew should be back in training today and, if he passes training, which we hope he does, then can be in the squad," Bilic said. "I have just spoken to the medical team and unfortunately Cresswell and Antonio are out for tomorrow's game. But the doctors are optimistic they'll be ready for the next game against Liverpool."

Right on cue Magnus Carlsen's previously stuttering form came back into flow for games three and four of the tiebreaks in New York on his 26th birthday. The world champion retained his crown by defeating Russia's Sergey Karjakin 3-1 in one-hour rapids after their classical games ended 6-6. The match proved enormously popular with online audiences, was a media hit and had the most brilliant final move, a queen sacrifice for mate, of any world title series. Yet questions remain about the performance of both players. The biggest mystery is what happened to Karjakin's preparation. The challenger rightly gained plaudits for his tenacious, resilient and at times inspired defensive play, particularly in game two of the tiebreak when, despite playing for many moves on the three-seconds increment, he found a wonderful resource based on a bishop and rook pawn stalemate. Just soaking up the opponent's punches is an unlikely planned strategy. At the final press conference Karjakin said he had too much to prepare so sometimes forgot the details. His preferred opening as White was the d3 Spanish, a quiet line with little possibility of unleashing a significant novelty. Yet there were claims that Karjakin's team had a budget of $1m and years before Karjakin became the challenger he stated that he had a purpose-built chess computer and database but that Carlsen had a still bigger one. The mammoth budget produced almost zilch in the field of opening bombs. Karjakin's clock management in the one-hour rapid tie-breaks was dreadful. In the very routine first game he took most of his time for around 20 moves, allowed Carlsen a 15-minute time lead and was lucky that the game petered out to a draw. Of course Carlsen noticed his opponent's weakness and for the remaining games he kept ahead on the clock while posing more complex questions. It paid off in game three when a rare Karjakin novelty boomeranged and the Russian had a passive, though tenable position. Finally the pressure got to him and at move 38 he froze. He could have kept in the game by attacking Carlsen's queen but instead let his time run down to two seconds before making a fatal capture which lost immediately. For much of the match Carlsen's play was uneven, culminating in the eighth game where he imploded by impatiently trying to win a drawn position. It was only after Karjakin missed a likely chance for a second and probably decisive victory in game nine that the Norwegian reasserted control, deciding on a clear match strategy of going for 6-6 and tie-breaks which he believed he would dominate and did. So why did the Norwegian team have to go to Plan B when on all known previous form Carlsen should have won the match in the classical games? My guess is that Carlsen, despite publicly stating that Karjakin was a serious opponent, inwardly relaxed because he perceived that he was stronger and had easily cruised through his two previous championship matches against India's Vishy Anand. I would also point a finger at Carlsen's three-hour online blitz match against Hikaru Nakamura on 27 October as hardly ideal preparation for a classical contest. But overall the result was right. Carlsen is the world No1, Karjakin, even after gaining rating points in New York, is still only No6. Carlsen had a scare and will surely take the lesson on board before 2018. Meanwhile he will continue to delight chess fans with his virtuoso tournament performances. The high percentage of draws, some of them routine, in the main match, has led to proposals for the reform of the format to reduce the importance of speed tie-breaks. The idea I like best is for the fast tie-breaks to be staged before the classical games, thus sparking early public and media interest and ensuring that one side in the main match would always be under pressure to go for a decisive result. Adding a 13th game at the end where the tie-break loser has White would make for the desired small imbalance. However, it's all theoretical, as the match organisers, Agon, have already declared that the format for Carlsen's next title defence will be the same as in New York, right down to the same dates. It may not happen like that, of course, since finding sponsors for a multi-million dollar event is never easy and much will depend on the nationality of the next challenger. At present Fabiano Caruana, the US champion and world No2, is the favourite to qualify and other elite grandmasters from the US, France and the Netherlands are also serious contenders, along with Karjakin and the ex-champion Vlad Kramnik from Russia. Many journalists provided daily reports. The best were by Jonathan Tisdall, US master resident in Norway, whose daily MattOgPatt articles are still an enjoyable and thoughtful read. Sergey Karjakin v Magnus Carlsen, third tie-break game 1 e4 e5 2 Nf3 Nc6 3 Bb5 a6 4 Ba4 Nf6 5 O-O Be7 6 d3 b5 7 Bb3 d6 8 a3 O-O 9 Nc3 Na5 10 Ba2 Be6 11 b4 Nc6 12 Nd5 Nd4 13 Ng5?! Bxd5 14 exd5 Nd7 15 Ne4 f5 16 Nd2 f4! 17 c3 Nf5 18 Ne4 Qe8 19 Bb3 Qg6 20 f3 Bh4 21 a4 Nf6 22 Qe2 a5 23 axb5 axb4 24 Bd2 bxc3 25 Bxc3 Ne3 26 Rfc1 Rxa1 27 Rxa1 Qe8 28 Bc4 Kh8 29 Nxf6 Bxf6 30 Ra3 e4 31 dxe4 Bxc3 32 Rxc3 Qe5 33 Rc1 Ra8 34 h3 h6 35 Kh2 Qd4 36 Qe1 Qb2 37 Bf1 Ra2 38 Rxc7?? Ra1 0-1 3471 1 h5+! If Kxh5 2 Qf6! when 3 g4+ and 4 Qxh6 mate is a winning threat. The game ended 1...Kh7 2 Qf6! Qc7 3 Qg6+ Kh8 4 Bf7! and Black resigned as he must give up his queen just to delay mate.

The Liberal Democrats secured a stunning byelection victory to unseat Zac Goldsmith by convincing up to a third of leave-supporting Tory voters to switch to the party, Tim Farron has claimed, adding that the outcome could "change the direction of British politics". The Lib Dems overturned a 23,000 majority on Thursday to remove the former Conservative MP in a vote that became a de facto plebiscite on the government's Brexit plans. Sarah Olney, the winning Lib Dem candidate, took a fraction under 50% of the entire vote to record a majority of 1,872. Large numbers of local Labour voters backed her, with the Labour candidate, Christian Wolmar, losing his deposit. Nick Clegg, the former Lib Dem leader, has used an article in the Evening Standard to say that the Conservatives could lose more elections if they do not change their stance on Brexit. So that is really the lesson of last night for Theresa May: she is the prime minister for the whole of the United Kingdom, not just for her party or the hardest of hard Brexiteers. She must reach out, urgently, to those millions of people who simply do not share the worldview of Farage, Gove and Fox. Yes, the Brexiteers won on June 23 — but with victory comes magnanimity and responsibility. It is now Theresa May's duty to show a bit of both. Otherwise Richmond may turn out to be the first of many election upsets. Downing Street has said the byelection result will not stop the government delivering Brexit. A Number 10 spokesman said: We had an election and we had a referendum. The referendum result was very clear and the majority of the country expressed an opinion for us to leave the EU. The message from the British people was loud and clear on June 23 that there is a desire for us to leave the EU. The government is getting on with delivering that. Asked whether the result might make the prime minister reconsider her decision not to hold a second EU referendum, the spokesman replied: "No." Earlier today the Conservative party said the result "doesn't change anything" in relation to government policy over Brexit or Heathrow. Boris Johnson, the foreign secretary, has paid tribute to Zac Goldsmith, the former Richmond Park MP. Goldsmith "made a remarkable contribution" to the Commons, Johnson said. He was heroic and principled in standing up for what he believes in on Heathrow expansion. He will be missed but he will certainly be back. That's all from me for today. Thanks for the comments. The Liberal Democrats' newest MP walked out of a live radio interview after being given a grilling over her position on Brexit, the Press Association reports. Sarah Olney, who ousted former Tory Zac Goldsmith in the Richmond Park by-election, disappeared off air just three minutes into the Talk Radio broadcast. The premature exit came after tricky questioning by presenter Julia Hartley-Brewer on her calls for a referendum on the terms of Britain's exit from the European Union. She said: "Voters knew what they were voting for in your by-election, they knew what they were voting for in the EU referendum. Why do we think that one election should be re-run and one shouldn't?" Olney said the terms of Brexit had not been clear during the referendum and it had been a vote on the departure rather than the destination. "There was no clear manifesto for what happened to our membership of the single market or what happened to freedom of movement," she said. Hartley-Brewer replied: "Every single leading member of the remain campaign said a vote to leave the EU was a vote to leave the single market. Nothing unclear about that at all." After a few seconds of silence, an unnamed aide stepped in and told the presenter: "I'm really sorry but Sarah has to leave now." Hartley-Brewer said the MP "should be able to answer some simple questions" about her policy and asked for her to be put back on air but was told Olney had another interview to attend. "If she doesn't want to answer questions from a radio station perhaps she is not fit to be an MP", the presenter added. I've already posted three Guardian analysis pieces about the byelection, by Dave Hill (see 8.40am), by Anushka Asthana (see 10.35am) and by me (see 9.23am.) Here are five more analysis articles that are worth reading. Jeremy Cliffe from the Economist says the real loser at the byelection was Labour. The outgoing MP may be a Conservative (until recently, at least). But the loser was Labour. The party took 3.7% of votes, down from 12.3% last year, and lost its deposit. It obtained fewer votes (1,515) than it has members in the seat (it claims over 1,600). That may reflect tactical voting: left-wing voters lending support to the Ms Olney. But it also speaks to Labour's lacklustre voice on Europe (notwithstanding the wise appointment of Sir Keir Starmer as its Brexit spokesman) and general funk. And it speaks to a wider structural evolution. Three or four years ago, with UKIP on the rise and the Lib Dems in power with the Tories, the talk was of the fragmentation of the right of British politics. That period seems to have passed. The 2015 election saw the Conservatives consume the Lib Dems' centrist flank. The Brexit vote and Theresa May's nationalist tilt has attracted back some Tory defectors to UKIP (hence her party now routinely exceeds 40% in polls). Today the fragmentation is more on the left. Particularly under Paul Nuttall, its statist new leader, UKIP is now overwhelmingly a problem for Labour; especially in the sort of post-industrial areas that have long voted for the party but strongly supported Brexit. But Andy McSmith on his blog says the byelection result says nothing about the state of the Labour party. In Newbury, in May 1993, when the voters amassed behind a Lib Dem to keep out a Tory, Labour ran a member of its head office staff as the candidate and sent in Peter Mandelson to plan the campaign, and harvested just 2% of the vote (compared with 3.7% in Richmond Park). It was, to put it mildly, not an accurate pointer to what might happen at the 1997 general election. The significance of yesterday's vote is that the electorate in a heavily pro-EU constituency were given a one-off chance to rid themselves of their pro-Brexit MP, and seized it. The result says nothing, one way or the other, about the Labour Party's uncertain future. Helen Lewis at the New Statesman says the outcome was worrying for both main parties. The result in Richmond will make many in Labour and the Conservative party nervous. For Tories who won their seats from Lib Dems in 2015, this is a sign that there is a small but significant block of voters for whom Brexit is a motivating issue. (Nearly three-quarters of voters in Richmond voted Remain.) For Labour, the concern is that a political discussion polarised around pro/anti-Brexit lines leaves them out of the picture - as has happened in Scotland, where the narrative is framed around independence/unionism. John Rentoul at the Independent says the byelection result increases the chances of Brexit being delayed. What a sensational, media-saturated by-election does, though, is change the atmosphere, especially in the House of Lords. If the supreme court rules in January that parliament must vote on article 50, it will have to go through both Houses. Until this morning, the Lords would have felt bound by the referendum. Now there is evidence that the will of the people is not as clear-cut as the prime minister insists it is. The House of Lords is still unlikely to delay article 50. Angela Smith, the leader of the Labour peers, has said they will not obstruct it. But a few more Paleo-European peers in all parties and on the cross benches may be emboldened, and if anything else happens before the bill is tabled they may be more emboldened still. Ian Warren at Election Data says Richmond Park is a very unusual constituency because it is dominated by two groups: stable, wealthy over 40s in professional occupations and younger professionals in high-end privately rented accommodation. This is from Ipsos MORI's Ben Page. Tim Farron, the Lib Dem leader, has told LBC that Theresa May has now effectively become the leader of Ukip. He said: There is no point in Ukip now because Theresa May has become the leader of Ukip. They've taken that right-wing extreme view on Brexit. Something that most people who voted leave I think don't actually agree with. The academic Rob Ford has been tweeting about the size of the swing in Richmond Park. Chuka Umunna, the former shadow business secretary, has told the Evening Standard that he has no time for politicians, like the Lib Dems, who are calling for a second referendum on the EU. He told the paper: I really have no time for calls for a second referendum because I think it comes across as disrespectful to those who voted to leave. Those calls reinforce what I feel is a false stereotype — of a bunch of people in London who think they know best. Labour is not calling for a second referendum, but Emily Thornberry, the shadow foreign secretary, recently refused to rule one out. Grant Shapps, a former Conservative chairman, has criticised his party's decision not to put up a candidate against Zac Goldsmith in Richmond Park. This chart, from James Kanagasooriam from Populus, indicates which Conservative seats might be vulnerable to tactic voting by aggrieved remain supporters. (They're the seats above the blue line.) Zac Goldsmith's brother Ben has been tweeting about the result this morning. The Sun's Tom Newton Dunn points out that Goldsmith deleted a rather coarser version of this in the early hours of the morning. The Conservative MP Anna Soubry, a staunch remain supporter, has welcomed the Richmond Park result. Earlier I quoted research from the academic Chris Hanretty showing Richmond Park to be one of the most pro-remain constituencies in the countries. (See 9.23am.) This morning he has tweeted a link to an updated table, saying it is the 28th most pro-remain seat in the country. Guy Shrubsole has turned this into a more readable chart, with colour coding by political party. The Liberal Democrats victory in the Richmond Park by-election could place the party back on the road to significant gains in the House of Commons, according to one of the country's leading psephologists. Prof John Curtice said Sarah Olney's defeat of Zac Goldsmith was not simply about the Conservative party but also something that ought to worry Labour, which he described as a "fragile creature" that had taken another blow. He suggested the outcome suggested voters were "beginning to forgive the coalition" and warned that Labour worried about the Ukip threat, it ought to pay attention to the risk at the much larger socially liberal end of its spectrum of potential voters. "This gives the Liberal Democrats the opportunity to get back into general election game," the academic at Strathclyde university told the Guardian. Its not going to put them in a position to be the next government but it potentially puts them back onto the road to securing significant representation in the House of Commons once again. He asked if it could be comparable to the party's 1990 Eastbourne byelection victory, which came off the back of disastrous polling but led to a solid performance in the 1992 general election. "Do we see them go into double figures for Liberal Democrats?" he asked about the national polls. Curtice said the Lib Dems had tapped into a "niche market" of around half of remain supporters who were still deeply upset about the Brexit decision, but said it was a part of the electorate that the Lib Dems were "ready to exploit". He described the typical potential Lib Dem voter as socially liberal and a university graduate. And that, he argued, should worry Labour, which had been very focused on the Ukip threat but had another concern to contend with. If I were the Labour party I would be worried if the Lib Dems are back in the game. Labour is worrying about losing socially conservative end of the coalition, but they forget that it is smaller than the socially liberal end. He suggested that Jeremy Corbyn's party's nervousness about respecting the Brexit vote wasn't necessarily in line with its current electorate. Everyone is going around with an outdated vision of what a typical Labour voter is about. Between two thirds and three quarters of Labour supporters voted remain. Here are the main points from Tim Farron's briefing with the press in Richmond Park. Farron said the byelection result showed that the government's Brexit policy could be changed. And he renewed his call for a second referendum on Brexit, to give voters a say over the final deal. Britain deserves a more moderate way forward than the extreme version of Brexit that Theresa May is currently following. This byelection gives real heart to the majority of people in this country who just think things could be done better, that we would have an open, tolerant, united country ... If the British people decide to say to Theresa May that there is a better way forward than the one she is proceeding with, and if we therefore end up with either a soft Brexit or, best still in my view, that the terms of the deal are put to the British people at the end of all this, as a consequence of her fear of losing dozens of seats to the Liberal Democrats, we will have done a great day's work for the British people ... This result shows that, whilst we haven't changed the balance of the House of Commons vastly ... what it might do though is change the direction of British politics. He claimed that leave voters were backing the Lib Dems because they wanted Britain to stay in the single market. Most of them don't regret their vote in June. But they do regret Theresa May taking their vote and perverting it into something they never meant it to be. The believe that we should be in the single market, even if we are outside the European Union. Given that that is the case, given that millions of people think that, surely our argument that we should have a referendum on the terms of the deal is gaining traction. He also claimed that a third of Tory voters who backed leave in the constituency had voted Lib Dem. (See 10.25am.) There is evidence to back up what Farron is saying. This analysis by John Curtice for NatCen found that even amongst leave voters there is strong support for retaining aspects of the single market like free trade. But the research also found the same voters want aspects of "hard" Brexit, like migration controls. Farron accused Theresa May of not showing proper leadership on Europe. There are two forms of leadership. One is when you see the way you think the country is going, you run around the front and you pretend that's you. I think Theresa May has done that. The other is where you are bold, you say this is where we believe the country should be, and you have the courage of your convictions and you argue for that. That is the leadership we have been showing and we have been rewarded for that today. He said the Liberal Democrats could stage a big revival very quickly. Let's not assume that given the massive shocks we've had in British politics and global politics in recent months that the Liberal Democrats' comeback is either inevitable or needs to take forever. It is entirely in the hands of British people. If they want there to be a progressive, moderate opposition that can really stand up to the Tories, given that Labour have shuffled off that space, then the Liberal Democrats' role has never been more necessary. This is a historic moment for the country. Let's see what happens next. As an example, he cited Scotland as an example, saying that after the independence referendum the SNP went from having a small number of MPs to "near total domination". He dismissed claims the Richmond Park is not a typical constituency because it is strongly pro-remain and has a very high proportion of graduates. When this was put to him he replied: There is no such thing as a typical constituency ... The reality is that, wherever you are in this country, there will be a balance of opinion. He dismissed calls for an anti-Conservative "progessive alliance". Although he said he was very grateful to the Greens for not putting up a candidate against the Lib Dems in Richmond Park, he said that he thought the best way to advance progressive goals was through a Lib Dem fightback. Farron says he "couldn't be more pleased" about the fact the Lib Dems now have a female MP. Olney says all the main candidates in Richmond Park were opposed to Heathrow expansion. So that is why it is safe to assume Brexit was a key factor, she says. Tim Farron and Sarah Olney are now talking to Sky News. Farron says there are been 23 gains in council byelections since the referendum. He says 13 of those came in leave areas. Here is my colleague Anushka Asthana's take on the byelection result. And here is an excerpt. It all resulted in a stunning victory for the Lib Dems, who overturned one of the Tories' safest looking seats. The party will deservedly cheer the result as a statement about the government's direction on Brexit and also take heart that they still have the ability to squeeze a third party – often a critical factor in first past the post elections. But these should be cautious celebrations. This byelection has shown that Farron's 48% strategy – targeting the very large minority of voters who backed remain in the EU referendum – can cut through in a place like Richmond. Still, for a party crushed to just eight MPs in 2015, Richmond Park is only a tiny step back in the right direction. The Lib Dems have made it into the foothills of a hike back to electoral relevance. They know that to make serious gains up the mountain of a general election means much more than persuading the most fiercely pro-EU electorate in parts of London. Tim Farron, the Lib Dem leader, is in Richmond Park speaking to the media. He has just repeated the point he made on the Today programme about how a large number of leave voters backed the Lib Dems in the byelection. He told the Today programme: If I tell you that nearly a third of Tory voters from the last election who voted Leave in June voted Liberal Democrat yesterday you will see that this is not just about Remain versus Leave rerun, it's about people trying to say to Theresa May we do not like the extreme version of Brexit outside the single market you are taking us down. I will post more from his briefing shortly. The Belgian MEP and former prime minister Guy Verhofstadt has tweeted his congratulations to Sarah Olney. He is head of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe group in the European parliament, which the Lib Dems belong to, but more importantly he is the European parliament's chief Brexit negotiator. Some byelections turn out to be of immense importance, either shifting the direction of national politics, or illuminating a change that is already underway. Most byelections have no real significance at all. And there are some that appear to be crucial landmarks at the time, but that subsequently turn out to be relatively insignificant. Last week Nick Clegg, the former Lib Dem leader, said victory for his party in Richmond Park would be one of the biggies. It "could cause the government to rethink its hard Brexit agenda", he said. That is probably an exaggeration, although the byelection may well have some implications for Brexit. Here are 10 lessons from the Richmond Park byelection. 1 - Voters in Richmond Park were making a protest about Brexit - but they were not necessarily voting against Theresa May's Brexit. Zac Goldsmith triggered the byelection so that he could stand as an independent and register his opposition to a Heathrow third runway, but the Lib Dems neutralised that by saying they would oppose the Heathrow third runway just as strongly. Instead they invited voters to use the byelection to vote against "hard" Brexit and in favour of a second referendum. But Lib Dems who campaigned in the seat admit that many people were supporting them not specifically because they are opposed to what May and David Davis are doing but because they wanted to vote against the entire 23 June referendum result. In other words, it may well have been more of a vote against Vote Leave than a vote against the Conservative government. 2 - The government's working majority is now down to 13. Assuming that Zac Goldsmith would have voted with the government on everything apart from Heathrow, that's a reduction from 15. That does not help, but it is not in itself too disastrous for May. 3 - Byelection losses can put pressure on governments to change policy - but there are two good reasons why there is is little chance of that happening here. Leaders fear losing seats in byelections not so much because their majority goes down but because, if all their MPs start getting scared that they too will lose their seats because of the poll tax or abolishing the 10p rate of income tax or whatever, the parliamentary party becomes unmanageable. But May is unlikely to face a delegation of MPs coming to see her to tell her that she must change course over Brexit. Why? First, this may well have been more of an anti Brexit vote than an anti "hard" Brexit vote. And, second, Richmond Park is one of the most pro-remain seats in the country. It is estimated that 72% of people there voted remain (compared to the national figure of 48%). This figure is based on research by the academic Chris Hanretty. (The referendum results were announced by local authority area, not by parliamentary constituency, which meant Hanretty had to devise a formula to convert one into the other.) On the Today programme John Humphrys said Richmond Park had the 17th highest remain vote. This Hanretty chart (pdf) shows only seven English seats with higher remain votes. Whatever, there are very few Tory MP who will worry about a remain backlash as strong as the one in Richmond Park. UPDATE: Hanretty has a better chart here, showing Richmond Park as the 28th most pro-remain constituency in the country. 4 - But this result will embolden Lib Dem MPs and peers, because they can now claim to have a mandate to oppose a "hard" Brexit and to push for a second referendum. Sarah Olney's election takes the number of Lib Dem MPs in the Commons from eight to nine and the Tory Jacob Rees-Mogg was right to dismiss them as a relatively puny Commons force. (See 8.18am.) But they have 104 peers in the Lords, where their impact can be decisive, and Richmond Park will now make those peers feel more confident about amending the bill parliament may have to pass to trigger article 50. 5 - The Lib Dems have also received a fillip nationally. One byelection win by itself will not revive the party, which is still doing dreadfully in national polls. It was at just 7% in the Guardian/ICM poll this week. But there was a fear the party had become toxic during the coalition. Richmond Park shows it can attract new voters in significant numbers. 6 - Which is why the chances of an early election seem more remote. There may be relatively few Tory MPs worried about the Brexit implications of the byelection. But at the last election 27 Tories won seats from the Lib Dems, and a swing on the scale achieved by Olney (21.5 points) would see many of them (or most? I haven't checked the numbers) lose to a Lib Dem challenger. A 2017 general election now looks riskier. 7 - Tactical voting is back. Many of the Lib Dem byelection victories in the 1990s were achieved because the party found it easy to get Labour supporters to vote tactically for it against the Tories and that seems to have been happening in Richmond Park. Labour fielded a strong candidate, Christian Wolmar, but his vote collapsed. Tactical voting seems the obvious explanation, which is why the result does not really tell us anything about Labour and Jeremy Corbyn (despite Tim Farron's attempts to claim otherwise - see 7.47am.) 8 - But the result may raise questions about the need for a "progressive alliance". On the left there has been increasing interest in the idea that progressive parties should form electoral pacts in some seats so that the party best placed to defeat the Tories gets a free run. The Greens adopted this approach in Richmond Park, and they are suggesting it worked. (See 8.09am.) Labour's decision not to adopt this approach was controversial. But Labour supporters voted tactically anyway, suggesting that perhaps formal "stand aside" deals are unnecessary. 9 - Parties still matter enormously. Some commentators claim that traditional political parties are dying, and that the future belongs to insurgent outsiders like Donald Trump. But, in the UK at least, it is virtually impossible to win an election without having a party machine behind you. Goldsmith's supporters believe that one of the main reasons he lost was that, once he decided to stand as an independent, he lost access to the activist support and voter ID data that are essential components of victory in a contest like this. In terms of volunteer numbers, he was overwhelmed by the Lib Dems. 10 - Negative campaigning can backfire. Anecdotal evidence suggests that some people were motivated to vote against Goldsmith because they have not forgiven him for what was perceived as the Islamophobic tone of his campaign against Sadiq Khan in the London mayoral contest. It was probably a marginal factor, but one he may reflect on. Over the last 12 months Goldsmith has seen his career crash spectacularly, losing two elections, one of which (Richmond Park) he was confident of winning until very recently. Students of May's summer purge of the Cameroons will note that this is another metropolitan Etonian who has crashed out of politics. Here is my colleague Dave Hill's take on the byelection result. And here's an excerpt. For Olney and her party, victory will feel like the next step on a national comeback trail in a region of the capital that used to be an orange stronghold. For London, it is a local reassertion of its people's disquiet over the turbulence triggered by the Brexit vote and the destructive mentalities it has unleashed. A freak of a byelection that risked being pointless has ended up as a restatement of some of the capital's most distinctive values. It won't be the last time the city makes its feelings known. Q: The Lib Dems have been here before. But it does not constitute a comeback, does it. Farron says this is the Lib Dems' first byelection gain for 10 years. Things can change dramatically and quickly, he says. There is a need for a moderate party that can take on the Tories, he says. And that's it. The interview is over. Rees-Mogg says having one extra Lib Dem in the Commons won't change much. And he says having a second referendum would amount to rejecting the result of the first referendum. That would be undemocratic, he says. He says it is a shame that Zac Goldsmith will no longer be in parliament. He promised to resign if the Heathrow third runway went ahead and he kept his promise. Farron says Goldsmith behaved with good grace. Farron says people will feel betrayed by the Brexit decision. That is why there needs to a second referendum, he says. He says it would be referendum on the deal, not a re-run of the first referendum. Q: But people would be able to vote to stay in the EU. Farron confirms that is the case. Tim Farron, the Lib Dem leader, is being on the Today programme now. The Conservative Jacob Rees-Mogg is being interviewed too. Q: This does not tell us much about your party, does it? Tim Farron says byelections do not change the government, but they can change the direction of the government. He says nearly a third of Tories who voted leave voted Lib Dem. That shows they are concerned about a hard Brexit, he says. Q: But Richmond Park had the 17th biggest vote for remain. Farron says the Lib Dems have gained 23 seats in byelections since June, and that many of those were in leave areas. That shows people are worried about a hard Brexit, he says. Jacob Rees-Mogg says this is a strong remain area. He accepts that people voted because they were unhappy about the leave vote. Caroline Lucas, the co-leader of the Green party, is suggesting the Richmond Park result is a victory for her "progressive alliance" strategy. The Greens decided not to put up a candidate in the byelection, and to back Sarah Olney instead, because they wanted to maximise the chances of a progressive candidate winning. And they think they made a difference. At the general election the Greens won 3,548 votes in the seat. This morning Zac Goldsmith lost by 1,872 votes, the Greens point out in a press release. In her statement Lucas says: The regressive alliance has been defeated and the government has suffered a hammer blow to its hard brexit plans. By standing up at this unique moment the local Green party showed real leadership – and can take a great deal of the credit for the Zac's toppling. It's good to see a candidate elected who will oppose Heathrow expansion, campaign for a fair electoral system and do their best to protect their constituents from the post-referendum chaos being inflicted on them by the Government. The Green party will, of course, continue to stand in the majority of elections – and look forward to campaigning to win seats in Richmond in the 2018 local elections. The Lib Dem leader Tim Farron has just been on Sky News. He made the claim about the Richmond Park result being a vote against the government's Brexit policy that he made in the statement he released overnight. (See 7.25am.) But he also claimed that it was a rejection of Labour, and that people were turning to the Lib Dems because they wanted a moderate opposition to the Tories that was not being provided by Jeremy Corbyn's party. These are from Sky's Beth Rigby. Here is the statement Tim Farron, the Lib Dem leader, issued earlier this morning after Sarah Olney's victory. The message is clear: The Liberal Democrats are back and we are carrying the torch for all of those who want a real opposition to this Conservative Brexit government. We are the only party fighting to keep Britain open, tolerant and united, and the only party that has said, loudly and proudly, that we want Britain to remain a member of the Single Market and that we want the people to be given the final say over the Brexit deal. That message has been resoundingly backed by the people of Richmond Park. This was a remarkable, come-from-nowhere upset that will terrify the Conservatives. A year and a half ago, their man won by nearly 40% and had a majority of more than 20,000. In one fell swoop we have wiped that out completely. If this was a general election, this swing would mean the Conservatives would lose dozens of seats to the Liberal Democrats – and their majority with it. No one believes the Labour party will win any seats off the Tories – and the SNP could only possibly take one off them. But there are dozens in our reach. So, as this by-election has demonstrated, the only way to prevent a Conservative majority at the next election is to vote Liberal Democrat. Here are the full byelection results from the Press Association. Sarah Olney (LD) 20,510 (49.68%, +30.41%) Zac Goldsmith (Ind) 18,638 (45.15%) Christian Wolmar (Lab) 1,515 (3.67%, -8.68%) Howling Laud Hope (Loony) 184 (0.45%) Fiona Syms (Ind) 173 (0.42%) Dominic Stockford (CPA) 164 (0.40%) Maharaja Jammu and Kashmir (Love) 67 (0.16%) David Powell (ND) 32 (0.08%) LD maj 1,872 (4.53%) Electorate 77,243; Turnout 41,283 (53.45%, -23.01%) For the first time in more than 10 years the Liberal Democrats are celebrating gaining a seat in a byelection. But the Lib Dems believe that the surprise result in Richmond Park, where Sarah Olney overturned the 23,000 majority that Zac Goldsmith when he won the seat at the general election for the Conservatives, does not just herald a revival for what was once the UK's third party; Olney and her party sought to turn this into a "Brexit byelection" and in her victory speech she claimed that Richmond Park was sending a clear message to Theresa May. The people of Richmond Park and North Kingston have sent a shockwave through this Conservative Brexit government and our message is clear: we do not want a hard Brexit, we do not want to be pulled out of the single market and we will not let intolerance, division and fear win. Here is our overnight story about the result. And here is last night's byelection live blog, with more about all the developments at the count. I will be focusing on reaction to the result this morning, with analysis of what it means. If you want to follow me or contact me on Twitter, I'm on @AndrewSparrow. I try to monitor the comments BTL but normally I find it impossible to read them all. If you have a direct question, do include "Andrew" in it somewhere and I'm more likely to find it. I do try to answer direct questions, although sometimes I miss them or don't have time. Alternatively you could post a question to me on Twitter.

Trevor Bayliss believes England's Ben Stokes has come a long way in 12 months when it comes to on-field behaviour and has warned that match officials who come down hard on what he calls "by-play" between players could rob cricket of its personalities. Stokes moved closer to a possible suspension during the third Test defeat in Mohali when he was charged with using "language or a gesture that is obscene, offensive or insulting" during an exchange with the India captain, Virat Kohli, after he was stumped for 29 during England's first innings. The official reprimand that followed was Stokes's second in a month after he was fined 15% of his match fee during the second Test in Dhaka for "verbally engaging" with the Bangladesh batsman Sabbir Rahman. Two more charges in the next two years will result in him being suspended for one Test match or two one-day internationals. "I think at times the ICC are almost looking for things," Bayliss said. "I agree things have been out of hand in the past and we don't want it to go overboard. But sometimes a little bit of by-play between a couple of guys on either side who are passionate about their cricket and their team, I think it's good for the game. "We've just got to be careful we don't go overboard and completely cut that out. I think having some personalities in the game is fantastic to watch. Ben Stokes has got to learn to deal with it in a different way or get away with it a bit better. I think he's come a long way in the last 12 months or so and I'm sure he'll keep improving in that area." While the ICC can punish players off the field retrospectively, there are no provisions in the laws that provide a deterrent within the game itself. This may be about to change, with player behaviour one of a number of issues being discussed by the MCC world cricket committee in Mumbai next week, before the fourth Test. The committee, which will be chaired by the former England captain Mike Brearley, will consider a number of options to be written into the laws and applied at all levels, including the possible use of red and yellow cards, sin-bins or run-penalties to help umpires police the sport. With England 2-0 down to India going into the Mumbai Test, the form of Stokes in alien conditions represents a rare plus during what is proving to be a tough tour against the world's No1 Test side. His five for 73 in Mohali and the 128 made in Rajkot means he is only the sixth touring player to claim a five-wicket haul and score a century in a series here, a feat achieved by Ian Botham, in 1980 and 1981. "That's a feather in his cap," Bayliss said. "Some of us are in awe of him. He just doesn't stop. He's like a wind-up clock. You get him off at the break, wind him up and send him back out." While the England management have remained in India, the bulk of the players are taking what they hope will be a restorative five-day break in the United Arab Emirates. Among them is Stuart Broad, who is taking time out of the trip to work with the medical team supporting the Lions side in Dubai as he tries to deal with the strained foot tendon that saw him miss the Mohali defeat. Broad will have further fitness tests before the fourth Test from 8 December, although Bayliss has admitted he is not 100% confident the 30-year-old will be ready in time. Watching on in Mumbai will be Haseeb Hameed, who has stated his intention to return to the tour after surgery in England on his broken little finger. The 19-year-old opener will rejoin his family, who have remained in the country.

Nico Rosberg's decision to walk away from Formula One with the taste of the podium champagne still in his mouth is a conspicuously brilliant one, not least because the newly crowned world champion took everybody with an interest in the sport – except, presumably, his nearest and dearest – by complete surprise. Perhaps the most graceful consequence of his decision is that it allows him to retire on equal terms with his father, Keke, who won his sole world championship in 1982. It was Keke who put Nico in a go-kart at the age of six, and who nurtured and mentored his son through the early years, as could be seen in a charming little home movie which was widely viewed this week. Keke got out of the sport unharmed, having tamed the 1,500-horsepower monsters of F1's first turbo era, and he and his wife, Sina, will be delighted that their son has managed to negotiate his way through a career on the track and emerge unscathed. Even though the odds on that are much better than they were in Keke's time, and incomparably better than for earlier generations, thanks to the modern emphasis on safety in the design of the cars and the layout of the circuits, there will still be a sense of relief. It may also be that one of the reasons Nico is getting out is that he wants to make sure that his wife, Vivian, their 15-month-old daughter, Alaïa, and any further children can live their lives without the stress of knowing that he is heading off every couple of weeks to hurl a car around a track at speeds up to 230mph. The new champion is 31 years old. He has been racing for a quarter of a century and has spent the past 11 years in Formula One, at the very pinnacle of the profession. He won the world title, which is something achieved by only 33 of the 742 men and women who have started grand prix races since the series began in 1950. His ratio of wins to races – 23 to 206 – is better than respectable for the modern era, particularly when his team-mate during his winning years was a world champion in his absolute prime. But a factor in his decision must be the knowledge that he is not the fastest driver in Formula One, that his Mercedes colleague, Lewis Hamilton, has the edge in outright speed, and that next year he would be on something close to a hiding to nothing. He might not want to spend a year defending his title under further critical scrutiny from those who believe that his success was made possible only by a couple of engine failures on Hamilton's car. On Rosberg's behalf it could be said that he was outstanding in terms of one-lap pace in qualifying, his 30 pole positions underlining his ability to get the most from his car in those controlled conditions. He was particularly good at working closely with his engineers, an attribute more vital than ever in the technology-saturated environment of Formula One in the 21st century, when drivers need to be able to absorb and carry out complex procedures relating to a variety of performance parameters while racing wheel to wheel with their rivals. That talent struck the Williams staff when he took their engineering-aptitude test before joining the team in 2006, earning the highest marks they had ever seen. This season it enabled him to get to grips with the problems of coaxing the Mercedes W07 off the start line, something that initially eluded Hamilton and cost the Englishman – who fluffed five starts during the season – very dear. It is of no little significance that his engineers and pit crew held him in high esteem. Some will no doubt claim that the decision betrays a certain lack of hunger. In a sense, that might be true. Michael Schumacher, Juan Manuel Fangio, Alain Prost, Sebastian Vettel, Jack Brabham, Jackie Stewart, Niki Lauda, Nelson Piquet, Ayrton Senna and Hamilton all won three or more titles. Hamilton, also 31, yearns for a fourth, Fernando Alonso, 35, for a third. Fangio retired at 47, Brabham at 44, Schumacher at 43, Piquet at 39, Prost at 38, Lauda at 36 and Stewart at 34. But although Rosberg's competitive nature was hardly in doubt during his time in F1, he is now clearly satisfied with what he achieved. And it should not be overlooked that a man who turned down the offer of a place to study aeronautical engineering at Imperial College in London in order to pursue his racing ambitions might well have interesting and original ideas about what he wants to do with the rest of his life. A personal memory is of seeing Rosberg on a flight home during his early days in F1, barely out of his teens, quietly taking his seat in economy class wearing a logo-free T-shirt and jeans, with none of the aura of entitlement that young sports stars tend to acquire along with their first contracts. There was an air of natural modesty and unpretentiousness about him that had clearly survived a privileged upbringing in Monaco and he has remained unaffected by his subsequent success. What his decision will do is deprive the paddock of a man whose ready smile and engaging manner made him easy to like. The world of Formula One brings such pressures to bear on an individual's temperament that it is hardly a surprise when behaviour is distorted. But Nico Rosberg never gave a sign of believing himself to exist on another plane from those who tightened his wheel nuts or asked him for an autograph. While taking himself, as he put it in his statement, to the peak of the mountain, he remained identifiably a member of the human race. "I'm following my heart," he said when breaking the news of his retirement. "My heart is telling me this." Good for him.

Hong Kong's government signalled that it would attempt to disqualify four pro-democracy legislators on Friday, after successfully barring two others from the city's parliament in an unprecedented attack on popularly elected lawmakers. The government will file a lawsuit seeking to unseat Lau Siu-lai, Nathan Law, Edward Yiu and Leung Kwok-hung by declaring their oaths of office invalid, local media reported. A Hong Kong court disqualified Yau Wai-ching and Sixtus "Baggio" Leung from taking their seats after the pair launched a dramatic anti-China protest during a swearing-in ceremony in October. In recent months, the Chinese and Hong Kong governments have become increasingly hostile to calls for self-determination and independence in the former British colony. Elections in September saw six candidates who support self-determination or outright independence swept into the legislature, including Yau, Leung, Law, Lau and Yiu. Many in Hong Kong disagreed with Yau and Leung's protest, which included displaying flags that said "Hong Kong is not China" and using a expletive to refer to China. However, the four others were seen as far more moderate. "This is a very serious challenge to the entire pro-democracy political community," said Law, at 23 the youngest person ever elected to the chamber. The move is a "suppression of political power" design to tip the balance of power in favour of pro-Beijing lawmakers, he continued. If enough lawmakers in the pro-democracy camp are ejected, the group would lose veto power over major legislation, one of the most powerful tools in a parliament stacked with pro-establishment legislators. After the government filed the first lawsuit to disqualify the two pro-independence lawmakers, Beijing intervened, rewriting Hong Kong's mini-constitution in a rare use of power. The move signalled the Chinese authorities' strong opposition to allowing dissenting voices into the legislature. Leung Kwok-hung, popularly known as "Long Hair" and a member of the legislature for more than a decade, has been jailed several times for political protests from within the chamber. He vowed to fight the charges during an impromptu press conference outside his office, wearing his signature Che Guevara T-shirt. Lawmakers are required to swear allegiance to the "the Hong Kong special administrative region of the People's Republic of China". Lau read the oath in slow motion, taking 10 minutes to read the 77-word declaration. That attempt was invalidated, but she was allowed to retake the oath and eventually sworn in. In the court ruling banning Yau and Leung, the judge said the pair "manifestly refused ... to solemnly, sincerely and truly bind themselves" to Hong Kong's laws, citing statements the judge said showed they made "a wilful and deliberate attempt ... to insult China". Law quoted Gandhi and stated his opposition to the current president of the legislature. It is not yet clear exactly what aspects of the oaths the government will challenge. Any lawmakers who are disqualified would have to be replaced in a by-election, which is supposed to occur within 21 days after all appeals are exhausted.

Why is the scrum an issue in this match? England and Australia have history when it comes to arguments over the scrum. The buildup to their pool match in last year's World Cup was dominated by Australian accusations that Joe Marler, England's loosehead, angles in illegally on the tighthead. In a series of articles and counter-articles, which continued after the match, one commentator would authoritatively explain with stills why Marler's angles were illegal, only for another to use the same scrums to demonstrate how the problem was the opposition. And so on. Then, in the summer series, it was Dan Cole's angles, on the other side of the scrum, that Australia objected to. For this Test, Eddie Jones has got his retaliation in first, pronouncing after the Argentina Test that Australia's scrum is illegal, shortly followed by more finger-pointing at Cole from Michael Cheika, the Australia coach suggesting he has scrummaged illegally for the entirety of his nine-year career. Cue various indignant Englishmen insisting otherwise. And so on and on. Is Dan Cole an illegal scrummager? He is a tighthead, and therefore operating in just about the most thankless position on the field, where his raison d'être is to be outnumbered at the scrum. Before him, England's most celebrated scrummaging tighthead was Jeff Probyn. "Like all props, Cole will cheat if he gets the chance," he says. "But he's not overtly illegal and he's not the worst." Probyn explains some scenarios in which a tighthead will turn inwards. 1) His loosehead breaks off and his hooker pulls away. 2) The opposition loosehead dominates him and he tries to stay where he is. 3) He dominates the loosehead, whereupon the loosehead slips up the side of him. In other words, dominate or be dominated, the tighthead will tend to turn in. "But Cole stands with both feet back. Normally, if you're trying to turn inwards, you put one foot forward." When 16 gargantuan men start pushing against each other, a certain amount of twisting is inevitable, but the desired outcome is a scrum that goes forward. England's has not been doing that so reliably this autumn. Why has England's scrum struggled? That Jones initiated the war of words this time tells its own story. England have had their scrummaging wobbles against all three opponents, culminating in Cole's yellow card at the end of the first half against Argentina. But Probyn is not so sure Cole was the problem. "There is a player who has not played much club rugby, walks straight into the England team and occupies a position in the middle of the front row. As soon as Dylan Hartley was replaced by Jamie George, England dominated the scrum. Hartley isn't as good a scrummager as George, and he's not match fit." Neither, says Probyn, is Mako Vunipola as good there as Marler, although the former has many other qualities. When George and Marler came on against Argentina, England's scrum, with Cole still in situ, started to go forward, but it should also be pointed out that Ramiro Herrera and Agustín Creevy came off for the Pumas at the same time. Likewise, England's earlier problems coincided with the loss of Billy Vunipola's bulk at the base. What role does the referee play? Too much. Not that it's his fault, particularly. It is often suggested that front-row forwards are the only people who should referee the scrum, but the implication of that idea is that they're the only ones who know the truth, which means they should all agree with each other – and they don't. Certainly, referees, for all their hours of tuition in the subject, are doing little more than guessing. But in real time events take place too quickly for anyone, expert front-row forward or not, to be sure. Are these just media mind games? Basically. Both teams go into this game with question marks over this set piece. There are fewer scrums these days than in Probyn's but the pressure on each has increased and not just from a physical point of view. Coaches know that an unfortunate slip and/or a referee's guess can be the difference between winning and losing. No wonder they get jumpy when the propaganda war starts. The scrum is unfathomable and sometimes brutally unfair, which is why it retains such legendary status in rugby's firmament.

Do poets need monuments? Not according to Horace, writing in the first century BC, who considered his poems to be "a monument more lasting than bronze/And loftier than the pyramids of kings". Ben Jonson took a similar line when others were campaigning for Shakespeare to be given a place in Westminster Abbey: why bother? "Thou art a Moniment without a tombe" he wrote, "And art alive still, while thy Booke doth live." Over the centuries, Poets' Corner has become a national institution nonetheless. There's no greater posthumous honour for a writer. And now Philip Larkin is taking his place there. His memorial stone sits between those of Anthony Trollope and Ted Hughes, with the tomb of Chaucer behind. Would he have approved? Not every poet leaps at the chance to be commemorated. Alexander Pope wrote an epitaph for himself as "one who would not be buried in Westminster Abbey", preferring a grave near his mother's, in Twickenham. Larkin, like Pope, set himself at a distance from metropolitan literary culture. But he cared about his reputation, accepting the various honours the establishment conferred on him and was anxious that 'posterity' would mean more than the dystopian, academic version offered by his imaginary American biographer, Jake Balokowksy. When he turned down the post of poet laureate, and it went to Ted Hughes, he joked in a letter to Kingsley Amis: "The thought of being the cause of Ted's being buried in Westminster Abbey is hard to live with." The tone is facetious; the regret that he might have missed out on a spot in the abbey is not. It has taken him much longer than Hughes did to get there - 31 years rather than 13 – and longer than TS Eliot and WH Auden, who made it within a couple of years of their deaths. Still, Shakespeare, who died in 1616, wasn't memorialised until 1740 ('After an hundred and thirty years' nap/Enter Shakespeare with a loud clap' wrote Pope). Byron – mad, bad and dangerous to know – took even longer. When he died, in 1824, the dean of the abbey at the time, Dr Ireland, thought the best thing was "to carry away the body &amp; say as little about it as possible". But crowds thronged to his funeral procession, and supporters were soon pressing for his inclusion. He finally got there in 1969. But even that's not the record for deferral: Christopher Marlowe, stabbed to death in 1593, had to wait until 2002. Till recent times most of the monuments in Poets' Corner were raised by private patronage rather than as state commemoration. Today the process for inclusion is at the discretion of the dean of Westminster, whose ear various pressure groups seek to bend. When Cecil Day-Lewis was denied a place in 2003, despite a petition led by his widow, Jill Balcon, and supported by (among others) Seamus Heaney, the brouhaha forced the dean to issue a press release: "There seems to be a view around that anyone who is poet laureate is automatically memorialised in the abbey," it read. "That has not been the case." Now that the laureateship has a fixed 10-year term, rather than expiring only when the poet does, it'll be even less the case. Most of the poets memorialised in the abbey are buried elsewhere. Chaucer, the first one there, is an exception. In his last years, the abbey may have offered him sanctuary from his debtors after he ran into financial troubles, as poets will. Thomas Hardy's remains are also there, but not completely: he had asked to be buried near his Dorset home, but when the abbey authorities approached his widow she compromised, by keeping his heart and sending them his ashes. The attempted exhumation of Spenser's tomb in 1938 was no less grisly. It was done at the bidding of the Bacon Society, who believed an elegy by Shakespeare might be inside and that the handwriting would prove that Bacon had written Shakespeare's plays. Sadly for them, they got the wrong grave. Given this history – the manoeuvring, lobbying, rivalries and exhumations - the question of whether Larkin belongs in a place of worship seems beside the point. There was a time when, as Thomas A Prendegast notes in his book Poetical Dust, "the nature of the Corner changed, becoming not so much an index of the worth of poetry as a measure of whether the poet was worthy" – ethically, that is. It may be that Larkin's alleged misogyny and racism have delayed his arrival. But they don't infect the published poems, only the letters and squibs, and haven't denied him a place. His lack of religious faith isn't an issue either. The enshrinement of Shelley, who wrote a pamphlet entitled The Necessity of Atheism, set a precedent after all. "There is No God", he believed, though he didn't rule out "a pervading Spirit co-eternal with the universe". Larkin didn't quite rule it out either. He called his poem Church Going "entirely secular". But it was prompted by an appeal he had seen from the Historical Churches Preservation Trust, and honours the church as a "serious house on serious earth" that exerts a powerful draw even on the unbelieving, "if only that so many dead lie round". There's also Water, a poem in which he imagines constructing a religion ("I should raise in the east/A glass of water/Where any-angled light/Would congregate endlessly"), as well as several other poems which shine with images of transcendent light. In Aubade – the greatest poem in the language about the fear of death – Larkin describes religion as "a vast musical brocade created to pretend we never die". But a residual Anglicanism did sometimes affect him, notably on the day after his mother died, when he invited Anthony Thwaite to join him for prayers at the chapel of All Souls College, Oxford, on the grounds that "Mother would have liked it". But in the end, all that matters are the poems, and the esteem and affection in which they're held. As the most quotable British poet of the 20th century, Larkin deserves his marmoreal afterlife. The lines Pope proposed be inscribed on the vacant scroll under Shakespeare's bust say it perfectly: "Thus Britain lov'd me and preserv'd my Fame".

The two rivals in the race for the Austrian presidency have traded allegations of espionage, economic incompetence and "spreading lies" in the final TV debate before Sunday's rerun of a run-off vote. Polls show the rightwing populist Norbert Hofer and Green-backed Alexander Van der Bellen neck and neck for the vote. A victory for the Freedom party candidate, Hofer, would make him the first far-right head of state in the European Union since the second world war. Van der Bellen narrowly won the original vote in May, but it was annulled because of irregularities in the counting process. In a tetchy and bad-tempered debate on Thursday, Hofer suggested his liberal rival would struggle to get an audience with the US president-elect, Donald Trump. "I don't think that Mr Trump would invite you," Hofer taunted the retired economics professor, boasting of strong diplomatic ties to both the White House and the Kremlin and calling for an end to sanctions against Russia. According to a Gallup poll, the majority of Austrians believe Trump's success is more likely to help Hofer. In a survey of 800 Austrians, 53% believed Trump's shock victory would play in favour of the Freedom party candidate. Van der Bellen on Thursday accused Hofer's party of slandering his late father, whom a member of the Freedom party accused of having harboured sympathies for the Nazis. Holding up a photograph of his father, a Russian national with Dutch roots who fled his home country during the 1917 October revolution, Van der Bellen said he would defend his father since he was no longer able to do so in person. Historians have not found any credible evidence for the Freedom party's allegations. Hofer also accused Van der Bellen of having been a communist and a Stasi spy. "I get it, you were nothing," Hofer said. "You're lying again!" Van der Bellen replied. After Hofer accused him of having been a spy, Van der Bellen said: "This is the meanest thing I've experienced in a long time ... This is ridiculous." Hofer said Van der Bellen had lied about his stance on civil service and conscription laws as well as Austria's neutrality. "This is another falsehood," Hofer said.

Fabric will reopen its doors to the pubic in January. The London club will host a series of events during the first full weekend of the new year, from 6 to 8 January. The venue was threatened with permanent closure in September after Islington council revoked its licensing, claiming that "a culture of drugs" existed at the club that its management was unable to control. After an appeal – and much petitioning from those opposing Fabric's closure – the council went on to agree to strict new licensing conditions, including an over-19s policy and ID scanners at entry to the venue. "It's pretty much impossible for us to put a measure on just how much gratitude we are feeling right now to be able to announce our reopening proper," said a statement on Fabric's website. "The credit for this is shared among hundreds of thousands of petition signers, letter writers, donors, T-shirt bearers, artists and party promoters. A community of people from the world over who came together and continued the principal of unity that was central to the foundation of our culture – to save us." The statement says Fabric's return will feature new sound-systems, including "our new Pioneer Pro Audio Room Two setup, pushing out mesmeric high-level sound" and will be kicked off with a weekend of events "with family very much at its core". Friday is cited as a "FABRICLIVE" event, while Saturday will star tech-house DJs Craig Richards and Terry Francis. The weekend closes with WetYourSelf! restarting their weekly residency. The move to revoke Fabric's licence came after 18-year-olds Ryan Browne and Jack Crossley died after taking ecstasy at the club in June and August respectively. The decision to close the world-renowned venue, which opened its doors in 1999, met strong criticism from fans, artists and politicians including local MP Emily Thornberry. London's mayor, Sadiq Khan, announced the reopening last month, saying: "Fabric will reopen. Thanks to all who helped find a solution that protects the club's future and keeps clubbers safe."

The Rev Mike and the Rev Nicky-Sue Terry have the classic married couple's habit of finishing each other's sentences. But perhaps it's unsurprising that they know each other's minds so well. They are not just man and wife, but also two halves of a pioneering job-share within the Church of England, splitting the role of vicar for St Mary's in the Hampshire village of Warsash between them. They take turns conducting services, he chairs parish council meetings, she runs the pastoral team, and vicarage life is divided according to individual strengths, although both try to take Fridays off. Mike, who previously served in the Royal Navy, likes long-term planning; Nicky-Sue says she prefers "to get into the detail of things, which ... " – she pauses, and Mike interjects – "drives me completely barmy". Some parishioners in distress are drawn to her, some to him, but they try to make the relationship seamless. "We have a phrase we use," says Mike, "which is: 'We are the vicar, we are.'" And both are thrilled to have a way of working that suits them. Having entered the church late in life – Mike, now 60, met 54-year-old Nicky-Sue in 2007, when both were training for ordination – neither wanted to run a church full-time, and so when their bishop suggested an experimental job share, both were intrigued. "In a sense, this is the Church of England beginning to recognise that we can do things in a more flexible way, and can be responsive to a modern environment," Mike adds. "It's a very positive reflection on a changing world. And if the Church of England can do it, that says something." Thirteen years after Tony Blair's government pushed through the legal right to request flexible working amid squeals of protest, it feels as if the last bastions of traditional working practices are finally being stormed. Change is lapping at the highest reaches of the establishment; the armed forces, parliament and the judiciary. Next spring, a landmark report is due to be published exploring the feasibility of job-sharing for MPs, to encourage parents and disabled candidates into parliament. The Ministry of Defence is in the middle of a trial project, offering soldiers with young children the chance to defer deployment overseas or rejig chunks of leave to reduce their hours. The scheme will be opened to more service personnel from February. Two unnamed judges recently began the high court's first ever job-share, and last week it emerged that future vacancies on the supreme court will be open to flexible applications in the hope of attracting female judges. (Currently the ratio is one woman to 11 men.) The next big leap in the story, says the Fawcett Society's chief executive Sam Smethers, would be moving to a default assumption that every job can be made flexible in some way – early starts or finishes, home working, part-time work or job-sharing – unless there is good reason not to. But that means showing it can work even at the top, and in professions once stoutly resistant to change. "It's about opening minds and realising that a lot of the way we do things is just because we've always done it that way," she adds, "not because that's the way it has to be done. In most jobs there is some prospect of flexible working." The niggling question, however, is how firmly these painstaking gains for working parents are entrenched in workplace culture: there are fears that, in a potentially tougher economic climate post-Brexit, it might become too easy to roll back employment rights. This is why it is so intriguing that even professions granted exemption from the law are now voluntarily thinking the previously unthinkable. The single biggest reason for leaving the armed forces, according to the annual Armed Forces Continuous Attitude Survey, is the impact on family life – and it's not just affecting women. There is growing concern about promising male officers leaving in their 30s and early 40s, just as experience becomes invaluable, because of the toll taken on marriages and children. It is this prospect of troops voting with their feet that has prompted a rethink of the rigid patterns of army life. If the role of military wives was once to stay at home raising children while their men were off at war, those days are long gone. Almost one in 10 soldiers is now female, many military spouses work, and too many struggle to fit that around their soldier's long absences and unpredictable hours. In a recent survey for the Army Families Federation (AFF), which has campaigned for flexible working on forces families' behalves, 39% of spouses said their partner couldn't help with childcare even occasionally. (For soldiers not on active deployment, variable start times and other forms of flexibility may be be available, but the forces are exempt from the legal right to request). "You can't rely on your soldier to finish at fixed times. They're away a lot and the burden of the childcare absolutely falls on the spouses," explains Louise Simpson, policy and research director at the AFF, and an army wife herself. "If you talk to an organisation like Recruit for Spouses, which helps military spouses return to work, they're trying to place people who were in incredible jobs [before becoming] military spouses, who are now downsizing considerably and finding even that difficult. Employers look at their CVs and say: 'Oh, we can't have someone this highly qualified.'" Yet many spouses can't afford, she says, not to work. Simpson praises the army's current chief of general staff, General Sir Nick Carter, who personally backed the flexible working experiment last year by declaring there was "absolutely no reason" for not changing parade times on a base so that soldiers could do the school run. Tiny changes could, Simpson says, make a big difference. But the Ministry of Defence remains cautious about the impact on operational readiness to deploy. The trial will continue until at least 2019 before any final decision is taken. Meanwhile, the AFF argues that more could be done to spread the message that modern couples both work and need to share the domestic load. "We need to educate our command that this is the way most people operate now, so if every now and then a soldier wants to leave at 4pm to pick up the kids, they could," says Simpson. But there is some private anxiety about the consequences of taking up the offer: one new mother Simpson talked to recently said her soldier husband wouldn't take up the scheme because he worried that "it would be an end to the fast track". For both civilian and military parents, the key may be making sure that flexibility goes right to the top of the tree. At first glance, judges make terrible candidates for part-time working, since the same judge must sit continuously through trials that can last weeks. But the crown court now has a handful of part-timers, working in blocks of several weeks on and several weeks off – and the supreme court's cases are shorter and more predictable than criminal trials, which makes them potentially more amenable to part-timers if they were carefully matched to cases. A final decision has yet to be taken on what kind of hours will be accepted, but crucially, candidates won't have to declare that they want to work flexibly unless they are short-listed, meaning their CVs should be sifted purely on merit. Since most supreme court justices are in their late 50s and 60s, the changes are unlikely to attract new mothers, but could suit someone seeking reduced hours because they are caring for an elderly parent, or to see teenagers through A-levels. And more than that, it sends a powerful signal through the system. "What we're saying is that, actually, we appreciate people are looking to us to take the lead," said a spokesman for the supreme court. What kind of boss denies women the legal right to maternity leave, requires them to commute hundreds of miles a week and calls them lazy if they complain? The answer, technically, is all of us. MPs are not legally employees, but servants of the people, and the people can be unforgiving bosses. Ironically, the law on working life is currently made by people whose working conditions would be illegal almost anywhere else. The Labour MP Rachel Reeves has just written a biography of the pioneering Labour minister Alice Bacon, Alice in Westminster, in which she reflects on how life has changed for female politicians since Alice's election in 1945. "The hours have massively changed, the through-the-night sittings that existed in her day – the latest I've been there is maybe 1.30am," says Reeves, who has two children under three years old. "There's a nursery now, whereas when Alice was an MP very few women had children. There was a feeling you couldn't have both. Those are choices that women are much less willing to make now." But the flipside of afternoon and evening sittings was that some MPs in Alice's day treated parliament as a part-time job, pursuing careers in law or the City during the day. Time could be interestingly elastic, if what you wanted was the freedom to make money, not the freedom to see your children. And while back then established MPs might have deigned to visit their constituency only once a year, the weekly shuttle back and forth is the bane of many modern political parents' lives. Since there's no way around the need to live in two places at once without breaking the constituency link, there is growing interest in job-sharing, with two candidates standing for parliament on one ticket and dividing the work between them. Two Green activists, Sarah Cope and Clare Phipps, brought an unsuccessful court case last year arguing they should be allowed to stand for parliament as a job-share, and this week the Green MP Caroline Lucas – who shares her own party's leadership with Jonathan Bartley – once again backed the idea. But it remains controversial, dividing even those passionate about opening up parliament. Reeves thinks ministerial posts could be shared relatively easily, but worries about how an MP job-share would cope if its two halves disagreed over an unexpected issue, such as the vote on bombing Syria: "For me, that was an incredibly difficult decision. I had friends who politically I'm very close to who voted the other way. I'm not sure how you agree that in advance. Do you just say: 'Well, it's a Wednesday, so that's Rachel's day to vote?' That doesn't feel right. I personally think it's incredibly difficult." Nonetheless, two academics, Bristol University's Prof Sarah Childs – author of a separate recent report on diversifying the Commons, currently being studied by a working group of MPs – and Birkbeck University's Dr Rosie Campbell, are examining the practical challenges for a report due next spring. The urgent priority for many in Westminster, however, remains dragging arrangements for new parents into the 21st century. Ministers have been able to take maternity leave since 2001, but new mothers still have no formal right to time off constituency work. Most muddle through, reliant on the goodwill of whips to excuse them from voting at Westminster, while braced for criticism over their temporarily patchy presence. Reeves recalls signing casework shortly after her second child was born last June, and resuming constituency surgeries within six weeks. Despite being signed off Westminster votes for four months, she turned up to vote on Syria and tax credit cuts. "I was never completely off," she says, before adding hastily, "but I'm sure that's true for people in other jobs as well." Why don't MPs complain more about conditions most parents wouldn't tolerate? Reeves snorts incredulously at the question: "Because you get no sympathy!" Besides, she says, there's flexibility in the school holidays when MPs work from their constituencies. "I don't think we have loads to complain about. We're a bit like self-employed people, who can't take maternity leave because it's going to cost you." The snail's pace of reform in parliament undoubtedly reflects private fears of a backlash from voters still smarting over the expenses scandal. But Childs remains optimistic about the prospects for change, arguing that it is in nobody's interest if MPs "have to rely on good relations with the whips" to get time off to recover from childbirth. She is struck, too, by the way the wave of SNP MPs elected in 2015 are starting to change the dynamic. Used to the more modern Scottish parliament, which keeps something closer to office hours, she says they are much more willing to question stuffier traditions: "They're able to make comparisons, and they look around and say: 'Why are we doing this the way we do?'" And as the two vicars of St Mary's found out, that can be a life-changing question. "When we started, it was an experiment; we had no sense that we would do what we do now," says Nicky-Sue, who thinks a job share might never have occurred to them without their bishop's prompting. "But there's something very symbolic about it, a married couple sharing a post like this. It's perhaps a challenging concept. But it's a beautiful one."

In a crushingly personal dispatch from a family pushed off the edge of London's housing boom, Daisy-May Hudson hits record on her camcorder as she, her mother Beverly and 13-year-old sister Bronte are evicted from their Epping home and forced into the purgatory of the hostels system. The younger sibling, afraid to stay there alone at night, dubs the pebbledashed lodging they are allocated "Hansel and Gretel's thing in the woods". They face an all-too-familiar austerity-Britain obstacle course: freefalling living standards, bureaucratic vindictiveness and stonewalling – plus paying a pretty penny (£500 a week) for the privilege. What's less obvious, and brought home especially well by Hudson's insider perspective, is the undermining effect on mental health of this loss of control. In one curious sequence, a strained Beverly accuses Bronte of picking arguments; Bronte flatly denies ever opening her mouth. Even if Hudson could step out of the eye of this emotional storm, a more objective overview of the reasons for their treatment and the housing crisis overall might not even be possible, judging by the council's refusal to let her shoot on their premises. But the film wasn't made to do that, so much as "take back power" in a depersonalising situation. Strangely, it's the most trite images amid Hudson's generally alert shot selection – water spiralling down plugholes, heart-shaped decorations offsetting tatty institutional wallpaper – that seem most poignant in their inadequacy. Hudson's chronicle in support of her mother has a desperate, defiant quality, too: I, Beverly Hudson.

Bob Bradley has finally generated the momentum he has craved and his head may still be spinning, in a good way, after last Saturday's 5-4 win over Crystal Palace – his first in charge of Swansea. He comes to London with his team still in the relegation places but with renewed belief and ready to confront opponents who have lost some fluency over the past two months. For Tottenham, this feels like a must-win. David Hytner Kick-off Saturday 3pm Venue White Hart Lane Last season Tottenham Hotspur 2 Swansea City 1 Referee Jonathan Moss This season G10, Y48, R2, 5.20 cards per game Odds H 1-3 A 8-1 D 9-2 Tottenham Hotspur Subs from Vorm, López, Trippier, Wimmer, Carter-Vickers, Carroll, Winks, Onomah, Sissoko, Nkoudou, Janssen, Alderweireld Doubtful Alderweireld (knee) Injured Davies (ankle, unknown), Lamela (hip, unknown) Suspended None Form DDDDWL Discipline Y27 R0 Leading scorer Kane 5 Swansea City Subs from Fulton, Llorente, Nordfeldt, Rangel, Van der Hoorn, Mawson, Kingsley, Dyer, Montero, Bastón, McBurnie Doubtful None Injured Ki (toe, 10 Dec) Suspended None Form LDLLDW Discipline Y21 R0 Leading scorer Fer 6

The Gambia's new president, Adama Barrow, is a real-estate agent and former Argos security guard who wooed voters with promises of a new start for one of Africa's poorest countries. The 51-year-old was born in a riverside village far inland, on the eve of Gambian independence. He won a scholarship to high school in the capital, Banjul, then rose through the ranks of local firms. He was working as sales manager at a gas company when he decided to travel to London to study and save up funds to start his own company. He is proud of an experience that included working as a security guard in an Argos store in Holloway Road, north London. "Life is a process, and the UK helped helped me to become the person I am today. Working 15 hours a day builds a man," Barrow told Le Monde during the election campaign. While in London he developed a passion for Arsenal that the self-confessed workaholic describes as one of his few indulgences. Modest and softly spoken, he still keeps punishing hours, even after building up his own business. "I work 12, 13, 14 hours a day," he told Agence France-Presse before the election. He has two wives and five children, aged between two and 18. A devout Muslim, he says faith guides his life and politics. "If you are a religious man it always influences you." He touted his business experience and lack of political baggage as assets in a country that has had only two leaders since independence. Voters embraced his promise of change, transforming him from private citizen to national hero in just a few weeks. On Friday, the Guardian spoke to three staff members who have worked at the Argos branch on Holloway Road for 15 years or longer who could not remember the now president-elect of Gambia, but local shoppers were dazzled by his rise. Abdul Yaseen, 45, who has been shopping at the store for 20 years, said: "It seems hard to believe that he could go from that job to president. Fair play to him."

When Aldous Huxley was dying in 1963, he asked his wife to inject him with LSD, and he passed away, she wrote afterwards, without any of the pain and distress that cancer can cause in the final hours. "All five people in the room said that this was the most serene, the most beautiful death," Laura Huxley, a psychotherapist, wrote to other members of his family. Huxley, who wrote his 1954 essay The Doors of Perception about his experience of taking the psychedelic drug mescaline, anticipated just such a death in his last novel, Island. At the time, many in the psychiatric field thought psychedelic drugs such as psilocybin, the active ingredient of magic mushrooms, and LSD held huge promise to alleviate all kinds of severe mental distress. There were experiments, funded by the United States government, into the use of LSD at the end of life. But the doors clanged shut in 1970, when the US government classified the drugs in schedule 1, which meant they had no medical use. Nearly half a century later, two trials in the US may have proven that wrong. One, conducted at Johns Hopkins University and the other, at New York University, gave a single high dose of psilocybin, along with psychotherapy, to 80 people with advanced cancer who were experiencing depression and anxiety. The results published this week were remarkable, prompting 10 eminent figures in the psychiatric world in the US and Europe to contribute commentaries to the Journal of Psychopharmacology, where the trial outcomes were published, calling for more research. In 80% of cases, patients' distress was lifted and remained so for six to eight months. In the same week, the Food and Drug Administration in the US gave the green light to a phase 3 trial of MDMA, or ecstasy, for post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). This will be a large-scale trial, following several small and successful trials, capable of producing the evidence needed for the FDA to approve MDMA as a licensed medication. It's a watershed. Years of hard work by those convinced that mind-altering drugs have a place in medicine have led up to it, overcoming legal and financial obstacles to trials as well as social and political hostility. The multidisciplinary association for psychedelic studies (Maps), which has fought for this and other trials since 1986, believes ecstasy will be a licensed medicine within four years. "We're not counter-cultural in any sense," says Brad Burge of California-based Maps, which will raise $20m to fund the final trials. "We are trying to develop a legitimate treatment option for people with PTSD and other illnesses." What has shifted over the decades is gradual recognition of the vast amount of untreated need. "There is a great deal more awareness than there used to be of PTSD as an epidemic worldwide," says Burge. The conventional treatments for PTSD such as anti-depressants and anti-anxiety pills do not work for most people, any more than they do for the sort of distress around life-threatening cancer that makes some sufferers have suicidal thoughts. Psychotherapy can help, but the psychiatric community is astounded by the lasting effect of a dose of MDMA on a war veteran who cannot leave his home for fear of reliving the horrors he has seen. Prof David Nutt from Imperial College in London, editor of the journal that ran the psilocybin trials this week and involved in a smaller study that reported in May on the use of psilocybin in other sorts of depression, says MDMA works in a very different way from magic mushrooms. "MDMA in PTSD is not a psychedelic," he says. "I'm not sure psychedelics would work in PTSD. They might make it worse. "What MDMA does is dampen down the brain circuit which is overactive in PTSD and that allows people to engage in the psychotherapy in a more efficient way. I've treated patients with PTSD and as soon as you say, look I want you to start thinking about the trauma, they faint. You can't engage with them. The traumatic memories are so overwhelming." Psilocybin is different. Like LSD, it can produce a mystical experience. Scientists do not yet know if that is why it has a profound effect on depression. "That's one of the key research questions," says Nutt. "Do you need a mystical experience? Do you need to meet some greater being?" Back before the US blanket ban in 1970, scientists trialled LSD as a treatment for alcoholism. The co-founder of Alcoholics Anonymous, Bill Wilson, credited mystical experiences on the drug for his own recovery. "His belief was that you had to find a higher power so that you could look down on this rather petty affection people have for alcohol," said Nutt. In his own depression study, he said, some people did have mystical experiences. Others had powerful emotional experiences. When it comes to using psychedelics at the end of life, which was very much of interest to scientists in the 1940s and 1950s, a mystical experience may be key. "When you see that you are more than your current self and you have experiences as our patients do, feeling you are taken outside of your body and floating off into space and into other worlds, then you see the bigger picture. You realise you don't ever die. No one ever dies. You stop breathing. You stop thinking. But the atoms are still there," said Nutt. "There used to be this wonderful little quiz question they set for scientists doing the Cambridge entrance exam. How many O2 molecules of Socrates' last breath do you inhale every time you breathe? The answer is about 26 because those atoms, those molecules, are still around. We are just a rather complicated form of life but our matter doesn't disappear – it's just the way it's organised that does." Whether such a mind-expanding experience can ever become part of mainstream psychotherapy is no longer just a rhetorical question.

Yesterday, Caroline Flint used parliament's historic first debate on transgender equality to claim that gender-neutral toilets put women at risk. Responding to Maria Miller, chair of the women and equalities committee, Flint said she welcomed the debate, "but would [Miller] agree with me that we also need to be mindful of creating neutral-gender environments that actually may prove more of a risk to women themselves?" I can get where Flint is coming from. Many women are afraid of being sexually assaulted and I'm one of them. In 2009 I was harassed in a women's toilet. A woman I did not know came up to me and asked me if my breasts were real. As a trans woman, I'm used to other people feeling like they have a right to interrogate me, so her rude and invasive questions weren't a surprise but what happened next was. She pulled down my top and bra, exposing my nipple. There was someone else in the loo at the time, which added to my humiliation. I have a skin graft across my chest after I accidentally burned myself as a toddler. I'm no longer ashamed of my scar, but it's an area I used to keep covered for years so I felt doubly mortified – and yes, violated. Forgive me, then, for not buying into this lovely idea that same-sex loos are magical places where bad things never happen. If only. In 2011, a trans woman called Chrissy Lee Polis was beaten until she had a seizure by two girls in a women's toilet in McDonald's, Baltimore. They dragged Polis out of the restroom by her hair as staff looked on and filmed the incident. As Polis lay on the floor convulsing, blood pouring from her mouth, onlookers warned her attackers to flee before the police arrived. She could have died. She'd have been in good company. Trans people suffer terrible violence and discrimination: in the year to 30 September at least 295 trans people were murdered worldwide – including 16-year-old Kedarie/Kandicee Johnson, who was found dead in March in Iowa. Keisha Jenkins, 22, was shot in the back in Philadelphia, but not before she was beaten to the ground by a group of five or six men. Orange is the new Black's Laverne Cox has accurately described the situation for trans people as a "state of emergency". Research from the US reveals that trans women are nearly twice as likely to suffer sexual violence as other women: having reported such crimes, they are also considerably more likely to go on and experience violence from the police. Here's another fact for you: 48% of young trans people in Britain have attempted suicide. Not "thought about". Attempted. But who cares about facts and figures on the violence and discrimination trans people face when we could just talk about people's imagined fears instead? Flint justified her concerns yesterday by bringing up the voyeurism conviction of student Luke Mallaband, who placed phones to secretly record women at a number of toilets and shower rooms – including female-only facilities. The SNP's John Nicolson replied sensibly that: "The point that has just been raised is a matter for criminal law. This has nothing whatsoever to do with transgender equality." Miller also gave a very reasonable response: "It's not a zero-sum game. Giving rights or enforcing rights that one group has does not mean that we have to see those rights taken away from another group ... we have to be careful in this place that we don't appear to be undermining the rights of trans people." The horrible truth is that, if a man wants to assault a woman, he can do so anywhere. The idea that making toilets gender-neutral puts women at risk is a classic "slippery slope" argument. Where's the evidence? If Flint has proof that gender-neutral toilets put women at risk, I'm all ears. If not, I'm rather bored by people such as her playing devil's advocate and whipping up unnecessary panic. Trans women like me have been using female toilets for decades without causing anyone any problems whatsoever. If you're living in Britain in 2016 you have almost certainly used a public toilet at the same time as a trans person and not even realised. It doesn't have to be a big deal unless you make it one. The biggest irony? While making bathrooms more trans-friendly hasn't led to any problems, the fabricated "debate" surrounding this progress has. Take 22-year-old Aimee Toms, who was washing her hands in the women's bathroom at a branch of Walmart in Connecticut when someone approached her and said, "You're disgusting!" and "You don't belong here." Toms – who was born with a uterus and identifies as a woman – believes she was harassed because of the current panic about trans people in bathrooms. A fuss about a problem that doesn't exist has become a problem in and of itself, with more and more women who don't look traditionally "feminine" now facing greater scrutiny in public. Earlier this year, a 16-year-old lesbian was thrown out of a McDonald's in Hull because, she says, staff believed she was a boy and she had been using the women's toilets. McDonald's said she was being disruptive. It's time to stop panicking about imaginary fears – and focus on the very real violence and discrimination gender-variant people face every day.

Donald Trump has said he supports a controversial oil pipeline that runs next to a Native American reservation in North Dakota – a project that the president-elect is personally invested in. A briefing from Trump's transition team said that the real estate magnate supports the construction of the Dakota Access pipeline and that his backing "has nothing to do with his personal investments and everything to do with promoting policies that benefit all Americans". Financial disclosure forms released earlier this year show that Trump has a stake in Energy Transfer Partners, the Texas-based firm behind the pipeline, and Phillips 66, which will hold a share of the project once completed. Trump's investment in Energy Transfer Partners dropped from between $500,000 and $1m in 2015 to between $1,500 and $50,000 this year. His stake in Phillips 66, however, rose from between $50,000 and $100,000 last year to between $250,000 and $500,000 this year, according to the forms. The financial relationship has run both ways. Kelcy Warren, chief executive of Energy Transfer Partners, gave $103,000 to elect Trump and handed over a further $66,800 to the Republican National Committee after the property developer secured the GOP's presidential nomination. However, Trump's transition team dismissed any conflict of interest. "Those making such a claim are only attempting to distract from the fact that president-elect Trump has put forth serious policy proposals he plans to set in motion on day one," said a briefing note that was sent to campaign supporters. Mary Sweeters, a spokesperson for Greenpeace, said Trump's support showed that "crony capitalism will run his administration". "This is the definition of corruption," she said. "The president of the United States should not be trading favors with oil and gas corporations. Millions of people will lose access to a clean water supply, including the Standing Rock Sioux tribe, and the rest of America will face the impacts of catastrophic climate change from burning fossil fuels." A protest camp has grown in North Dakota since April, amid fears that the $3.8bn Dakota Access pipeline will threaten the water and cultural artifacts of the Standing Rock Sioux tribe. The 1,170-mile pipeline will take oil from North Dakota's Bakken fields to a refinery in Illinois and will cross the Missouri river – the main source of water for the tribe. The long-running protest has unified Native American tribes against the project, with repeated clashes between protesters and police. This week, North Dakota governor Jack Dalrymple ordered the immediate evacuation of the protest camp, amid accusations of police violence from the mass arrests and water cannon deployment that have echoes of the civil rights protests of the 1960s. Barack Obama has suggested that the pipeline be rerouted to allay the fears of tribes but Energy Transfer Partners has vowed to push ahead and has accused the federal government of imposing costly delays upon the project. Trump has promised an "America first" energy policy that will attempt to boost domestic oil, coal and gas production. The president-elect has already stated he wants to "lift the Obama-Clinton roadblocks and allow vital energy infrastructure projects to move forward", including the Keystone pipeline, another controversial fossil fuel project. North Dakota senator John Hoeven, a Republican, said that he met with Trump and successfully urged him to support the Dakota Access pipeline. "Mr Trump expressed his support for the Dakota Access pipeline, which has met or exceeded all environmental standards set forth by four states and the Army Corps of Engineers," Hoeven said. "Also, it is important to know that the new administration will work to help us grow and diversify our energy economy and build the energy infrastructure necessary to move it from where it is produced to where it is needed. The result will be more jobs, a more vibrant economy and affordable energy for the American people."

Byelection results should not be overinterpreted. After all, with their inevitable focus on single issues and low turnouts, these mid-term votes regularly throw up unusual outcomes that do not shed light on what might happen in a general election. Nevertheless, the reasons that voters use them to stick two fingers up at a sitting government can be telling, and ought to be listened to. Zac Goldsmith may have been standing as an independent but the London-shaped V-sign that ousted a popular local MP from parliament to be replaced by a Liberal Democrat was not only aimed at his personal support for Brexit. Instead, it appeared to be a gesture at Theresa May's Conservatives as well. After all, residents in Richmond and north Kingston weren't just put out by the fact that the country voted to leave the EU (although there is unquestionably anguish about the result in this part of London) but at what has unfolded since the decision. To many, May's repeated mantra of "Brexit means Brexit", with red lines on immigration and the European court of justice, feels aimed at the 52% who voted to leave the EU. The Lib Dems tapped into a perceived lack of nuance from ministers over the idea that the vote was actually quite tight. The Tories will dismiss this result because Goldsmith was an independent without their support, fighting in what was, for decades, a Lib Dem seat. They will argue that this fiercely pro-European and prosperous suburb is no indicator of a wider pattern across the country. But they would be wise to at least take note of what the Lib Dems, whose national vote collapsed just 18 months ago, achieved on these London streets. Sarah Olney talked about meeting voters on the doorstep who had only ever voted Conservative and who said they would, for the first time, opt for her party because of anger at the government's economic response to Brexit. So Richmond has shown that Tory remainers are prepared to peel away, in large enough numbers to overturn a 23,000 majority. How significant is that beyond south-west London? The psephologist John Curtice says the result shows that there is something out there to be exploited: the unease of remain supporters about the direction of travel of this Tory government. The extent to which the Lib Dems can build on this victory depends on whether Richmond was more about a snub of Goldsmith or of May. Curtice points out that if it is the former, then the number of seats that backed remain in the face of a Tory outer, and where the Lib Dems are still a force, are seriously limited. Lewes, in East Sussex, is the most obvious other example. If this was a wider outcry at Tory policy, then a significant number of extra constituencies start to sound an alarm, he warns. But Curtice points out that the Lib Dems, with so little national support overall, are not the best placed party to exploit this particular flash of anger. "Inevitably it will become much more serious for Theresa May if voters were to use the Labour party as the vehicle with which to punish the government [over Brexit]," he said. That seems unlikely at present. After all, Labour is in flux over how to respond to a Brexit vote that appeared to be strongest in many of its heartlands. It is also torn over the issue of immigration, between a leadership that wants to "hold its nerve" and those constituency MPs who are determined to sound tough. Moreover, Richmond is bad news for Labour because it underlines that while the party battles with the Ukip march to the right, it could also face a threat from elsewhere. Curtice points out that Labour secured more support in 2015 from socially liberal, pro-EU voters than from any other group. He suggests that the party back May's call for economic access and immigration controls for now, but then change tack if she fails to come back with a solid enough offer. To be in a position to do that Labour needs to heal its deep wounds and start sounding like a party of government as soon as possible. Many are sceptical as to whether that is realistic. As one adviser to David Cameron points out, May does risk losing votes from liberal remainers who were comfortable voting for the former prime minister. "But she's gained a lot of Ukip voters," he adds, arguing that May knows that a solid pitch to working-class, red Tories could more than make up for any shortfall if Jeremy Corbyn continues to trail in the polls.

Donald Trump claimed this week he would remove himself from his business operations in a bid to address the unprecedented conflicts of interest that would follow him to the presidency. Little is known about how exactly Trump plans to distance himself from his sprawling empire, which owns hotels and golf resorts and businesses including a winery and modeling agency, and whether his plans would truly be enough to avoid placing his private and public interests on a collision course. What exactly is Donald Trump proposing? It's not entirely clear. The president-elect tweeted on Wednesday that he would be leaving his business "in total", and he said he would hold a press conference to discuss the matter on 15 December. Trump said legal documents were being prepared to take him "completely out of business operations", because it was "visually important" there be no conflicts of interest when he takes office. Notable in Trump's announcement was his plan to have his adult children attend the press conference with him. Trump's transition team has stated in the past that Trump will relinquish the day-to-day operations of the Trump Organization to three of his children: Ivanka, Eric and Donald Jr. Would that be a blind trust? Trump has sometimes described placing his children in charge of the family business as a blind trust. But legal and ethics experts have said that this would fall short of a true blind trust. While the law does not require it, elected officials traditionally divest themselves from holdings or assets that would be subject to potential conflicts of interest while serving in public office. Trump has declined to do so, leaving him with the option of setting up a true blind trust operated by a lawyer or trustee to mitigate concerns. But in order for a blind trust to properly function, Trump should have no contact during his presidency with the individual overseeing the management of his assets. Trump's children are not only in regular contact with him, but were also named in top roles on his transition team. Just last month, Trump's daughter Ivanka set off alarm bells by sitting in on a meeting between her father and the Japanese prime minister, Shinzo Abe. Jared Kushner, who is Ivanka's husband and is rumored to be taking on a prominent job in the Trump administration, also attended the meeting. Ivanka and brother Eric subsequently joined their father at a meeting with business associates from India. There are at least 20 countries where the Trumps do business. What is the legal position here? Since his unexpected victory, Trump has sounded a note of defiance regarding the legality of continuing with his business operations in tandem with the presidency. "The law's totally on my side, the president can't have a conflict of interest," he told the New York Times. While it is true that some rules on conflict of interest for executive branch employees do not apply to the president, Trump will be bound by bribery laws, disclosure requirements and a section of the US constitution known as the "emoluments clause" that bans elected officials from taking gifts from foreign governments. Trump has framed his stated intention to step back from the Trump Organization as something he is doing for the good of the country, rather than out of necessity. But the US Office of Government Ethics, the federal agency tasked with oversight of conflicts of interest laws among elected officials, maintains that divestiture is the "only way" for Trump to truly put the issue to rest. Former White House ethics counsels agree. Richard Painter, a chief ethics counsel to President George W Bush, said Trump must sell his businesses or risk violating the "emoluments clause". "Foreign diplomats staying in hotels, parties thrown by foreign governments in hotels, loans from the Bank of China, rent paid by foreign governments and companies controlled by foreign governments in office buildings, etc" would all pose a risk for him, Painter told the Guardian. If Trump does say he will remove himself from all his holdings, will we be able to tell? The lack of public information about Trump's finances renders it difficult to truly examine any action he might take on this front, short of clear divestiture. During the presidential race, Trump broke with a 40-year tradition among major-party candidates by refusing to release his tax returns. This left the public, and the media, without a clear portrait of his finances, business partners, payments and loans. Because Trump's eponymous conglomerate is privately held, there is also no requirement that it disclose its assets. Absent financial transparency, the possibility of Trump using the office of the presidency to bolster his businesses could continue to exist, even with his children in charge. Have there been any signs of him doing that so far? There have already been several examples since the election that have triggered concerns over whether Trump has any intention of separating his privately run business from his soon-to-be official business. In a meeting last month, Trump asked the Ukip leader Nigel Farage to oppose the building of wind farms near his golf course in Scotland – reportedly because Trump was concerned such activity would spoil the property's view. There was also the meeting with the Indian real estate executives, shortly after the election, who are developing a Trump-branded property in Mumbai. Congressional Democrats sought answers this week pertaining to another possible conflict of interest: a contract Trump signed three years ago to lease the government-owned Old Post Office for his new hotel in Washington. Both House and Senate Democrats pointed out that a clause in the lease specifically stated that no elected official of the US government should benefit from the agreement. Now that Trump is president-elect, they argued, he would in effect become "landlord and tenant at the same time" and thus violate federal government regulations. The Democrats also pointed to a reception at the Trump International Hotel in DC, booked for next month by the Kingdom of Bahrain, as further evidence of conflicts of interest that are expected to grow with the property openly encouraging foreign diplomats to stay there while traveling to Washington on official business.

As encouraging as Middlesbrough's recent performances have been they have still won only twice and are one point ahead of Hull. While Harry Maguire – a centre half coveted by Aitor Karanka – may have a chance to audition for a January move by marking Álvaro Negredo, the absence of Boro's injured left-back George Friend could permit Robert Snodgrass to undermine the potentially vulnerable Fábio da Silva. Do not bet against Adama Traoré's extraordinary pace and dribbling ability for Boro proving key though. Louise Taylor Kick-off Monday 8pm Venue Riverside Stadium Last season (Championship) Middlesbrough 1 Hull City 0 Live Sky Sports 1 Referee Mike Dean This season G10, Y43, R3, 4.90 cards per game Odds H 7-9 A 4-1 D 5-2 Middlesbrough Subs from Guzan, Ayala, Leadbitter, Espinosa, Nsue, Downing, Fischer, Rhodes, Nugent, De Sart Doubtful None Injured Friend (knee, 11 Dec) Suspended None Form LDWDLD Discipline Y29 R0 Leading scorers Negredo, Stuani 3 Hull City Subs from Jakupovic, Kuciak, Weir, Maguire, Bowen, Olley, Huddlestone, Tymon, Maloney, Hernández Doubtful Hernández (groin), Maloney (back), Mason (ill) Injured Bruce (achilles, 17 Dec), Odubajo (knee, May), Keane (knee, unknown) Suspended Mbokani (first of three) Form LLLWLD Discipline Y18 R2 Leading scorer Snodgrass 4

A cross-party group of 56 MPs have called on the culture secretary, Karen Bradley, to explain her decision to block the only female BME applicant to Channel 4's board. It emerged this week that the Department for Culture, Media and Sport had taken the unusual step of vetoing the unnamed candidate, who was one of five put forward by the regulator, Ofcom. The remaining four applicants who were accepted are all white men, and the Channel 4 board has no members from ethnic minorities currently sitting. Though only four roles were originally advertised by Channel 4, Ofcom decided to put forward what it considered to be five "outstanding" candidates. The regulator, Channel 4 and the government have declined to identify the rejected candidate, but one source said she was not a well known public figure. In a letter to Bradley, the MPs describe the decision to reject a rigorously vetted person at such a late stage as unprecedented, and say it is a "matter of urgency to find out the reasoning behind your decision to reject the candidate". Among the signatories was David Lammy, a former culture minister, who said the government had "serious questions to answer". "The government talks a good game on gender and racial diversity in the boardroom but actions speak louder than words," said Lammy, who is also chair of the all-party parliamentary group on race and community. "Channel 4's remit requires it to reflect the diversity of the UK and the organisation is making great progress in this regard. "In appointing four white men to the board, the secretary of state has failed Channel 4 and the country, and in doing so has hugely undermined all of the work being done on diversity across the broadcasting industry." Responding to the letter late on Friday, Bradley said the department had picked the "best four candidates" for the four roles advertised by Channel 4, but appeared to leave open the possibility of appointing other board members with other skill sets at a later date. Bradley's letter read: "I am very grateful for your work to support diversity, particularly in our creative industries. I am in full agreement in the need to ensure our public institutions and appointments represent and reflect modern Britain. I do however firmly reject any suggestion that female or BAME candidates are treated unfairly in our public appointment decisions." Her comments echoed those of Theresa May, who hen challenged over Bradley's decision by Lammy at prime minister's questions, defended the government's appointments process. She said she was not aware of the specific case but it was "about who is right for the job". The shadow culture secretary, Tom Watson, shadow education secretary, Angela Rayner, shadow minister for diverse communities, Dawn Butler, shadow home secretary, Diane Abbott, Conservative former minister Helen Grant and SNP spokesman for culture, media and sport, John Nicolson, were also among those who signed the letter. Butler said May and the government would be judged on what they said and did on improving diversity at the highest levels. "Change does not come about through talk but through action," she said. "The five candidates went through a rigorous vetting process and were of an extremely high calibre. This is an unprecedented move by this Tory government as it is the first time that a candidate has been rejected. "To not select the only woman and person of colour is extremely worrying and the government should be held to account for this decision."

A website targeting university professors for spreading "leftwing propaganda" is raising fears of McCarthy-era tactics while also drawing ridicule. The Professor Watchlist was established by Turning Point USA, a conservative nonprofit whose stated goal is to "promote the principles of fiscal responsibility, free markets and limited government". The website first appeared on 21 November and includes 200 professors from across American universities. Professors are added to the list for a range of perceived offenses, that are sourced from media articles. The site also accepts tips from the public. Professor profiles include a picture of each academic and a description of why they have been added. In a blogpost describing the watchlist, Charlie Kirk, the founder and executive director of Turning Point USA, said: "Some of America's college professors are totally out of line," and added that the list was dedicated to exposing professors who "promote anti-American, leftwing propaganda in the classroom". The site has sparked a mix of fear and ridicule from the academic community. Dr Anthea Butler, an associate professor of religious studies at the University of Pennsylvania and occasional contributor to the Guardian, was added to the list for claims that she made a racial slur about former presidential candidate Ben Carson, which she denies. Her profile also includes an op-ed she wrote on George Zimmerman, the man who fatally shot unarmed black teenager Trayvon Martin in 2012, in which she references the book Is God a White Racist? Butler said she is familiar with Turning Point USA and that they often attempt to harass professors through associated outfits. "I've had a lot of abuse from these kind of people before," Butler said. "It's an intimidation tactic and I'm not fearful about doing what I do everyday in the classroom." In a statement, Matt Lamb, the director of constitutional enforcement and transparency at Turning Point USA who also manages the watchlist, said: "The list is a great resource for all students to be aware of what is going on in their classrooms and be prepared to debate important topics." The nonprofit rejects any associations with "alt-right" movements or the election, as they said the list was started before election day. "We are taking publicly available information and aggregating it in an easy to search format," Lamb said. "Using freedom of speech to call out people who are abusing their power used to be called journalism, and we're using our first amendment rights." Joe Kuilema, a professor of Social Work at Calvin College, was added to the list for an article he wrote in the student newspaper responding to an incident in which a swastika was drawn on the snow on a car. Kuilema's piece discussed correlations between white privilege and white supremacy. The piece was picked up by conservative sites such as the Daily Caller and Info Wars. He was surprised to learn he was on the list after receiving a flurry of emails from former students and colleagues informing him. "I am an associate professor at a small Christian liberal arts school in the midwest United States, I don't consider myself particularly dangerous," he said. However, Kuilema said that this is not a new phenomena and there's been a long history in the US of social workers who speak up being labeled as "dangerous". Dale Maharidge, a journalism professor at Columbia University, was also added to the list for an exchange he had with Project Veritas. After learning he was on the list he ridiculed the site on Twitter, saying he brainwashed his students with radical coffee using "beans grown by leftists in Guatemala". "I'm laughing at them while at the same time shaking my head and worrying," Maharidge said. "These guys are buffoons [but] look at the buffoons in Europe in the 1930s and look at the McCarthy years." His fear is that the list may be used by others to target professors. "We have a list, we know who you are – then suddenly you're marking people as targets. We look at history, we saw it happen in Italy, in Germany with this kind of thing, we saw it with McCarthy, known communists, that's my fear, that these buffoons are taken seriously."

Efforts to have the presidential election vote reviewed in states where Donald Trump narrowly defeated Hillary Clinton came under attack on Friday, as Trump allies asked courts to stop recounts in three states. Legal submissions were made to authorities in Michigan, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin by Republicans who argued that recounts requested by Jill Stein, the Green party candidate, should not be allowed. Michigan's attorney general, Bill Schuette, said in a lawsuit that Stein's "dilatory and frivolous" recount would cost the public millions of dollars, and could result in the state being unable to cast its votes in the electoral college. In Pennsylvania, attorneys for Trump accused Stein of "bringing mayhem" to the election process despite "being no more than a blip on the electoral radar" and having no evidence that the vote had been sabotaged by foreign hackers. Two pro-Trump campaign groups meanwhile asked a federal court in Madison, Wisconsin, to bring a halt to an ongoing recount in the state, which was prompted by a petition from Stein that was accepted by election authorities last week. Stein defended her push for recounts and pledged to not back down. "In an election already tainted by suspicion, some coming from Donald Trump himself, verifying the vote is a commonsense procedure that would put all concerns around voter disenfranchisement to rest," she said in a statement. The Green party candidate requested recounts in the three states on behalf of a coalition of election security experts, who were concerned that the electoral process could have been disrupted by foreign hackers. They acted following warnings from US intelligence agencies during the election campaign that Russian hackers were behind the thefts of emails from Democratic party officials and had been detected intruding into the voter registration systems of several American states. Opponents to Stein's efforts on Friday all pointed to the absence of any clear evidence that the vote had been skewed by external forces. Trump won slim victories over Clinton in all three states after Clinton had led in opinion polls for several months. According to the latest tallies compiled by state authorities, Trump won Michigan by 10,704 votes (0.2%), Pennsylvania by 46,765 (0.8%) and Wisconsin by 22,177 (0.7%). Stein and her allies have suggested that hackers may have downloaded state voter registration databases and filed bogus absentee ballots, or tampered in some way with the electronic machines that register votes. But they have not offered proof pointing to either theory. The Obama administration has said it is confident that no cyber-hacking interfered with election day and that the result was "the will of the American people". A group of Democratic senators has, however, asked the president to declassify more information about Russia's involvement in the US election process. The Republican efforts to derail Stein's recounts raised a wide range of objections on Friday. Schuette, the Michigan attorney general, homed in on Michigan law holding that a candidate must show that she or he was "aggrieved" by the result in order to prompt a recount. "Stein has zero chance of winning Michigan's electoral votes; she cited no evidence of fraud or mistake in the canvass of votes; and she has offered no argument as to how she is aggrieved by the electoral counts," Schuette, a Republican who supported Trump's campaign for the presidency, said in a lawsuit to a state appeals court. Stein said in a statement that Schuette's lawsuit was a "politically motivated" attempt to prevent checks on the integrity of the vote count in the state. Trump's campaign itself filed a petition in Michigan on Thursday in opposition to the recount. In Pennsylvania, attorneys for Trump and the state Republican party argued in a court filing that Stein's efforts placed the state "at grave risk" of not being able to meet a 13 December deadline for settling disagreements before submitting results for the electoral college vote. Stein's request, according to the lawsuit, "has not alleged any specific acts of fraud or tampering in Pennsylvania, much less that any such fraud increased the votes of President-elect Trump, let alone to such degree that it affected the outcome of the election." The Republicans also used Stein's own filings against her. Stein asked the state court to put her petition contesting the election on hold pending the discovery by recounters of hacking. But state law bars such a "fishing expedition", the Republicans said. In Wisconsin, the Great America Pac and Stop Hillary Pac cited the US supreme court's order to abandon recounts in Florida after the 2000 presidential election to argue that Wisconsin's present recount violated the equal protection clause of the US constitution. They also said the recount could not be "accurately and carefully" completed before the 13 December deadline for Wisconsin to settle disagreements before presenting its vote for the electoral college. The campaign groups asked the court to stop the recount "to prevent careless mistakes" that would taint the election's results and "cast a pall" over Trump's victory. Michigan authorities were meeting on Friday morning to discuss Stein's request and opposition from Trump and the state attorney general. Recounting, which was due to begin on Friday, has been placed on hold by the Michigan secretary of state.

Police have launched a murder investigation after a 64-year-old immigration detainee died following a fight in a detention centre close to Heathrow. Officers were called to an assault at the Colnbrook immigration removal centre in west London on Thursday morning, but the man died in hospital 12 hours later at 9.30pm. A 32-year-old man remains in custody, while two others, aged 31 and 35, have been released with no further action. Colnbrook has the capacity to hold up to 396 men and 27 women. It is run by Home Office subcontractors Mitie Care and Custody. Colnbrook detainees told the Guardian they were sad about the death and expressed fear for their safety. The centre manager, Paul Morrison, circulated a letter to all detainees on Thursday night saying the victim was being treated in hospital. "The detainee involved is currently being treated in hospital and police have attended the fight. We believe this to be an isolated incident. We have no further information at this time," the letter said. One detainee said: "There is a lot of violence in this centre and a lot of people are harming themselves. We are not allowed to have phones with cameras in them, but if we were, we could get some photos to the outside world and show people what is really happening in this place. "They sometimes put the whole place on lockdown and then we feel really trapped. Every day we feel very stressed in this place. I don't think you would keep an animal in these conditions." Another detainee said: "Everyone is very scared after what happened. We don't know who to trust and we don't know what will happen next. Nobody feels safe here. "People who are sick don't always get the proper treatment from the healthcare unit and we see terrible things sometimes when people are being deported. Their ankles are twisted, their arms are damaged, some have restraint belts put around their waists, then they are picked up like a handbag." Jerome Phelps, the director of Detention Action, which supports people in detention, said: "While the exact facts are still unconfirmed and a murder investigation is continuing, our thoughts are with the family and friends of the deceased. "Irrespective of the circumstances, the bare minimum we expect from immigration detention centres is that they guarantee the safety and security of those in their protection. It is unacceptable that this marks the 27th death that has happened in a detention centre in the UK. The Home Office owes a duty of care to people in detention and this must be upheld." A Scotland Yard spokesman confirmed that a murder investigation is under way. "Detectives from the homicide and major crime command led by DCI Mark Lawson are investigating. No one else is currently being sought in connection with the investigation," he said. A Home Office spokesman said it did not comment on continuing police investigations. Colnbrook, which opened in 2004, holds migrants the Home Office is planning to remove from the UK, as well as foreign prisoners who have completed their sentences. However, Home Office figures show that in July, August and September, 43% of detainees were released back into the community. A Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Prisons report in 2013 found "significant evidence of constant low-level anxiety and fear among detainees" at Colnbrook, although the then chief inspector of prisons Nick Hardwick found that there had been some improvements in the levels of violence and use of force.

Imagine a two-tiered society with elite citizens, genetically engineered to be smarter, healthier and to live longer, and an underclass of biologically run-of-the-mill humans. It sounds like the plot of a dystopian novel, but the world could be sleepwalking towards this scenario, according to one of Britain's most celebrated writers. Kazuo Ishiguro argues that the social changes unleashed by gene editing technologies, such as Crispr, could undermine core human values. "We're going into a territory where a lot of the ways in which we have organised our societies will suddenly look a bit redundant," he said. "In liberal democracies, we have this idea that human beings are basically equal in some very fundamental way. We're coming close to the point where we can, objectively in some sense, create people who are superior to others." Ishiguro spoke to the Guardian ahead of the opening of a new permanent mathematics gallery at the Science Museum in London, which features a machine to predict coastal storm surges built by his oceanographer father, Shizuo Ishiguro. The author hopes that the £5 million exhibition, and others like it, will encourage people to engage with the process of science and its future trajectory, rather than simply tuning in for the headline results of research and only then worrying about the implications. "Despite the atom bomb and things like this, we're still in the habit of compartmentalising scientific endeavour," he said. "It's important that we, as a society, get much more interested in science and maths, that we don't silo it off in our minds ... until there's some breakthrough product that turns up." Ishiguro cites three areas - gene editing, robotics and Artificial Intelligence - that he believes could transform the way we live and interact with each other over the next 30 years. "We are on the brink of all kinds of discoveries that will completely alter the way we run our lives," said the author, whose 2005 book, Never Let Me Go, imagines a dark future in which humans clones are raised to be organ donors. The gene editing tool, Crispr, allows scientists to cut, paste and delete single letters of the genome with unprecedented precision, meaning aberrant genes can be overwritten with working copies, and, potentially, functional genes replaced with enhanced versions. Chinese scientists are already trialling the technology in patients to treat lung cancer. "When you get to the point where you can say that person is actually intellectually or physically superior to another person because you have removed certain possibilities for that person getting ill... or because they're enhanced in other ways, that has enormous implications for very basic values that we have," said Ishiguro. He also has concerns that in AI and robotics the bulk of intellectual capital lies with "the Silicon Valley masters of the universe" rather than universities or government-funded labs. "There are some very powerful and rich people who want to do enormous research in this area," he said. "Some of them might want to come out with things that are very beneficial, but it's probably outside of regulation and so, yes, I think society as a whole needs to be more engaged." Ishiguro's father, an oceanographer originally based in Nagasaki, moved with the family to Guildford, Surrey, to work at the National Institute of Oceanography in 1957, when Ishiguro was five. Despite the two countries having been at war just a decade previously, the family were made welcome, he said. "The British people of that era had a very sophisticated sense of the international community because they had come through the war," he said. "They knew the difference between serious things and less serious things, [having] lived through a period when they thought they were going to be under Nazi occupation." Ishiguro contrasts this with the anti-immigrant rhetoric that dominated the Brexit and US election campaigns. "We have become much more multi-cultural and much more cosmopolitan in many ways, but the attitude to, say, the refugee crisis, I think is quite different to what I remember from the Britain I grew up in," he said. His father's electronic analogue machine, which is the size of a large wardrobe, converted meteorological and ocean data (wind speed, tidal motion, water depth and so on) into electrical signals on a series of wire meshes. This allowed the height of storm surges, and where and when they would make coastal impact, to be predicted. The system was originally developed to help Japanese fishing fleets, but modified to be applied to the North Sea, where floods following a storm surge in 1953 led to more than 2,000 deaths. Ultimately, the machine was superseded by digital computers, but the scientist continued to perfect his creation in the family garden shed in Guildford until his death in 2007 – a fact Ishiguro describes as "entirely unsurprising". Despite having taken a different career path, Ishiguro inherited an obsessive attitude towards work from his father, he said, recalling him mulling over equations every evening while watching American thrillers on television. "Looking back now I can see that the whole approach to his work is quite like my approach to my work as a writer," he said. "He didn't think of it as a job at all. It was something he obsessively thought about the whole time. That was my model." Mathematics: The Winton Gallery, designed by Zaha Hadid Architects, opens on 8 December. It spans 400 years of mathematics, focusing on ideas and objects that have influenced everyday lives.

Sarah Olney, the new MP for Richmond Park and north Kingston, only joined the Liberal Democrats last May after the party's crushing defeat in the general election that handed the Conservatives an unexpected majority. Before that, the 39-year-old accountant, who lived in a semi-detached house in north Kingston with her husband and two children, had voted Lib Dem but never been a member of any political party. "It never occurred to me [to join one]," she said. "I didn't grow up in a political family. I don't have political friends. It wasn't on my radar at all." Her suburban middle-class background has little in common with that of Zac Goldsmith and his family, who were less than gracious in defeat. Goldsmith's brother Ben said "even by Liberal Democrat standards, Sarah Olney is unimaginably drab" in a tweet in the early hours that was hastily deleted. In a rewritten version, he called her "utterly dreary" instead. In response, however, Olney would only say she was not prepared to get personal. Olney grew up in Surrey Heath. Her father was a headteacher and her mother a nurse. "They voted Tories, they are Tories," she said of her public-sector parents. Would they still back Theresa May's party now? "I don't know, I expect so. The last time they had an opportunity to vote I wasn't a Lib Dem," she said, before adding with a laugh that she thought her mother would back her new party in the future. Not that her parents are fans of their local MP, the arch-Brexiteer Michael Gove. "They hate him, they can't stand him, he's very unpopular in the constituency," she said, arguing that it was his desire to pursue "radical change in education" that put off some voters. "He wanted to shake things up, but you vote Tory for stability, for security, for competence. You don't vote Tory for radical change," she said. Olney lives with her husband, Ben, a town planner, and their two children, Isabel, seven, and Rufus, three. She said her daughter was "very proud and very excited" about her new role, although she was too young for it to seem unusual. "It's just 'that's what my mum does'." Olney said she saw herself as a non-partisan person who was ready to work across the political aisle, and who wanted to focus on her three priorities: Brexit, Heathrow and the NHS. Was feminism a big driver behind what she wanted to achieve? "I think there are certain issues that affect women more than men, things like domestic violence, equal representation in parliament, equal pay, we are still not there," she said. "I would want to make common cause with other MPs who want to make changes in those areas." She said her experiences of getting appropriate training and qualifications to secure a job – she was an accountant at the National Physical Laboratory in Bushy Park – that paid enough to cover the mortgage and fund childcare were an important part of her motivation. She admits she is no expert when it comes to the workings of the House of Commons. "I've got a lot to learn about parliamentary process," she said. "I wasn't planning to become an MP. I haven't studied the text books yet so I need to familiarise myself with the process. "But I've been elected on a very clear anti-Brexit mandate and I'll be fighting hard for Britain to maintain close links to the European Union."

Writers including Val McDermid, Joanna Trollope and Francesca Simon have lined up to brand the strategy for public libraries in England announced by the government this week "too little, too late". "To produce a report which ignores that one in eight libraries has closed, that librarians are being sacked, that funding has been slashed, while talking about libraries providing additional, unrelated services is disgraceful," said Simon. "Libraries are best used for their vital original purpose – to make books and learning available to all. Libraries can be 'better utilised' by keeping them open, properly funded and professionally staffed. Then let's discuss providing other services." McDermid was equally scathing, telling the Guardian: "Any financial support for libraries is significant and welcome, but I suspect this may be too little, too late for many communities. Libraries are the seedbeds of our future and, at a time when we're already facing a skills gap, they should be at the heart of our future strategy as a country." Authors also hit out at the timing of the report, with applications for grants from a £4m fund designed to help disadvantaged communities due by the beginning of January. "The new report doesn't seem to go nearly far enough," said Trollope, "and why have they given libraries almost no time to apply or react, especially at a time of year which is half-holidays anyway?" The Department of Culture, Media and Sport published the five-year strategy under the title of Libraries Deliver on Thursday, aiming to help the services thrive after years of decline. At the centre of its recommendations were calls for innovative thinking about usage, promotion and partnerships with other organisations. The report also suggested that libraries should be community hubs and about more than books. Nicola Morgan, who chairs the Society of Authors' children's writers and illustrators group, warned that the report was undermined by its failure to address the heavy losses sustained by library services squeezed by steep reductions in local authority funding. "It fails to show how the devastating cuts of recent years will be reversed; crucially, it fails to place librarians at the heart of library provision and talks far too little about real action," she said. "If this is not to be mere lip service, we need promises to reverse cuts and commitment to increase spending before it is too late." Society of Authors chief executive Nicola Solomon was also critical of the emphasis on community usage rather than provision of books. "It is great to talk about community hubs, but in the end books are at the heart of libraries," she said. "The report ignores the numbers on opening hours, budgets and usage." The writer Daisy Goodwin also expressed her fear that the report might push libraries away from their core value within literary culture: "My big concern about trying to make libraries into community hubs, is that the vital function that libraries have as an oasis of quiet in an increasingly noisy world, will be lost." Authors also raised concerns that the report did not address how library funding is caught between central and local government. Although local authorities have a statutory duty under the Public Libraries and Museums Act 1964 to provide a comprehensive and efficient library service for all, this has not been enforced by successive governments. As a result, provision has been seriously reduced in recent years as local councils raided budgets to shore up other essential services. Novelist Charles Palliser, who sits on the Society of Authors' management committee, said: "The real problem is that hard-pressed councils are cutting funding. I get the impression that libraries themselves are being blamed for the crisis rather than the belt-tightening imposed by the government on councils." He added that what was needed was cash to help keep public libraries open and functioning. The £4m Libraries Opportunities for Everyone Innovation fund, administered by Arts Council England, opens for applications on Monday, but library authorities must submit their details by 5 January. The money is for "pilot library service projects that provide people with opportunities that they might not have otherwise". But campaigners have criticised the amount on offer. Not only does it fail to address the central issues of book stock, closures and opening hours, it amounts to less than £31,000 each if spread between the 131 library authorities. Activist Tim Coates told the Guardian: "There is a bathtub of bureaucracy in every council that costs a small fortune. That is where the money for book funds should come from – and that's what this report should have said."

Who knows what might have happened had David Moyes responded positively to Leicester's overtures following Nigel Pearson's departure. Instead they turned to Claudio Ranieri and the rest is history but the champions arrive on Wearside with a stumble in their step and only five more points than their bottom-placed hosts. Yet if Ranieri is mildly anxious, Moyes remains desperate for a win. Much hinges on whether Sunderland's Jermain Defoe and Victor Anichebe and Leicester's Jamie Vardy have their shooting boots on. Louise Taylor Kick-off Saturday 3pm Venue Stadium of Light Last season Sunderland 0 Leicester City 2 Referee Andre Marriner This season G10, Y40, R1, 4.20 cards per game Odds H 2-1 A 6-5 D 5-2 Sunderland Subs from Mannone, Manquillo, Love, O'Shea, Kirchhoff Januzaj, Khazri, Larsson Doubtful Kirchhoff (hamstring) Injured Borini (groin, 17 Dec), Gooch (ankle, Mar), Cattermole (hip, Apr), McNair (knee, Aug), Rodwell (hamstring, unknown) Suspended None Form LLLWWL Discipline Y29 R3 Leading scorer Defoe 7 Leicester City Subs from Hamer, Hernández, Wasilewski, Chilwell, Schlupp, Mendy, Mahrez, Okazaki Doubtful None Injured Schmeichel (hand, 17 Dec) Suspended Drinkwater (second of three) Form LWDLLD Discipline Y22 R0 Leading scorer Slimani 4

On the night of 25 September 2010, there was a sombre atmosphere at the Labour party conference in Manchester. Supporters of Ed Miliband were walking around shell-shocked, stunned by their upset victory over his brother. David Miliband was counselling his own backers, who seemed almost bereaved by defeat. But in one packed, increasingly sweaty bar, a rather different scene unfolded. Ed Balls, who had come third in that year's leadership contest, was at a karaoke microphone belting out the Killers' Mr Brightside. While his rivals wore grave expressions, Balls was seeing the funny side, mocking himself and getting ready to dust himself down and start all over again. For his most loyal supporters, it was a typical display: part self-deprecation, part showing off, and all accompanied by an easy familiarity with popular culture. It's fair to say that was not the way most people saw Ed Balls. Once known as more of a spod than a SpAd – he was famously said to have inserted the phrase "post-neoclassical endogenous growth theory" into a Gordon Brown speech – he then became notorious as Brown's enforcer, caricatured as both a boffin and a bruiser. As Ed Miliband's shadow chancellor, he was the regular butt of jibes from David Cameron and George Osborne, who sought to make him the face of supposed Labour profligacy. When he lost his Morley and Outwood seat in 2015, it became the defining image of Labour's 2015 defeat. In all the political obituaries that were written back then, few described Balls as popular – and no one called him a national treasure. And yet when Balls was finally ejected from the BBC's wildly popular Strictly Come Dancing last weekend, the wave of affection was unmistakable. In the previous 10 weeks, he had steadily built up what felt like a major public following. On social media, the love overflowed. In the street, where once, if he was recognised at all, it might be by someone who, unprovoked, told him to fuck off, now strangers would call out to say he was "smashing it on Strictly". BBC executives spotted a trend: whenever Balls was about to dance, the ratings spiked. Week after week, the judges put him at the bottom of the leaderboard. But week after week he stayed in. The voters had glimpsed the Ed Balls of that Manchester bar in 2010 – and they loved him. All this must surely mean he's gutted to be out. On the contrary, he says now, catching his breath between an appearance on ITV's Loose Women and taping the Strictly Christmas special. "I'm not disappointed at all. I've had a fabulous time. Feels like a victory, not a defeat." Which might sound like a politician's spin until he tells you that, in the seconds before Tess Daly revealed who was going to be in last week's decisive dance-off, he confided to a producer that he was more worried about scraping through than staying in. "I think by the time I got to last Saturday, I knew it was time to go." But why? He had surpassed all expectations, even making it to the all-important Blackpool stage. The pantomime-villain-cum-judge Craig Revel Horwood had declared him to be "improving". Plenty believed Balls would make it to the final, even perhaps – in this year of Brexit, Trump and Leicester City – win the whole thing. But not him. "I knew that as the programme goes on, it becomes more about who's good. And I wasn't as good as the others. I felt that [had I stayed in] the next week would have had lots of people saying, 'It's not fair, it's not on'. As Len Goodman has said since, the British people like an underdog, but there's also a sort of sense of fair play." And unlike those other electoral results of 2016, Balls did see this one coming. "Judge Rinder and I were talking about the algorithm and the way things work," he says, simultaneously straight-faced and aware of the comic absurdity. "Maybe we're both a bit nerdy like that. Judge Rinder had been sitting there with his calculator working it out in the wardrobe room between the two shows on Saturday night." He goes on to explain that, because "you're balancing 50% public vote and 50% the judges", once only a handful of contestants are left, a tipping point is reached where even coming first in the public vote might not be enough to save you from the dreaded dance-off. (Not for nothing was Balls reputed to be one of the finest economists of his generation.) But he has more to say on the numbers. "The thing that is really frustrating about this show for people who follow politics, people who understand politics, is that we all need data. We need polls, we need exit polls, we need results. We need to know turnout. We need to know past results, and the problem with Strictly is that, although they're very clear about the method, and they're very clear about the independent verification, they don't give us any data at all. So none of us ever know. We never knew whether we were just scraping through in week three, or totally storming it." He was like that throughout his Strictly journey, approaching the competition with an eye on political strategy. He learned quickly that it was crucial not to be bland, not to be stranded in the middle between those who are terrific and those who are awful. But nor did he want to be another John Sergeant or Ann Widdecombe. He really wanted to learn to dance and to become better. Nothing pleased him more than when the judges praised his "dance content". As the weeks went by, he realised that people – perhaps millions of people - were beginning to rely on him for a little bit of cheer to relieve the gloom. Never more so than in the week of Donald Trump's election. As it happens, I watched him and his professional partner, Katya Jones, in the rehearsal room that week. They were practising a salsa to Gangnam Style. The BBC cameraman had already seen it and predicted, rightly as it turned out, that "this is going to tear the roof off". Sure enough, that moment when Ed appeared to ride Katya – "the pony" – made me, and everyone who saw it, gasp in a rare combination of delight and horror. It has been viewed 3.5m times on Facebook alone. But going into it was not easy. First, the Trump election had brought everyone down. "How do you do this emotionally when you sort of feel something so terrible has happened?" Then he saw the Twitter voices sobbing that all they had to look forward to was Ed on Strictly. That added to the pressure. "I certainly felt a responsibility not to give people another disappointment or setback at the end of the week where there'd been a massive disappointment and setback." The result was, he says, a more restrained performance, at least at the start, than he'd planned. He just didn't want anything to go wrong. This brings us to the dignity issue. Plenty of people felt that a man who had once sought to be the nation's chancellor should not be cavorting around doing a paso doble on primetime TV. He includes Gordon Brown in that list, but quickly adds that Brown soon came around – texting Balls each Saturday evening to give him his own assessment of his performance. After Balls descended from the roof of the Winter Gardens playing a flaming piano, the former PM texted to say, "I will never see Blackpool in the same light again." Brown comes up several times in our conversation, including in a context few would have expected. I had asked Balls about Jones, a phenomenal dancer widely praised for playing to Ed's strengths and unlocking his comic potential. They had to work together with great intensity, in the studio for 45 hours a week. To my surprise, he compares his working relationship with Katya with his equally demanding former boss. "I was older, but I was the junior partner with Katya. With Gordon I was younger, but I was also the junior partner. But actually I always felt with Gordon that I should challenge him and say when I didn't like things or when I disagreed. I did the same with her, and she with me. Actually what you realise is that, in both cases, the strength of the underlying relationship and the mutual respect is what allows you, sometimes, in the privacy of [working together, just] the two of you, to say 'You're getting this wrong, that's ridiculous,' or 'That's not going to work,' or 'Why can't you support me more?' The same way it happened between Gordon and me." The big shift came, he says, when he realised that performing on a show like Strictly meant playing a character. In the first week, he admits, he was stiff and stilted, because he was still being himself. But once he became the banjo-playing hick for his Charleston, or the yellow-suited Mask, or one half of Laurel and Hardy, he was liberated. He says he also focused only on the people in the studio audience, never thinking of the 11 million watching at home. If he had, he says, it would have been overwhelming. Above all, the confidence came from a deep but unexpected source. In his memoir, Speaking Out, Balls explains that he did not realise he had a stammer – an "interiorised" one – until he was 38. Facing up to that and then talking about it in public was, he believes, a turning point. "Being comfortable in yourself – including saying, 'I've got a stammer, that's who I am' – once you've done that, nothing else seems quite as hard in the future." Even dancing a cha-cha-cha on live TV. Indeed, Balls goes further, saying he believes he would never have gone on Strictly had he not had the stammer and faced up to it. It has enabled him to take risks, and to believe "this is who I am and it's OK". Now when he speaks to stammering children, as he does often, he tells them not to aim to eradicate their stammer, because, "well, one, it's never going to go, but two, the strength they get out of dealing with it, and therefore being able to be themselves, will make them better people. And that's why I'm better for having a stammer." Now that he's out, he has more time on his hands. What's next? He's doing the Strictly Live Tour next year, which will mean a return to the Leeds venue where he learned he lost his seat in 2015. He sees some kind of poetic karma in that. He will miss the Manchester leg because he's flying to Arizona to give a speech on the world economy. Not many Strictly contestants can say that. It's a strange kind of balancing act – light entertainment star and heavyweight politician. He certainly hasn't stopped thinking of Labour and its current predicament. "You don't succeed by being supported by cheering rallies of paid-up members," he says pointedly. "The thing that's worrying at the moment is not just our poll and trust ratings, but actually on some of the big policy prescriptions, we're out of touch. The British people want the security of the Nato alliance. They don't think that getting rid of our nuclear weapons would make us safer. They don't think that free movement and immigration is an unalloyed success. When they hear our senior spokespeople saying 'immigration is good for you and you should just accept it' – that may make sense in Islington or Hackney, but it makes no sense at all where elections are won or lost around the country." He may well now be the most popular Labour figure in Britain. In 10 short weeks, he has acquired a commodity that is denied most politicians: more than simple popularity, he is now seen as a human being. No longer is he viewed through what he calls the "thick lens" that stands between almost every politician and the public, one that warps and distorts them all. That could be a priceless asset. Does that mean there's a way back for him? He says it would be "foolish" if he thought, "Oh, I've done well on a reality TV programme, let me go and be a reality TV politician." The two disciplines are very different. To succeed on reality TV, he learned that, "You've got to shock. You've got to have some drama," even go a bit "wild". In politics, you also have to take risks, but you have to have "thought it through, and it's serious, and you need to build consensus. You can't just surprise. The world does not want a reality TV president," he says (even though it's about to get one). Tellingly, he rules nothing out, even my half-serious suggestion that if there was ever a vacancy for the London mayoralty, he could run and win. And there's a reason for that. When his book was launched in September, Balls told guests that no matter how much he was enjoying Strictly, what he missed was the sense of "purpose" that politics provided. He sticks by that now. I ask if even a wet Tuesday in February as education secretary was more thrilling than a spectacular night on Strictly. "Oh massively, oh definitely. Incomparably so." The responsibility, the ability to make a difference in people's lives – "It's just in a different realm." "The thing is, though, I'm quite reconciled with that. I may never ever have that degree of responsibility and purpose again. And I'm quite happy with the idea that I might spend the next five years doing some [teaching at] King's [College, London] and at Harvard, and some Norwich City [where he is chairman] and some television maybe. But I think I'd be disappointed if I didn't do something that felt like it was public service ... I'd love to have a chance to do that kind of thing again."

Donald Trump's administration will be the most affluent ever. Estimates are imprecise because we don't even know the president-elect's true net worth, but the wealth of his cabinet picks so far range from $12bn to $35bn. At the very least, this quadruples that of the Obama cabinet. But more than just representing his friends, loyalists and family, the natural alliances among these people, their hallowed predispositions, will impact the policies they form. We know the dangers of this skewed power. Before F Scott Fitzgerald wrote The Great Gatsby, he published The Rich Boy, a 1924 short story, in which the narrator says: "Let me tell you about the very rich. They are different from you and me ... They think, deep in their hearts, that they are better than we are because we had to discover the compensations and refuges of life for ourselves." Fitzgerald questioned the moral and ethical vacuity of the rich in his works. His work was first penned in the glitz of the roaring 1920s. Then, the wealthiest citizens clanked champagne flutes to their own good fortunes, while the majority of the population struggled in the proverbial alleyways. Is it really so different today? Despite all his populist slogans, Trump was born with a golden spoon in his mouth. He understands having money because he never had to understand not having money. He understands bending the rules because he's made money doing that. He became president doing that. He boasted about it during the election. He gravitates to people similar to him, billionaires and up and coming millionaires. His cabinet choices are pedigreed and skilled at using the government to their profit advantage. We are supposed to believe that because they know how that game is played, that as public officials they will divert those talents on our behalf. The only fly in that ointment is that they have no reason to do so. We have Steven Mnuchin, the Treasury secretary nominee, whose hedge fund took over a California bank in 2009 on the cheap, got the government to back the risk of the deal and proceeded to foreclose on 36,000 homes between 2009-2015, reaping a profit for him and his group of around $1.5bn. He's not going to regulate the industry that handed him that windfall. Then, there's Commerce secretary nominee Wilbur Ross who made billions taking over flailing steel and other industrial companies, pushing costs like pension payments onto the government and firing people in the process. He's not about to advocate for unions or higher minimum wages or equal pay for women in the workplace. Education secretary nominee Betsy DeVos never went to, nor sent her children to, public schools. So you can bet she won't be advocating for federal funds to elevate conditions for the middle or poorer classes that attend them. Transportation secretary nominee (and millionaire) Elaine Chao is on the board of Wells Fargo which engaged in scamming its customers for years. She will likely be given a carte blanche on road and bridge privatization, not necessarily public funding for them, which will enable Wall Street to securitize the profits. It's said that given her marriage to Senate Republican majority leader Mitch McConnell, she'll be able to convince him to push for infrastructure spending on roads and highways, but it's more likely the big industrial and construction companies will get sweetheart government contracts that will somehow come out of our pockets in the process. The rest of his cabinet either has similar bends or remains to be filled, but the themes can be examined under the auspices of what keeps the powerful in power, and that is simply: not to share it. The deregulation of Wall Street and other industries, reduction of transparency in reporting, the cutting of corporate taxes which push the tax and debt burden onto the rest of the population, are not simply policy choices. They are strategies of a power elite that wants to preserve itself, at any cost to the rest of us. In the wake of the Great Depression, Fitzgerald, who attended Princeton, but hailed from poorer roots than many of his classmates, went on to say: "I have never been able to forgive the rich for being rich, and it has colored my entire life and works." We won't be able to forgive the rich in Trump's cabinet either – especially if they continue to ignore the needs of the 99%.

Aintree 12.00 Evening Hush 12.30 Oldgrangewood 1.00 Minotaur 1.35 Alvarado (nap) 2.10 Byron Flyer 2.40 Le Mercurey 3.15 Seefood Chepstow 12.35 Braventara 1.05 Sykes 1.40 Touch Kick 2.15 Atirelarigo 2.45 Corrin Wood 3.20 Kingswell Theatre 3.50 Snow Castle Sandown 12.20 Bardd 12.50 Royal Debutante 1.20 Some Kinda Lama 1.55 Altior 2.25 Zubayr 3.00 Sire De Grugy 3.30 Doing Fine (nb) Wetherby 12.10 Baden 12.40 Minella Charmer 1.10 Lough Salt 1.45 Two Smokin Barrels 2.20 Sakhee's City 2.50 Apterix 3.25 Passing Call Wolverhampton 5.15 Spin Point 5.45 Vincenzo Coccotti 6.15 Lmntrix 6.45 Getna 7.15 Sutter County 7.45 Winning Story 8.15 Gloryette 8.45 Snobbery

With a fortnight still to go before its release, Rogue One is nonetheless set to be 2016's highest-grossing film. The first "anthology" movie in the Star Wars franchise, it is set in roughly the same universe as episodes one to seven, but features none of the familiar characters. Its cast is more credible than A-list: Felicity Jones, Ben Mendelsohn, Riz Ahmed, Diego Luna. Likewise, its British director, Gareth Edwards. Yet such is the strength of George Lucas's space saga brand, acquired by Disney for $4.05bn in 2012, that earlier this week, Rogue One broke presale ticket records for the year. Pundits predict a final global total of $1.4bn. But these figures may mask a slightly different story. Although three films (Finding Dory, Captain America: Civil War and Zootropolis) have already tipped the billion dollar mark in 2016, the market is perceived to be down, making topping the charts less of a challenge. And although impressive, Rogue One's presales pale in comparison to those for last December's Star Wars: A Force Awakens, which went on to make $2.1bn. Rumbling concerns around the film began in August, with word that Edwards had taken a backseat while co-writer Tony Gilroy reshot, according to some quotes, around 40% of the film. Insiders insisted Gilroy's role was mostly in post-production, yet on Wednesday it was reported that his fee had risen from around $200,000 to more than $5m, fuelling further speculation that Disney's issues with the original cut had been considerable. "It does sound a little bit unusual," says Bruce Nash, founder and publisher of box office analysis site The Numbers. While rival studio Marvel now builds two weeks of reshoots into its schedule as standard, and successful blockbusters such as Titanic and Back to the Future were changed considerably, these changes are generally to address casting concerns or redo an ending, rather than something as fundamental as the director. But the real reason may not be so straightforward as the studio being keen to improve a movie in which they had already invested $200m. For while Disney would naturally seek to maximise profits on the film, it would not do so at the expense of its core product: the Skywalker saga. "It's an interesting decision for Disney," says Nash. "They want to reinforce the franchise, and they probably don't want to cloud the waters." Earlier this week, Edwards confirmed that Rogue One will not have the iconic opening text "crawl" so synonymous with the series, while producer Kathleen Kennedy vowed that regardless of Rogue One's success, no sequel would be forthcoming. Its function, then, is as much to keep the series in public consciousness and maintain momentum for next Christmas's Episode VIII as it is to stand on its own feet. "Disney would have been looking at the film through two lenses," says Nash. "How do we make a great film and how do we fit it into the overall mythology? They want the secondary films [a young-Han-Solo movie is also on the way] to build into making the next main story even more interesting." It's possible that Edwards, the man behind highly innovative sci-fi film Monsters, might in fact have made a movie so interesting it was actively distracting. Gilroy won acclaim for the George Clooney drama Michael Clayton, but his last film was the more generic The Bourne Legacy, whose tone may be more in keeping with what Disney desire. It's momentum, too: while The Bourne Legacy took a healthy profit, it didn't make as much as the previous films, nor was it so critically successful as to steer the series down a path in which Jeremy Renner became the lead rather than Matt Damon. So the current box-office predictions for the film – mammoth yet not mould-breaking – could be good news for the studio. It may also have been cheered by the numbers for Warner Bros's Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them: another series spun off from a beloved franchise. In the US, that film opened with just half of what the final Harry Potter film made – a ratio that would likely suit Disney. Rogue One's final total will depend on its level of mainstream cut-through. Says Nash: "Episode VII was a huge family gathering. I don't feel that's the case for Rogue One. Core movie fans are going to go out in droves but in order to hit the real heights you have to answer yes to the question: is grandma going to come see this film?" Making an event movie is great in theory. But you don't want it to upstage the main event. •Rogue One: A Star Wars Story is released on 15 December in Australia and the UK, and on 16 December in the US.

A good party is not about cooking so many intricate and glamorous recipes that you become frazzled by the experience. Better to be a bit clever and prep as much as possible in advance, and to make things that will excite people without giving you a nervous breakdown. Here are five dishes that mix traditional flavours and ingredients with a touch of the unusual: a collection of light bites bursting with flavour that can be served as fun canapes or light starters, and with as little last-minute faff as possible. Have very happy Christmases, all. Mustard and muscovado roast ham hocks with celeriac, apple, raisin and parsley salad You don't have to spend a fortune to have a slap-up feast at Christmas. Hocks are a fraction of the cost of a whole ham. Serves eight to 10 as a generous first course. 2 smoked ham hocks, each about 250g 1 onion, peeled 8 cloves 440ml cider ½ tsp black peppercorns 100g dark brown muscovado sugar 1 pinch ground cloves 75g English mustard For the celeriac salad 3 tbsp red-wine vinegar 30g currants (or raisins) A squeeze of lemon 75g natural yoghurt 35g mayonnaise ½ tsp wholegrain mustard ½ celeriac (about 350g), peeled 2 granny smith apples 1 small bunch flat-leaf parsley, picked and roughly chopped Salt and freshly ground black pepper Soak the hocks overnight in a large pan of cold water, then drain – this removes excess salt. Stud the onion with the cloves, then put it in the same pan with the drained ham, cider and peppercorns. Add enough water to cover, then clap on the lid and bring to a boil. Turn down to a low simmer and leave to cook for two hours, until tender (top with boiling water to cover, as necessary). Heat the oven to 200C/390F/gas mark 6. Lift the hocks out of the pan and on to a board. When they are cool enough to handle, remove the skin with a sharp knife, but leave the fat on the hams. (Use the skin to make crackling – it's a fun garnish on the salad, for instance, or chop it into strips and serve with apple sauce as an extra-tasty nibble.) Lightly score the fat all over in a diamond pattern. Mix the muscovado sugar, ground clove and mustard into a paste, then smear over the hocks. Spoon a ladle of ham stock into a roasting tin (this will help keep the meat moist), and put a rack in the tin. Sit the hocks on the rack and roast for 30-35 minutes, until the fat is golden and glazed, then remove and leave to rest. Meanwhile, start on the salad. Heat the vinegar in a pan, then pour it over the raisins in a small bowl and leave to soak for five minutes. Mix the vinegar and raisins with the lemon juice, yoghurt, mayo and wholegrain mustard. Using a mandoline (be careful) or the slicing attachment on a food processor, very finely slice the celeriac and apples, then toss in the dressing with the parsley and season generously. Pull the meat from the hocks in bite-size chunks and serve warm or cold with the celeriac salad, either on individual plates as a light first course, or as a canape (rest a little shredded ham on individual chicory leaves and top with the celeriac and apple cut into matchsticks, so they fit in the leaves). An added bonus is that you should have some ham left over to eat cold during the festivities. Burrata, beetroot, beetroot crisps, dukkah, watercress There's an exotic mix of Italian and Middle Eastern flavours going on here. This makes more dukkah than you need here, but the upside is you'll have some ready to sprinkle over all sorts – I particularly like it on eggs and kedgeree. Serves four as a starter, more as a nibble. 6 small beetroot (80g each), trimmed 2 large burrata 100g watercress, washed and dried Seeds from 1 pomegranate Olive oil, for roasting For the dukkah 75g toasted hazelnuts 1 tsp turmeric 2 tsp sesame seeds (a mix of black and white, ideally) 1 tsp nigella seeds 1 ½ tsp cumin seeds, toasted 2 tsp coriander seeds, toasted 1 tsp flaked sea salt For the vinaigrette 2 tbsp good-quality red-wine vinegar Zest and juice of ½ orange ½ tsp caster sugar 2 tbsp chopped parsley leaves 6 tbsp extra-virgin olive oil Heat the oven to 180C/350F/gas mark 4. Put the beetroot in a small pan of cold water, bring to a boil and cook for 45 minutes to an hour, until tender. Meanwhile, put all the vinaigrette ingredients in a clean jam jar, season generously, screw on the lid and shake to emulsify. Once the beetroot is cooked, drain and rub off the skins (wear rubber gloves to protect your hands from both heat and stains). Cut four of the beetroot into quarters, put in a bowl and toss in the vinaigrette while they're still warm. Meanwhile, put the hazelnuts on a baking tray and toast in the oven for five minutes, until pale golden. Grind the remaining dukkah ingredients with a pestle and mortar or spice grinder, then add the nuts and grind into rough crumbs. Very finely slice the remaining two beetroot into rounds (use a mandoline, if you have one) and toss with olive oil, salt and pepper. Lay these on a baking sheet and bake for 10-15 minutes, until starting to crisp. Transfer to a sheet of kitchen towel, to drain off any excess oil. Divide the watercress between four plates and top each portion with half a burrata, four beetroot quarters, a scattering of the beet crisps and some pomegranate seeds. Drizzle over the dressing and sprinkle with dukkah. To turn the dish into a canape, spread the burrata on pitta crisps or crostini, and top with the beets, seeds, a drizzle of dressing and the dukkah. Salt cod fritters with allioli and watercress salad If you can't get hold of salt cod, it's simple to make at home: take a 250g piece of boneless loin or steak, place on a layer of sea salt in a plastic container, cover with more salt, then pop on a lid and refrigerate for up to five days (you can add other flavourings, too: fresh herbs, say, or chopped garlic). Turn the fish every day, pouring off any liquid it gives off, then soak, prepare and cook as below. Salt cod gives these fritters a glorious flavour, but you can also make them with unsalted fish. If need be, you can cheat with the allioli by mixing crushed garlic into top-notch mayo. Makes about 20 fritters, for a canape platter or to serve four to six as a starter. 250g salt cod, soaked in cold water for 24 hours, water changed at least twice 300g floury potatoes (eg maris piper or desiree), peeled and finely sliced (ideally on a mandoline) 2 bay leaves 500-700ml whole milk 1 garlic clove, crushed 1 big handful parsley leaves, finely chopped ½ tsp smoked paprika 2 tsp mustard powder 1 tbsp olive oil 35g plain flour, sieved 2 eggs Sunflower or vegetable oil, to deep fry For the allioli 2 egg yolks 3 garlic cloves, peeled 1 tbsp dijon mustard 2 tsp fresh lemon juice 2 tsp cider vinegar 250ml olive oil 250ml vegetable oil To serve 150g watercress 1 tbsp sherry vinegar 2 tbsp extra-virgin olive oil Lemon wedges, to serve Put the drained cod, potatoes and bay in a pan and cover with milk. Bring to a boil and simmer for four to five minutes, until the fish flakes easily away from the skin. Scoop the fish out of the water and set aside to cool; leave the potatoes to simmer for five to seven minutes more, until almost falling apart. Drain the potatoes, reserving the poaching milk, then mash smooth with a tablespoon or two of the milk. Fork in the flaked fish, garlic, parsley, paprika and mustard powder, and season to taste. Meanwhile, put a tablespoon of oil in a pan and add 150ml water. Bring to a boil, then take off the heat and add the flour, whisking vigorously, until smooth. Beat in the eggs one at a time, until combined, then stir in the salt cod mixture and cook over a low heat for three to four minutes, stirring constantly, until the mix thickens. Spread on a large plate or baking tray, and leave to cool. For the allioli, put the egg yolks, garlic, mustard, lemon and vinegar in a food processor and blitz briefly. With the motor running, add the oil drip by drip, until the mix starts to come together, then add the oil in a thin, steady stream until you have a glossy, smooth mayonnaise. Season to taste, adding a touch more lemon, if you think it needs it. Using two dessertspoons, shape tablespoons of the salt cod mix into quenelles or rounds. Arrange on a plate or oven tray lined with greaseproof paper, cover with clingfilm and refrigerate for at least an hour, to firm up, or overnight. To cook the fritters, fill a wok or heavy-bottomed pan with enough sunflower oil to come 5cm up the sides, then heat to 180C (or until a small cube of bread turns golden in 45 seconds). Gently drop a few fritters into the hot oil – don't overcrowd the pan – and fry for two to three minutes, until golden and crisp. Drain on kitchen towel and serve at once; or make them all in advance and keep warm in a low oven or heat up later in a hot oven. Just before serving, toss the watercress with the vinegar and oil, season and serve with the warm fritters, allioli and lemon wedges. Grilled sesame chicken wings with sticky pomegranate, parsley and shallot salad These are the definition of finger-licking good. Serves four as a first course. 12 chicken wings, tips removed 4 tbsp tahini Juice of 1 lemon 4 tbsp cold water For the marinade 3 garlic cloves, peeled and crushed to a fine paste with ½ tsp salt ½ tsp smoked paprika 1 tsp ground cumin Juice of 1 lemon 3 tbsp tahini 1 tbsp olive oil For the salad Seeds from ½ pomegranate 2 tbsp pomegranate molasses Juice of 1 lemon 1 tbsp olive oil ½ shallot, peeled and finely chopped 1 large bunch flat-leaf parsley, picked Whisk the marinade ingredients in a large bowl and season. Add the wings, rub the mix all over, and refrigerate for half an hour. Meanwhile, whisk the tahini and lemon juice (it will seize up a little), followed by the water, bit by bit, until the mix is the consistency of double cream. Season to taste and set aside. Mix all the salad ingredients except the parsley in a bowl, then season to taste. Grill the wings under a hot grill or on a griddle pan for 20-30 minutes, turning them regularly, until golden and crisp on the outside and the juices run clear. Transfer to a large platter, spoon the sauce over the top, then toss the parsley leaves into the salad, spoon over the wings (or serve on the side) and serve at once. Mini roast new potatoes with ajo blanco dip, sherry vinegar and grapes Ajo blanco is a chilled Spanish soup made with ground almonds and olive oil. Here, I turn it into a rich, silky dressing for tiny potatoes and sweet grapes. Serves eight to 10 as a starter or canape (based on roughly three potatoes per person). 1kg baby potatoes 3 sage leaves 4 tbsp rapeseed or olive oil 1 large pinch flaked sea salt For the ajo blanco 1 large garlic clove, peeled and crushed 125g blanched almonds 50g slice sourdough bread, broken into pieces 1 tsp flaked sea salt 150ml water 150ml extra-virgin olive oil 3-4 tbsp good sherry vinegar, for drizzling 3-4 tbsp extra-virgin olive oil, for drizzling 2 heads red chicory, finely sliced (or 1 large handful frisée lettuce, leaves separated and roughly chopped) 200g green or red grapes, halved 30g lightly toasted flaked almonds Heat the oven to 200C/390F/gas mark 6. Put the potatoes, sage, oil and sea salt in a roasting tin, toss to coat, then roast for 30-40 minutes, until golden, crisp and tender. Meanwhile, blitz the crushed garlic and almonds until the mix is the texture of a very fine crumb and starts to smell strongly of almonds (five or six minutes should do it). Add the bread and salt, blitz again, then, with the motor running, slowly add the water and oil until it is all incorporated: the texture should be somewhere between a hummus and softly whipped cream (it will thicken while it stands, so you will probably need to loosen it with a dash more oil before serving). Season to taste. Put three tablespoons of ajo blanco on each plate and use the back of the spoon to swirl it into a circle. Top with three or four potatoes, drizzle over a teaspoon each of sherry vinegar and oil, and scatter over a few bitter leaves, grapes and almonds. Alternatively, season the soup with a few tablespoons of sherry vinegar, ladle into bowls, decorate with grapes and almonds, and serve the spuds on the side for dipping. Crab salad with Lincolnshire Poacher, paprika and green peppercorn gougères A light crab salad with deeply cheesy, crispy bites. Makes eight large gougères to serve four as a starter, or 18-20 canape-sized ones. 250ml water 80g unsalted butter ½ tsp flaked sea salt 100g plain flour 1 tsp paprika 5 green peppercorns, crushed 4 eggs 130g Lincolnshire Poacher or a mature cheddar cheese, finely grated For the crab 250g white crab meat Zest and juice from 1 lemon 1 big handful parsley leaves, finely chopped ½ red chilli, finely chopped 150g creme fraiche 3 tbsp good extra-virgin olive oil Heat the oven to 200C/390F/gas mark 6, and line two or three baking sheets with greased parchment paper. Mix all the crab ingredients in a bowl and season to taste; add more lemon juice, creme fraiche or oil, if you think it needs it. Put the water, butter and salt in a pan, bring to a boil, then whisk in the flour and spices. Whisk until the roux comes cleanly together into a ball that comes away from the sides of the pan. Leave to cool a little, then beat in one egg until the roux comes back together, then beat in the cheese and the rest of the eggs. Fill a cup with just-boiled water. Dip an ice-cream scoop (or two teaspoons) into the hot water, then scoop out eight large, smooth balls and place on the baking sheet (or 18-20 smaller ones); dip the scoop in the hot water before tackling each new ball. The smoother the gougères are before baking, the better, so to finish, dip a teaspoon into the hot water and run the back of it over each ball. Bake for 30-35 minutes for the larger gougères, or 10-15 minutes for the smaller ones: they should be golden, crisp and light, with an almost hollow and slightly soft centre. (That said, there's nothing wrong with underbaking them a little; they'll just have more gooey cheese and less crunch.) Serve warm from the oven on plates with the salad on the side (or, if you want to get ahead, leave to cool completely on a rack and serve later). To serve these as a canape platter, split open the mini gougères and stuff with the crab mix.

The body of a 30-year-old homeless man was found at the back of a dark loading bay beside the Birmingham New Street railway station car park on Tuesday night, the coldest of winter so far. There are no flowers at the place he died, but the flattened, damp cardboard boxes where he slept are still there, along with a couple of woollen hats and a pair of green socks. The man has not been named and none of the homeless people who sleep on the surrounding streets are quite sure who died. Police say he was a drug user. Charity workers fear his death is the inevitable consequence of radical cuts to homelessness services, which have led to a new rough-sleeping crisis in the city. Alan Fraser, the chief executive of Birmingham YMCA, which has been forced to reduce the number of beds it can offer rough sleepers, said: "We can't say an individual died because of local authority cuts, but the reality is that the risks of people dying because of homelessness at this time of year are massively increased, because people cannot get into the places they need to be in." Previously the organisation was funded to help rough sleepers with addictions, but cuts have made that difficult. "We could have taken people like this man in before. Previously, if he had been given a place, he would have had a key worker who would have got him to a treatment programme. But people like that, with drug problems, we are now – even us – having to say we can't take the risk, we can't risk our safety, their safety and the safety of other residents," Fraser said. Birmingham city council's chief executive, Mark Rogers, also acknowledges that one of the clearest consequences of the reduction in local authority budgets over the past six years is the rise in homelessness. He points to reductions in the funding of the Supporting People programme, which was designed to help people with addictions and mental health problems get into secure accommodation, as a key area of concern. "A very simple indicator of withdrawal of grant funding is the rise in homelessness. Rough sleeping has increased considerably in the city," he said. People who have worked to address homelessness for decades are despondent, because until 2009 and the start of large local authority cuts, huge progress had been made. Department for Communities and Local Government homelessness statistics show that rough sleeping in Birmingham was registered at nine people in autumn 2010, but by 2015 – the last available count – had quadrupled to 36. Outreach workers say these figures are a conservative estimate and note that there has been a further leap in numbers in the past 12 months. Paul Atkin, who has run homelessness charity Reachout Network in the city for 20 years, said: "I have never seen it so bad. The number of people we are seeing on the street in Birmingham is frightening. In 1996, we would see 20 people a night; now, we see four times that amount." Atkin was doing a 6am check of the streets near the railway station to ensure that no rough sleepers had died of hypothermia. By 8am, he and his wife, Jackie, had counted 27 people asleep in the streets around the station; this was a relatively quiet morning, he said. "There are a lot of young women now, which is very alarming. They have cut back everything and these poor people are stuck in a cycle of homelessness. The numbers have snowballed in the past year. There is a massive need and a huge void of available services," he said. In John Bright Street, a council road sweeper was cleaning the area near where the homeless man died, contemplating whether to move a crate and some flattened cardboard that were clearly being used as bedding. He had noticed soaring numbers of people sleeping rough. "There are definitely more. It's got to be double. It is shocking," he said. Fraser said the notion of ending street homelessness had felt "tantalisingly close" in 2009. "It is really bleak because we felt as though we had made vast strides. I wouldn't say we had solved homelessness, but we had got it to manageable levels and made huge progress until 2009. Then the cuts started and since then homelessness has increased," he said. "I've been in this area 25 years. It feels worse now than I have ever seen it. What is all the more depressing is that we know what works and we were doing it and it was having a positive impact. We had got it sussed." In Birmingham there was a pot of £50m for Supporting People programmes, but the money got radically cut back after 2010; there is now £25m–£27m available for the initiative, of which the YMCA receives £320,000. "Now we can only take a small number of high-needs people in each team; you have to be more circumspect about how many you can cope with, so those higher needs people – people with mental health problems or drug and alcohol problems – often end up sleeping rough. If someone comes in with multiple problems, drug and alcohol, history of violence, history of offending, mental health problems, or self-harming, we struggle to take those people," Fraser said. "We haven't got the staff to do door knocks; we don't have the ability to keep them safe and we can't take the risk. It's too dangerous for the safety of other residents. We still take people who would otherwise be homeless, but they tend to have lower needs." Supporting People ceased to be a ringfenced programme in 2009. "From the point that it was unringfenced and went into the general fund, the amounts of money available to spend effectively reduced, because that coincided with general reductions to revenue support grants, so we are spending considerably less on something we still call Supporting People, but isn't a distinct programme any more," Rogers said. The cost of homelessness has emerged in other ways. "Between July and September this year, we have had a 25% increase in the costs we are incurring to support rough sleepers and homeless people," he said. Around the corner from the car park where the man died, Mary, 39, has been sleeping in a doorway near the station for more than a year, since her partner went to prison and she lost her home. She had noticed an increase in homeless people in the past year. "There has been a rise in the number. I don't know why," she said. Hostel workers are clearer about the reasons. Cuts to homelessness services have come at a time of wider welfare reform, and increased used of benefit sanctions – which can push people into debt, and make paying bills impossible – cuts to housing benefit, and the introduction of the bedroom tax and overall benefit cap have all contributed. A homelessness analyst in a large Birmingham housing association, who is about to be made redundant as funding to rough-sleeping projects is reduced, said he was dismayed by how services to resolve homelessness had been cut by the NHS as well as the council. Previously, outreach workers would have been able to call on specialist drug and alcohol teams who could help get people into drug treatment programmes, nurses and mental health workers who specialised in helping the homeless, and housing workers who knew all the hostels and how to access them. Only the housing team remains. "Rough sleeping is back to its peak of where it was about 20 years ago," he said. Tassawar Hussain, the team leader at the YMCA Northfield hostel, is annoyed by volunteer groups that distribute tents and quilts to the homeless. "It doesn't help. It allows them to stay on the streets. You need to be brought into a building," he said. A couple, who have had drug problems in the past, said they were on the streets because of the bedroom tax, which made their three-bedroom house unaffordable, after their daughter was taken into social services' care because of drug use. "It's very depressing. I cry every day. The police keep moving us. Where do they expect us to go?" said Anna, 26, who asked for her real name not to be published. "We're supposed to be getting some help with housing. I don't know if we will." By New Street station, Darren, 38, who has been sleeping rough for two months since losing a place in supported housing (for reasons that are not clear), said he thought there were more people on the streets and he felt increasingly vulnerable. Other people stole his food and money when he was asleep, he said, so he tried to find places where he could sleep underneath security cameras. "I've got schizophrenia. I am supposed to be getting help. I don't get any help," Darren said, holding on to his duvet (greying, with no cover) and a blanket. Once the shops open at about 9am, rough sleepers are moved on. The fear of robbery is justified. Police said on Friday that CCTV images showed that as the unnamed homeless man lay dying, someone came and searched his pockets and may have stolen money from him.

On a warm Wednesday afternoon in July, Samantha Cameron stood on the steps of Downing Street, her three children by her side, while her husband, David, gave his final press statement as prime minister. She blushed as he thanked her for her personal support, described her as "an amazing wife, mother and businesswoman" and praised her work in aid of volunteering. The soon to be former PM's wife did not comment to the waiting journalists, but her departure from No 10 made a statement nonetheless. She was wearing a £1,495 navy and orange dress by Roksanda Ilincic, one of a number of British-based designers whom she had championed during her time in the spotlight. The outfit was perfectly unshowy and appropriate, but the long, exposed zip from its front neckline to hem spoke of something else, a hint of the fashion-forward edginess that she had made her signature. The following day, alongside the political obituaries of her husband, the papers were full of praise for a woman who "in matters of conduct and in all things sartorial" had always been "an ambassador for Britain", and quietly nodded to her own creative imagination. This week we learned what Sam Cam has been up to since. The 45-year-old announced she would launch her own womenswear label early in 2017, with a 40-piece collection for sale through Selfridges and the designer fashion website Net-a-porter. The label, she reveals in an interview with the new edition of Vogue, will be called Cefinn, which draws on the initials of her children, Nancy, Elwen, Florence and Ivan, the couple's first child, who died in 2009. Cameron was careful to wear Zara and M&amp;S as well as McQueen and Erdem during her time in Downing Street. Her own collection will fit somewhere in the middle, not priced at the very highest levels but hardly within the reach of the average hardworking family. Images show smart monochrome separates in black, red and grey; hemlines are discreet, tops often sleeveless. These are clothes for women like her - professional, discreet but body confident (Cameron's "honed by years of regular running and Ashtanga yoga", according to Vogue), and with £300 in the bank to spend on a single item. Cameron may be the first prime ministerial spouse to launch their own fashion line, but the move comes as no surprise to friends of the couple, who say this has always been central to her ambitions for life after Downing Street – even if the couple found themselves packing up earlier than either would have wished. "The fact is that she has always wanted to do this," says a close family friend. "I have known them both pretty well for 20 years, and she has often talked about this. Like any woman, she has had the priority of her children, and certainly after Ivan's death they really did want to make sure that the family came first. Then when David became prime minister, it was difficult for her to consider doing anything like this. "But I've often gone round on a Saturday morning, popped in for a cup of coffee, and you'll find that she's sitting at the kitchen table sketching things and looking at things. It's part of her life. So there is nothing surprising to anybody who knows the family – this is a long-term wish." Certainly fashion and retail are in her blood. Samantha Gwendoline Sheffield was born in 1971, the elder daughter of Sir Reginald Sheffield, a wealthy baronet and landowner, and the former Annabel Jones, now Viscountess Astor, a 60s It Girl and jewellery designer who started her first business at 17 and later opened the upmarket furnishing label Oka. Her younger sister, Emily, is deputy editor at Vogue; the home furnishing designer Cath Kidston is a first cousin. Samantha studied fine art at Bristol Poly, then moved into fashion, starting as a window dresser at the luxury stationery and leather brand Smythson before rising to be its creative director. She was credited with turning a slightly dusty notepaper brand into a serious player in the lucrative luxury handbag market. The "Nancy" bag was named after her daughter. In 2010, after she discovered she was pregnant again following the trauma of Ivan's death, and after her husband was elected prime minister, she stepped down to a consultancy role at Smythson, working two days a week but making clear she intended to stay very involved. Though described as less intimidating than her formidable mother, friends say she has inherited all of Annabel's business smarts. "They both have that rare mix of being extremely good at business but without being like those aggressive, killer women who try to get on by elbowing everyone aside," the designer Jane Churchill told her husband's biographers. "They do things themselves and just get on with it." It seems clear the six-year pause to live at Downing Street – a "very odd" life, she tells Vogue – was not something she particularly relished, but Cameron was eager to use her role to support key sectors, notably British fashion design as an ambassador for London fashion week. Industry insiders enjoyed discreet receptions at Downing Street, while young designers such as Emilia Wickstead and Jonathan Saunders saw their profiles boosted when she chose to wear their clothes. But "at the end of the day, I was there as [David's] wife," she says. "It wasn't my gig." Her own ambitions were very explicitly on hold, rather than being set aside altogether. She had always made her own clothes, she tells the magazine, but in 2011, after Florence was born, she hired a professional designer to teach her pattern cutting. The dining table at 11 Downing Street was set up with her sewing machine and she would spend evenings knocking up samples while listening to BBC Radio 6 Music. Her husband, who met Samantha when she was an undergraduate and has been manifestly besotted ever since, has been "absolutely glowing with pride, it's the most touching thing," since news of the label broke this week, according to the family friend. "You used to say to him: 'Come for a walk,' and he would say: 'I'm very sorry, I've got a big, high-powered meeting on.' Now he's doing the babysitting. They are totally equal in the relationship, absolutely." Cefinn has a staff of five, including a pattern cutter and a machinist, but the driving force is Cameron herself, insists the friend, who says she has been "absolutely flat out" since leaving Downing Street. "She is learning an enormous amount at an enormous rate, and she is doing it all herself. Every bit of design is hers. She is not employing [designers] who then use her brand. This is Sam's stuff, these are Sam's clothes, these are the things Sam likes. It's very much a personal thing." Sam Cam's highs and lows Born: 18 April 1971 Career: Fine art graduate and fashion obsessive who rose to become creative director of the luxury stationery and leather brand Smythson, some years before her husband rose to become prime minister. High point: Vanity Fair named her one of the world's best dressed women in 2015, the same year as her husband was re-elected to Downing Street. Low point: The couple's first child, Ivan, who was born with severe disabilities, died in 2009 at the age of six. His mother has said the pain will never leave her. She says: "The public scrutiny [of being the prime minister's wife] wasn't something I particularly yearned for. I don't feel relaxed or like I can be myself in the spotlight." They say: "This image of her as the quiet, doting wife ... She's actually very tough, in the nicest possible way. When she decides to do something, there is nothing that will stop her doing it" – friend Venetia Butterfield.

Ok everyone. I will be heading off now, but please feel free to continue the discussion below the line. Thanks all! Email over thoughts and suggestions about this feature if you have any (sarah.marsh@theguardian.com) They are always welcome! I had one of those moments parents dread this week. Just as I was putting the kids to bed my eldest, aged 7, asked "Does Father Christmas really bring us the presents, or is it you and mummy who get them?" The question took me aback, and I'm afraid my reply was the rather unconvincing fluff of "Well, what do you think? It's magic." She said to me "Look me in the face and say that, so I can see if you are lying." I was most conscious though that this was all in earshot of her 3-year-old brother. It's been my policy not to lie to my children about anything. If they've asked where babies come from or questions about religion they get a very biological or honest answer. "Well some people believe Jesus was the son of God. But daddy doesn't believe that." However, Father Christmas, the Easter Bunny and the Tooth Fairy all make an appearance in our household - which I guess makes me a bit of a hypocrite on the honesty front. I was pleased today to find out I'm not alone, here is a lovely little collection of what parents tell their kids about Santa which is well worth your time. The idea that NHS treatment should be denied or delayed for people who can be blamed for their condition is poisonous. It will lead to the end of an NHS founded on the principle that treatment is free for all, when they need it, regardless of their status, their worth, their morals, their state of mind. It didn't surprise me that lot of smug people wrote comments after my piece praising the Vale of York NHS, backed by Downing Street, for putting obese people and smokers to the back of the queue. People like to feel good about themselves by imagining they are superior to others, the unlucky, the addicted, or the unworthy. Which of us, really, is so virtuous? Let's have empathy and support for the people who need it most when they are ill and treat everyone according to need. Forget Sam-Cam's fashion range, one reader has other ideas ... Samantha Cameron's intention to launch her own fashion label has been the worst-kept secret in fashion. This week it was confirmed with an announcement that the Cefinn brand will go on sale early next year. So far, all we have to go on are two outfits, and the fact that the brand logo is eyebrow-raisingly close to the Celine font. More details will be in the January issue of Vogue, which is out on Monday. But the news got me thinking: why is it that we are so fascinated by the wardrobes of public figures? And what does using a spell in Downing Street as a launchpad for a fashion or lifestyle brand say about modern politics? Another view on those bank notes from the comments The nation's wombs were a battleground this week, as the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists recommended that sufferers of severe pre-menstrual syndrome (PMS) should be offered cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT). The severe form of PMS affects about 2% of women, and is defined by psychological symptoms that interfere with work, school performance or relationships. According to the experts, CBT is a more effective treatment than antidepressants. Which sounds fair enough. But, of course, no. Along with some fierce debate about the physical v psychological root of the issue, some interesting cultural questions were raised. Are we failing women by not treating PMS seriously? Are we trying to pathologise womanhood? Can our cash-strapped NHS afford to offer this kind of treatment? Can it afford not to? Do talking therapies work anyway? Can we have one damn story about periods that doesn't prompt a load of sexist, sniggering comments? Let's hear your thoughts... Campaigners are putting pressure on the Bank Of England, urging it make the new £5 note vegan friendly. The response from the Australian pioneer of the polymer bank note? Well, he says they are being "stupid". Many readers don't agree, and feel the bank should be more sympathetic – and perhaps more transparent. But some of you are pointing out just how little of the material is in the notes. What do you think? Share your thoughts below. We talked lunch this week, something that – perhaps because this feature runs around midday on a Friday – often comes up below the line. More specifically, it was the office lunches and your feelings towards your colleagues' habits that turned cogitation to conversation. One comment that resonated with many was this, which talks of presenteeism culture invading the lunch hour. Working during your lunch hour? This commenter agreed that this was the problem to tackle rather than stray odours. And also away from the whiffs of reheated dinners, the sound ... What do you think? Do you agree that we shouldn't be eating at our desks? What foods go too far if you are chowing down above the keyboard? Share your thoughts in the comments. Today's political news might be all about the Liberal Democrats' win in Richmond Park, but next week a byelection happens in very different political territory. The Sleaford and North Hykeham constituency is in the Brexit heartland of Lincolnshire, and 62% of people in the relevant local authority area voted to leave the EU (in Richmond, 70% supported remain). As part of the Anywhere But Westminster series, I went there not to cover the electoral race – this is a very safe Tory seat – but to find out how the aftershocks of the EU referendum were playing out far from the capital. With my journo partner John Domokos, I found a deep generational divide, lots of Brexit voters who wanted the UK to get out of Europe as a matter of urgency, and also something much more complicated and challenging: a deep, emotional link between support for Brexit and strong feelings about the decline of community and solidarity, and simple loneliness. For anyone who thinks the leave vote was essentially reducible to nastiness and xenophobia, this film may serve as some kind of corrective; more generally, we think it's not a bad picture of a very troubled England, and leave and remain voters united by one key thing – a pronounced fear of the future (oh. and some of what it explores probably also applies to Trump voters). Some are looking not only to Richmond, but to Sleaford, Lincolnshire, where there will be a byelection next week. Here's one of your views on that Richmond Park byelection: You can get involved in the discussion below. Our colleague James Walsh has been speaking to readers in the Richmond Park constituency, resulting in this piece which is worth a read: What does the Lib Dem victory in Richmond mean? Could a pro-EU message take a swathe of seats from the Tories? This graph by pollster James Kanagasooriam suggests that around 20-25 seats have enough people who voted Remain to overturn the Tory majority from 2015, so would be vulnerable to a similar swing – even without any drop in Tory popularity more generally. The question then becomes, can Labour take advantage? The Lib Dems are well placed – there are very few loyalists not in favour of staying the EU. Labour has a whole other problem with a swathe of northern Labour seats with large leave majorities. If Corbyn pivoted to an anti-Brexit, block Article 50 position he might win over a few Tory seats, but he'd surely leave the north exposed to Ukip's message that Labour is out of touch. That it wants to defy the will of the people and simple doesn't understand what its base wants. It's a pickle for the Labour leadership to be sure – and one that is unlikely to be easily solved, which means the Liberal Democrats will be the only progressive party able to take advantage of the Brexit schism in the country. If they take enough seats from the Tories, and Labour can hold on to what they've got at the next general election a progressive coalition government could be a possibility – which I would suggest makes the chances of an early election slim. The risk is simply too great for a prime minister with a small majority and a reputation for playing it safe. You've been sharing more vews in response to the question of sleep in the comments. Are we telling our bodies to do something totally unnatural? This week a report claimed that poor sleep costs the UK £40bn a year. People sleep badly, go into work, and with foggy heads do their best. But, whatever your job, such days are less productive than they should be. If only we could all sleep seven to nine hours a night, the UK would be wealthier. (The figures also showed a sharp impact of sleeplessness on productivity in the US, Japan, Canada and Germany.) Some companies provide napping areas. Others try to make the workplace feel homely. But isn't the real problem the endlessness of the working day, now revolving tirelessly around a world clock, the greed with which work wants to swallow the rest of our lives, so we stare at our smartphones when we should be sipping camomile and reading Marilynne Robinson? Do you, like this reader, remember better times? Share your thoughts below. We look forward to getting started. This is a space for our readers to discuss the week's news and comment articles, with input from writers above the line. It's been an eventful week, and we will talk about everything from the sleeplessness epidemic to the Richmond byelection. Join us now – and if you have any questions or comments about this feature get in touch (sarah.marsh@theguardian.com)

The plan was simple. To spend the first night of our Islay pilgrimage sleeping in the open on Eileach-an-Naoimh (Rock of the Saints) among the 6th century monks' hermit cells. We had decanted our kit from the rubber dinghy, explored the island, seen the saint's grave and watched as Guy Grieve from The Ethical Shellfish Company anchored his fishing boat in a place of shelter. The sun shone, the sea pinks waved in the slight breeze. We looked over the still waters to Mull. We were content. Then came the midges. Insistent vicious clouds of them. We slept that night among the diesel fumes in the tiny hold under Guy's wheelhouse, safely off shore, insect bites and disappointment soothed by a supper of scallops and Lagavulin whisky. Film-maker Howard Sooley and I have gardened together for 10 years, creating two beautiful biodynamic allotments. We have travelled through India for the Observer, seen the burning ghats of Varanasi and watched wild Durga Puja celebrations in Kolkata. We met Guy Grieve when we made a fish cookbook for London's J Sheekey restaurant. It was deep Hebridean winter, out on his rip, watching as he dived 30m down in the cold dark waters off the isle of Mull. Among the top three things I will ever eat are the scallops he pulled from the sea that day, eaten raw off a knife blade, sitting precariously on slippery black seaweeded rock. Another obsession Howard and I share is the landscape and peated whiskies of Islay (I have a cask hunkered down in a bonded warehouse behind the Port Charlotte Hotel that I worry over like an anxious parent.) Their names conjure magic: Caol Ila and Ardbeg among others. For five years now we have wanted to come into Islay from Mull by fishing boat, celebrating its scallops and whisky, twin tastes of the Hebridean sea. This summer, on the occasion of the Lagavulin distillery's 200th birthday it finally came together. This film marks the trip. The world's best seafood. The world's best whisky. Shared with friends. Cheers. With thanks to Lagavulin Scotch Whisky for supporting travel and accommodation while on Islay.

TV Captive (available 9 December) Captive could well be crowned this Christmas's Making a Murderer-style sleeper hit. Made by the Oscar-winning producers of Man on Wire and Searching for Sugar Man, it's a slick documentary series about hostage situations, explained by the people who lived through them. Every one is an eye-opener, from the prison riot in Ohio (told by Muslim and Aryan Brotherhood prisoners, and the warden they waged war against) to a Coca-Cola kidnap in Brazil and the retired couple held hostage for over a year by Somali pirates. Hip-hop Evolution (available now) First shown on HBO, this four-part documentary about the birth of hip-hop stars everyone from Chuck D to Grandmaster Flash, Russell Simmons and LL Cool J. Trollhunters (available 23 December) Guillermo del Toro's animated series about a teenager who accidentally finds the Amulet of Daylight, which turns him into a – you guessed it – champion Trollhunter. And if he refuses his new role, trolls will destroy the whole human world. Dirk Gently's Holistic Detective Agency Elijah Wood stars in this goofy sci-fi detective tale based on Douglas Adams' novel of the same name. Christmas catchup TV The Crown After this annus horribilis, forget the Queen's speech on Christmas day and spend 10 hours in the company of Claire Foy's Her Madge instead. Guaranteed, there'll be more intrigue, more gaffes – and more sex (both horse and human). Gilmore Girls: A Year in the Life It's frosty outside and the world has swiftly become a disaster zone. Why not watch the four new feature-length episodes about Rory and Lorelai, the fast-talking, wise-cracking mother-daughter duo? It's a beautifully wrapped gift, after all. Last Chance U You needn't have even the vaguest grasp of American football to get hooked on this inspiring sports documentary (I'm speaking as someone who doesn't – and who has.) If you have yet to meet Ronald Ollie and Miss Wagner and Coach Buddy Stephens, please head straight to Scooba, Mississippi and join them. Festive films Barry (available 16 December) It's Obama: the College Years. This captivating biopic, with one of the finest final scenes of any film this year, explores how the only black kid in the class rose to become the first black president. Home Alone and Home Alone 2: Lost in New York (available now) Chris Columbus's burglary Crimbo classic. Get nostalgic with Kevin McAllister, the Wet Bandits and John Candy as the "polka king of the mid-west". Plus, if you make it to the second instalment, a cameo from Donald Trump. Jingle All the Way (available now) Arnie's Christmas movie. Need I say more.

TV The Grand Tour (new episodes every Friday) What Clarkson did next. The troublesome trio's big-money banter-fuelled trip around the world continues at a petrol-guzzling pace. Are they still firing on all cylinders? And can they keep up their apparent attack on the BBC? Find out every Friday at midnight. Mozart in the Jungle (available 9 December) A comedy about the highs and lows of a New York symphony orchestra doesn't sound like a surefire hit, but as it enters its third series Mozart in the Jungle is an increasing delight – thanks mainly to Gael García Bernal's turn as eccentric conductor Rodrigo de Souza. The neurotic musicians who bed-hop and pill-pop around the city help too. The Man in the High Castle (available 12 December) AKA the show that started out as an alternative history fantasy, but increasingly looks like a disturbing vision of our future. Set in a world in which Germany and Japan won the second world war and now rule over the United States, this is a paranoid dream of a show in which no one can be trusted and only the mysterious Man in the High Castle – a collector of propaganda films showing the Allied forces in victory – offers a sliver of hope. And in series two, we will finally meet the man himself. Christmas catchup TV Transparent The drama about the Pfefferman family is now on its third series, and it's as exquisite, funny and painful as ever. Plus: this season comes with an added Caitlyn Jenner cameo. The Path This eye-popping show about a green smoothie-drinking, "truth and light"-seeking Meyerist cult follows Moonie member Eddie (Aaron Paul) as he goes through a crisis of faith. Drink the strange smoothie and get on board. Halt and Catch Fire The cracking 80s tech drama – a gripping, geeky world of punks, gamers and ham-radio operators – had such a phenomenal third series that its network, AMC, just had to give it the green light for a fourth and final run. I urge you to watch this. Good Girls Revolt It's 1969 in New York, and inside News of the Week magazine, the women aren't allowed to write, or take any credit for all their work – so they rise up against the all-male editorial team. Based on Nora Ephron's real-life rebellion, Good Girls Revolt is certain to rile you up. And it's a reminder that the war still ain't over. Ripper Street Charming, gripping and daft, the final series of the remarkable Victorian crime thriller is available to view here way before it'll air on the BBC. Mr Robot You can now watch both seasons of the drama about the f.soc hacking collective and the impending demise of US capitalist society – which, let's face it, feels more timely than ever. Festive film guide The Wizard of Oz (available now) Have your kids not yet followed the yellow brick road? Then they must meet Dorothy, Toto, Glinda and the munchkin gang – and this Christmas is surely the time to start. Always a magical experience. Meet Me in St Louis (available now) "Clang clang clang went the trolley, ding ding ding went the bell" ... Vincente Minnelli's much-loved 1944 musical is still as wonderful as ever. You will never tire of Judy Garland singing Have Yourself a Merry Little Christmas. The Polar Express (available now) In this very sweet animation, a boy doubts Santa's existence on Christmas Eve, so he gets swept away on a train to the North Pole to meet the big guy. Happy Feet 2 (available 3 December) More fun with the all-singing, all-dancing emperor penguin colony. Gone with the Wind (available 8 December) The 1939 classic about Scarlett O'Hara and Rhett Butler is as powerful, mad, dreamlike (and politically grotesque) as ever. Westworld (available 8 December) Been binge-watching the brilliantly twisting show about the wild west theme park in the future? Obsessed with Maeve and the Man in Black? Then see how it matches up to the original Michael Crichton/Yul Brynner outing from 1973. Dheepan (available 8 December) A powerful, masterful Palme d'Or-winner from Jacques Audiard about a trio of Tamil refugees living in Paris. Argo (available 20 December) Ben Affleck's Oscar-winning comedy about a fake film shoot sponsored by the CIA to rescue American office-workers taken hostage in Tehran.

The release of the professor watchlist, purporting to expose professors who discriminate against conservative students, is anything but that. I should know: I'm on it. As one of a handful of religion professors in the US who study, write and teach about conservative Christianity and politics, I am all too aware of the real meaning of the list, and of its purpose. Promoted by Turning Point USA, the list is not simply designed to expose professors who discriminate; it is designed to silence and smear. And it helps feed information and screeds to similar sites like the College Fix and Campus Reform, which states that they are "a watchdog to the nation's higher education system" to "expose bias and abuse on the nations college campuses". Charles Kirk, a young leader in conservative politics, who is the publisher of the list and co founder of Turning Point USA, stated that he hopes that the professor watchlist will change campus culture by highlighting previously reported incidences and statements. It very well might. Turning Point USA has chapters on over 300 college campuses across the United States, and even more on high school campuses. For a group claiming to be a watchdog to higher education, the organization is training students from high school in how to not engage their education critically, but to combat anything or anyone that does not promote or teach with a conservative viewpoint. It is an all-out bid to control not only academic freedom in the university setting, but to create a hostile climate for free speech and academic freedom. Rightwing organizations like Turning Point USA or Leadership Institute spend considerable amounts of money and time to train students with conservative values how to "fight back". Their efforts on campuses not only promote conservative values but also feed the large right-wing media complex – sites like Town Hall and Breitbart. Many of the articles that are published by College Reform end up being reported by other outlets within hours, and in some cases, picked up by Fox News. Professors targeted remain blissfully unaware until their inbox fills with hate mail, and the administration has to field calls from media outlets and disgruntled conservatives. Many professors and university officials do not know that these organizations, populated by their own students, exist. They are left flatfooted when lists like the Professor Watchlist appear, because these organizations are not only about promoting the idea that university education is hostile to conservatism, but also to get the maximum amount of exposure for their beliefs. For tenured professors like myself, the Professor Watchlist is an annoyance that takes away from research, teaching and time with students. For professors on the tenure track, or lecturers who are trying to keep a contract job, being named on the professor watchlist could mean diminished opportunities for their careers if colleges and universities do not understand the purpose and nature of these groups. These types of attempts to influence campus culture and teaching are disturbing. It creates an environment where the very idea and understanding of academic freedom and first amendment rights are called into question – not only by students, but also by well-funded outsiders with agendas. It also creates an environment of distrust. Students are being trained not only to report on professors, but on student events as well. At the University of Pennsylvania, a campus event the day after the presidential election in a dorm to provide a "breathing space" was reported on by a student who mocked the presence of coloring books, cats and dogs. This type of "reporting" is Orwellian. Yet there are students in our midst on campuses who feel that that they need to report on, rather than engage with, other perspectives. The irony of all of this is that while I am on the Professor Watchlist, I am probably one of the few professors in America who encourages the students who take my Religious Right in America course to attend conferences like CPAC and Values Voters Summit. No one censors my class when I ask students to watch clips of Ronald Reagan, Phyllis Schalfly or William F Buckley. I can teach a course like Religious Right in America at the University of Pennsylvania because of the institution's commitment to academic freedom and discourse. So when groups like Turning Point USA say that I should be watched because I am advancing a radical agenda in the lecture hall, maybe I should. I'm teaching about their organizations, and how conservatives think. Radical indeed.

George Osborne has defended earning £320,000 in five speeches since being sacked as chancellor in July, saying he is behaving no differently from his predecessors. In an interview with the Guardian in Liverpool about his plans to close the north-south divide by continuing to build his "northern powerhouse" from the backbenches, Osborne said he did not think people hit by austerity measures would consider his extra-curricular earnings unfair. "When I left No 11 unemployment had never been lower in the north, there were more people in work here, incomes were rising, the country was obviously not in crisis any more economically," he claimed. Osborne was replaced by Philip Hammond, once his deputy as shadow chancellor, who has since ditched his predecessor's economic targets and accepted that the deficit would grow, rather than fall, in the light of the UK's vote to leave the European Union. When the Hammonds moved into Downing Street, Osborne signed up with the same US agency as Tony Blair, the Washington Speakers Bureau, and embarked on a summer speaking tour. The most lucrative engagements were two events for the investment bank JP Morgan, for which he received £81,174 and £60,578, a speech for Palmex Derivatives (£80,240), and another for the Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association (£69,992). He said on Friday: "As a member of parliament I disclose all my earnings. These are relatively new rules. I think it's quite right that people can see what I do and what I am paid and so on. It's not different from what previous chancellors have done, Labour and Conservative. The difference is that it's disclosed. And I think that's a positive step forward." None of his constituents in Tatton, Cheshire, had challenged him on his non-parliamentary earnings, he added. Osborne's biography on the bureau's website says he "oversaw major reforms: the regeneration of the north of England through the northern powerhouse; forging a new relationship with China; and an overhaul of the UK pension and welfare systems". Speaking before a meeting in Liverpool of his new business-led thinktank, the Northern Powerhouse Partnership (NPP), Osborne acknowledged the project was still in its infancy. "It's early days but there is real excitement in the north and if I can sustain it through the partnership I have created, through the meetings we have been having, through my voice in the House of Commons, that's a good thing. As chancellor of the exchequer – here we are in a great maritime city – I was able to launch the ship down the slipway, if you like." Launching the NPP in September, Osborne told the BBC that Theresa May had had "a wobble" over whether to continue with the northern powerhouse idea. But he now insists that his successor is dedicated to the project, pointing to Hammond's northern powerhouse strategy published with last month's autumn statement. "If the northern powerhouse depends on one chancellor of the exchequer being in office, or one government being in office, it is not going to endure," he said. "The reason I created the Northern Powerhouse Partnership and chose this – of all the various things I could have done with my political energy on leaving office – was because it's got to be owned in the north, it's got to be sustained in the north of England, it's got to be able to endure changes of administration." It was not frustrating having to invent a thinktank to lobby the government when he had so recently controlled the nation's finances, Osborne insisted. "One of the things you learn is there are lots of ways to shape the debate about how our country is run. And of course if you are sitting in No 11 Downing Street you are a very powerful figure in that debate. But you can also shape the debate in the way I think I can, as a backbench MP, by creating this partnership with local Labour leaders in Liverpool, Sheffield, Manchester and the like, and with big businesses such as Unilever." Osborne said he was still trying to understand why so much of the north of England wanted to leave the EU – though not his own constituency, he stressed, which narrowly voted 51.2% to stay. But he said that people in the smaller, industrial towns and city outskirts may have felt left out as the city centres boomed. He said: "I think one of the big challenges we have got ahead is that there has been an amazing revival in these city centres in the north over the last 20 years but the industrial towns in between and the suburbs have felt, I think, a bit left behind. There have been a lot of good government initiatives from all governments to revive the waterfront, to rebuild the docks, but go a bit further out from the city and people I think feel that they haven't seen enough of the economic growth of the country." He added: "We are leaving the EU and the challenge now is to make sure that in the economic cost we pay for that the price is not paid by some of the poorest people who feel already that the system is not working for them." The former chancellor suggested that the deal May had offered to Nissan, which persuaded the Japanese car manufacturer to stay in Sunderland and build two new models there, should be extended to every business. He said: "If the government was saying to Nissan, 'we want to make sure we have the freest possible trade with the EU with no tariffs and no obstacles' and it was on the basis that Nissan stayed then we should be offering that deal to the entire British economy, not just to Nissan." This article was amended on 3 December 2016 to clarify that Tony Blair is on the Washington Speakers Bureau's books, but it is not his agency.

An age seems to have passed since Manchester City hammered Chelsea 3-0 in the corresponding fixture last season that featured John Terry being hauled off at half-time and which came in the wake of José Mourinho's dispute with club doctor, Eva Carneiro. While that defeat proved an omen of the demise of Mourinho and his champions, Chelsea arrive as leaders and a point better off than City, which means a draw would be a fine result for them. Expect both teams, though, to go for what would be a statement victory. Jamie Jackson Kick-off Saturday 12.30pm Venue Etihad Stadium Last season Manchester City 3 Chelsea 0 Live Sky Sports 1 Referee Anthony Taylor This season G11, Y39, R0, 3.55 cards per game Odds H 6-5 A 5-2 D 5-2 Manchester City Subs from Caballero, Gunn, Fernando, Nolito, Sané, Clichy, Iheanacho, Maffeo, Adarabioyo, Tasende, Garcia, Navas, Sagna, Delph Doubtful Delph (match fitness) Injured Kompany (knee, Jan) Suspended None Form DDWDWW Discipline Y25 R1 Leading scorer Agüero 10 Chelsea Subs from Begovic, Eduardo, Ivanovic, Zouma, Aina, Fàbregas, Van Ginkel, Oscar, Loftus-Cheek, Willian, Chalobah, Batshuayi Doubtful Van Ginkel, Zouma (both match fitness) Injured Mikel (muscle strain, 10 Dec), Terry (gluteal strain, 17 Dec) Suspended None Form WWWWWW Discipline Y28 R0 Leading scorer Costa 10

Police are investigating a tweet calling for someone to "Jo Cox" the Conservative MP Anna Soubry. The murder of the Labour MP Cox by an extreme rightwing terrorist raised concerns about parliamentarians' security and the level of abuse they have directed at them. On Friday morning a Twitter user by the name of Michael posted: "Someone jo cox Anna sourby please [sic]." Soubry, the MP for Broxtowe in Nottinghamshire, was a remain supporter in the EU referendum, like Cox. She replied: "Take it that wasn't a spelling mistake. You're a sad cowardly troll." The account has since been deleted but Soubry later posted a screenshot of the offending tweet, with the comment: "This is what has happened to our politics. Tolerance &amp; free speech must prevail." She told BBC Nottinghamshire that she was "very disturbed" by the tweet and confirmed that she had reported it to Nottinghamshire police as well as the parliamentary authorities. She said the message was the second of two death threats she had received in a week. "Somebody had rung the office on Wednesday and made a number of threats to harm me in the same way that Jo Cox was harmed ... so we reported that," she said. Soubry added: "It's almost as if Jo was never murdered. "It's surreal actually, that that terrible and dreadful event has almost been erased and we have gone back to the language, we have gone back to the way of doing politics which we all promised we wouldn't after Jo was murdered. "The abuse on Twitter has gone back up again from almost all sides – from both the left and the extreme right – and it all needs to stop." There was an outpouring of support from across the political divide. The Westminster SNP leader Angus Robertson was among those who urged the police to investigate. Thomas Mair was last week sentenced to prison for the rest of his life for the murder of Cox. He repeatedly shot and stabbed her in an attack during the EU referendum campaign in June. While attacking her he said: "This is for Britain," "Keep Britain independent," and "Britain first," the court heard. A spokesman for Nottinghamshire police said: "We have received reports of threats made to an individual. "Nottinghamshire police takes reports of this nature very seriously and an investigation is under way."

Sam Twiston-Davies's search for a winner continued fruitlessly here on Friday, as even a late switch from Exeter's abandoned meeting to ride Ballyandy, the 11-10 favourite for the feature event, could not seal his first success since 9 October. Ballyandy ran well but he had no answer to the late, determined challenge of Messire Des Obeaux in the Grade Two Neptune Novice Hurdle and the winner could well develop into a realistic contender for a Grade One event at the Cheltenham Festival in March. Messire Des Obeaux will certainly appreciate the hill at Cheltenham. He seemed to be running for third place behind Ballyandy and Cultivator with two hurdles still to jump. Neither could find a turn of foot to put the race to bed, however, and Messire Des Obeaux stayed on so strongly from the last that he surged past to record a half-length success with more authority than the margin might suggest. Messire Des Obeaux was stepping up from a win in handicap company last time, and was also giving 7lb to Ballyandy, who has now failed to win in three starts over hurdles having run into a very useful opponent every time. "I thought between the last two that we'd run very well and we were going to be a good third," Alan King, the winner's trainer, said. "And then he's knuckled down really well. He's not had a lot of racing and that's probably the first time he's had the gun put to his head really. "Hopefully he'll come on again and giving 7lb [to Ballyandy], it's a good performance. We've always thought he was very good, but I was under no illusions, I thought this was a cracking Winter Hurdle, I've won it a few times but to me this is the most depth that there's been in the race. "He's big and rangy and he's hopefully going to get better. There's only one thing putting me off the [Grade One] Challow Hurdle [next time], and that's that my three previous winners of this have gone to the Challow and been lapped, so I'll have to see. But it would seem the obvious place to go, and he'd be better again on even softer ground." Both Ballyandy and Messire Des Obeaux are quoted at around 20-1 for the Neptune Novice Hurdle in March, and though on this evidence it is the latter who makes much more appeal, there is also a chance that he could step up in trip to the three-mile Albert Bartlett Novice Hurdle. "If he didn't go to [the Challow at] Newbury, he'd go to Warwick for the Leamington [Novice Hurdle]," King said. "I wouldn't be surprised if, come March, we're looking at the three-miler." Getting a first win over hurdles into Ballyandy is turning into a frustrating task for Nigel Twiston-Davies, and the trainer was also thwarted on Friday when The New One, one of the best British-trained hurdlers of recent seasons, was denied a first run over fences when overnight frost forced the abandonment of the meeting at Exeter. Exeter was called off in time for The New One to take up an engagement in the Grade One Henry VIII Novice Chase at Sandown on Saturday, but he was not among the final declarations and is now likely to make his first start of the season over hurdles, probably in the International Hurdle at Cheltenham's meeting next weekend. The New One took the Grade One event in 2013 and 2014. "It is very frustrating he didn't run at Exeter. He had been absolutely superb at home and had not missed a bit," Twiston-Davies said on Friday. "We were very tempted to go for the Henry VIII, but he has been such a loyal servant we thought, why do that first time out over fences? What we intend on doing is to have a big look at the International Hurdle. It is a race he has won twice before and it is worth £130,000. If he was to win that then he may stay over hurdles, but I would still like to go over fences at some point."

What's going for it? I have deeply etched childhood memories of Rye. We came here often, Mum and Dad perhaps harbouring fantasies of moving to its medieval streets when we won the pools. Now I come here often, accompanied by much the same vain hopes. In the intervening four decades, little has altered, bar the arrival of boutique hotels, boutique cinemas and better coffee. Rye, after all, has been around the block and seen it all before, even unruly, egocentric demagogues striding across the globe. (This was once a command centre against Napoleon's potential invasion.) You'd think Rye's prettiness would be its undoing. But no. Even the annual deluge of summer tourists fails to dent its astonishing character. This is a town, though, best approached in winter, hunkered down, hatches battened against the maritime gusts, with the sun low over Camber Sands and a flaming log or two in the fireplace at the George. The case against Read the Mapp &amp; Lucia novels. Occasional tweeness. A few too many gift shops. Preserved, but when a place looks this good... Well connected? Trains: Hastings (18 mins), Ashford (22 mins), Eastbourne (44 mins) and Brighton (1hr 25 mins); changing at Ashford, you can be at London St Pancras in 1hr 23 mins. Driving: tricky; the A259 coast road is twisty and busy; 30 mins to Hastings, or Ashford and the M20. Schools Primaries: Rye Community and nearby St Michael's CofE are "good", Ofsted says. Secondaries: Rye College is "good". Hang out at... The delightful new cinema, the Kino, followed by a snifter at the George or Ypres Castle. Lots of choice for dinner, from the Ambrette to the Landgate to fish and chips. Where to buy Anywhere you can. Caught between marshes and the Weald, Rye huddles tightly round its hilltop. Everywhere is lovely, though the A259 circling the town can get cloggy, with consequences for the houses lining it. There are few opportunities for sprawling suburbans; a few around Military Road or Playden. Rye Harbour is worth a look, too. Large detacheds and town houses, £500,000-£1.4m. Detacheds and smaller town houses, £350,000-£500,000. Semis, £240,000-£450,000. Terraces and cottages, £200,000-£350,000. Rentals: a one-bedroom flat, £700pcm; a three-bedroom house, £1,100pcm. Bargain of the week I'll race you for this one. Listed, two-bedroom terrace house, needing modernisation, £265,000 with Phillips &amp; Stubbs, phillipsandstubbs.co.uk. From the streets Phil Law "A welcoming haven for writers and creatives, but it's impossible to buy anything useful as it's all coffee shops and chintz." Timothy Gorman "The Standard Inn, renovated a couple of years ago: excellent food, log fires, local beers, lovely staff, beautiful accommodation." Neil Murphy "Lots of second-homers and tourists." Do you live in Rye? Join the debate below. Live in Streatham, south London? Do you have a favourite haunt or a pet hate? If so, email lets.move@theguardian.com by Tuesday 6 December.

Both of these sides suffered midweek defeats in the EFL Cup but Arsenal will be confident of maintaining their title challenge. News that Santi Cazorla requires surgery on an ankle injury is a blow but Arsène Wenger's side have not lost in the league since the opening day, while West Ham are a point above the bottom three. Although Andy Carroll is available, Aaron Cresswell and Michail Antonio are out. Jacob Steinberg Kick-off Saturday 5.30pm Venue London Stadium Last season West Ham United 3 Arsenal 3 Live BT Sport 1 Referee Craig Pawson This season G8, Y24, R1, 3.25 cards per game Odds H 7-2 A 4-5 D 3-1 West Ham United Subs from Adrián, Spiegel, Arbeloa, Collins, Ayew, Feghouli, Nordtveit, Zaza, Carroll Doubtful None Injured Antonio (groin, 11 Dec), Cresswell (groin, 11 Dec), Töre (thigh, 17 Dec), Sakho (hamstring, Jan), Byram, Calleri (both hamstring, unknown) Suspended None Form WWLDLD Discipline Y35 R2 Leading scorer Antonio 6 Arsenal Subs from Ospina, Martínez, Jenkinson, Gibbs, Holding, Elneny, Coquelin, Iwobi, Reine-Adélaïde, Akpom, Sanogo, Giroud, Pérez Doubtful Elneny (ill), Giroud (groin) Injured Bellerín (ankle, 10 Dec), Debuchy (hamstring), Mertesacker (knee), Welbeck (knee, all Jan), Cazorla (achilles, Mar) Suspended None Form WDWDDW Discipline Y21 R1 Leading scorer Sánchez 8

A short film that is deeply critical of the church's attitude to homosexuality is to receive its world premiere in a cathedral with the approval of the archbishop of Wales. The 12-minute documentary, which tells the story of two former nuns who fell in love, only to be ostracised by the church after their relationship was exposed, is to be screened in St Asaph Cathedral in Denbighshire, north Wales. All One in Christ will premiere on Tuesday and is thought to be the first gay film to be screened in a British church. The archbishop, Dr Barry Morgan, said: "This film will not be easy watching for church members as it reminds us how people among us have been ostracised and mistreated because of their sexuality. "By sharing the personal stories of those who have suffered and been hurt, I hope this powerful film will bring home to all the scale of the damage done and ultimately help change attitudes within the church." The film was produced by organisers of the Iris prize, the world's largest LGBT short film prize, now in its 10th year. Although it is made with sensitivity, with many of the participants also talking of their undying devotion to the church, its producers acknowledge the venue for the screening could spark condemnation from some quarters. In the documentary, the former nuns Ann and Marika Jane Savage-Lewis describe the outrage of their local bishop after they were outed by a Sunday newspaper about 40 years ago. The local vicar physically blocked their entrance to the church. "That was us out," Marika Jane Savage-Lewis told the Guardian. She said the archbishop was "very brave" for allowing the screening – "particularly in view of the hoo-ha that's going on". Other participants include a lesbian priest who was once told by her local bishop that she was a "scandal risk" and a churchgoer who says "the lack of freedom to be ourselves amongst other Christians" takes its toll on mental and physical health. Andrew Pierce, the Iris prize's chair, said: "We have always been aware of the power of film and here we are days away from the historical screening of LGBT films in a cathedral in north Wales." Berwyn Rowlands, the Iris prize director, paid tribute to the courage of both the archbishop and the film's participants. "The idea that we have moved forward and that the Church in Wales in particular is willing for the cathedral to be used to screen this film is amazing," he said. "What we have here is a process of healing. For those who have faith, I think it will be ground-breaking. "We have considered carefully that there might be some criticism. We are hoping that common sense, humanity and tolerance prevail. Gay marriage is still seen as a problem, but it's wonderful how the bishops and the archbishop himself have gone out of their way to make it clear that the Church in Wales is a church for everybody." The film also includes the bishop Stephen Lowe, who says: "The way in which gay and lesbian people have been persecuted is something that the church needs to feel a deep repentance about." All One in Christ is among 36 films produced in partnership with communities across Wales by Iris Prize Outreach and financed by the Big Lottery Fund. The project works to build tolerance and understanding.

Richmond Park was a byelection made in heaven for the Liberal Democrats. Their opponent – a prominent leave campaigner whose father had funded the anti-EU referendum party in the 1990s, and who upset many of those of a small "l" liberal disposition with the style and tone of his London mayoral campaign in the spring. The constituency was a Lib Dem stronghold for over 40 years (until the vote collapsed, like almost everywhere else, in last year's general election) where over 70% of voters had voted to remain in the EU, putting it in the top 10 pro-EU constituencies. Local Labour voters were long used to voting tactically for the local Liberal Democrat. All the party had to do was to turn this unusually propitious set of circumstances to its advantage. But that does not mean that its victory can simply be dismissed as "a little local difficulty". Not so. Because ever since Nick Clegg shook hands with David Cameron on the steps of 10 Downing St and formed the coalition, doing well in byelections – hitherto the Liberal Democrats' forte – has been beyond them. Even its success in retaining Eastleigh in 2013 masked a 14-point fall in the party's vote, one of the biggest drops in support it had suffered in any post-second world war byelection. The party was saved from defeat by a Ukip surge at the expense of the Conservatives. But Richmond indicates that although the party is still languishing at just 8% in the national polls, it has at least put the searing experience of the coalition sufficiently behind it to restore its ability to make the best of a byelection. Moreover, the Liberal Democrats' success in Richmond is not an isolated one. It increased its share of the vote by 23 points in the Witney byelection in October. In local government byelections during the past three months, the party has on average enjoyed a 10-point increase in support, and has pulled off a number of seemingly remarkable victories. Now the crucial question is whether the party can use the favourable publicity generated by its byelection victory in Richmond to begin to put itself back in the electoral frame more widely. The last time the party was in anything like as much electoral trouble as the last few years was in the late 1980s following the acrimonious Liberal-SDP merger. And on that occasion it was a spectacular byelection victory, in Eastbourne in October 1990, that helped put the party back on the road to recovery. The Liberal Democrats now need to use the publicity generated by Richmond to get voters to think afresh about the party once more. Any such a development would be unwelcome both to the Conservatives – who have the most seats that are potentially at risk from a strengthened Liberal Democrat challenge – and to Labour, who might fear that those of its supporters who are disillusioned with Jeremy Corbyn might begin to think they finally have somewhere else to go. But if Thursday's byelection could help open a new chapter in the story of British domestic politics, it is much less likely that the victory for an anti-leave candidate will have any immediate impact on the government's pursuit of Brexit. In arguing the case for holding a second referendum on Brexit, the Liberal Democrats are aiming at no more than a niche market. Polling from YouGov suggests that only around a half of those who voted to remain believe the government should hold a second referendum. However, thanks to the party's long-standing pro-EU stance this is a niche that it is well-placed to win over. However, it is not a big enough market to deflect a Conservative prime minister who knows that a majority of her voters backed leave, and only 26% of whom back a second referendum at the end of June. Indeed, if the prime minister looks closely at the result, she will note that the 50% share won by the Liberal Democrats in Richmond is well below the 72% who voted to remain in June. Her job is to ensure that when the Brexit negotiations are over, most Conservative-inclined remain voters are sufficiently happy with the outcome that they will not be looking for a second referendum. But that was already her task long before Zac Goldsmith opted to call what for him, at least, has proven be a fatally damaging byelection.

The Dorchester's leaked list of grooming rules for female staff could open up the luxury hotel to lawsuits filed by current and former employees, critics have said. A set of grooming demands was this week reported to have been emailed by hotel managers to employees after the five-star establishment received complaints about the general hygiene of its staff. According to the leak, women were asked not to turn up for work with oily skin, bad breath or garish makeup. They were also encouraged to shave their legs, ensure their fingernails were manicured and avoid body odour. Kiran Daurka, an employment lawyer at Leigh Day, said dress codes were lawful when they related directly to the requirements of a job, but could be challenged when they encouraged the objectification of staff. "I would have concerns where a policy seemingly objectifies women by asking them to look a certain way which has no bearing on their ability to do a job," she told the Guardian. "For example, hair removal is clearly about objectification and sexualisation, as there is some ideal of what a woman should look like. "This may also unlawfully offend the religious or other beliefs of women whose belief system does not allow the removal of hair. "A dress code that treats women less favourably than men is discriminatory. But even where a policy is applied to all, it may still particularly disadvantage women, and that disadvantage would need to be objectively justified." An unnamed employee told the Daily Mail: "It's disgusting. This list is like something out of the dark ages and downright offensive. It's not as though you choose to have oily skin, and a lot of women, especially teenagers, cannot help it – no facial wash or moisturiser in the world can control that. "The women are all pretty livid but worry that if they complain – or rebel and turn up to work with chipped, dirty nails and hairy legs, for example – they'll be sacked on the spot." Philip Landau, an employment lawyer from Landau Law, said there were many reasons why an employer may want to have a dress code or appearance policy, such as to communicate a professional and corporate image. However, "an employer's policy must not be discriminatory in respect of the protected characteristics in the 2010 Equality Act for age, disability, gender reassignment, religion or belief, sex, or sexual orientation", he said. "Accordingly, any dress code or appearance policy should apply to both men and women equally. The codes do not have to be identical, as there will clearly be different requirements for male staff, but it does have to amount to similar standards. It is not clear what the equivalent grooming policy is for male staff at the Dorchester. "A grooming policy should also be reasonable and proportionate in nature, with particular reference to the work that is being carried out. If it isn't, and you are dismissed for failing to comply with the code, you may have a claim for direct discrimination on the grounds of sex if there has been a detriment for one gender over the other. You may also have a claim for unfair dismissal." Landau said employers needed to "tread carefully" in case they were seen to indirectly discriminate against an employee. The requirement not to display any excess body hair, including on the face, could discriminate against those with conditions such as polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS), of which one of the main symptoms is excess androgen – high levels of "male hormones" in the body. "This may cause physical signs, such as excess facial or body hair, and therefore a blanket policy of no facial hair could amount to indirect discrimination on the grounds of disability and sex," he said. Ewa Jasiewicz, a union organiser for hotel workers in London, said she believed the stipulations left workers open to discrimination, especially if they were transgender or gender fluid. "Gender is a protected characteristic under the Equality Act and this includes gender presentation and reassignment," Jasiewicz said. "Women workers at the Dorchester do not enjoy transparency on where their service charge goes and do not have fair tips or [a] living wage, but are expected to spend money on manicures? This beggars belief. This in my opinion is a form of paternalistic, sexist, gendered taxation on an already exploited and underpaid female workforce." The Unite regional officer Dave Turnbull said: "People of different ethnic backgrounds may not be able to comply with the requirements due to their skin or hair type. "It is possible that there is an underlying race issue here, as we are often told by members that hotels do try to avoid having black people in front-of-house position and it could easily be interpreted that the Dorchester are trying to get female staff to conform to a certain type. "Also there are religions where the removal of facial hair may not be acceptable. There may be disability issues linked to this as well, for example skin conditions or allergies to certain types of makeup." To apply these standards only to female staff would be clearly sexist, he said. "It treats women workers as if they are part of the product that is being sold by the hotel and can place staff at risk of sexual harassment and comments from customers who might view them as a commodity." Workers in the Dorchester and other hotels were on low basic pay and often reliant on variable elements, such as tips or service charges, to top up their earnings, Turnbull said. "The cost of makeup, beauty treatments and compliance with dress code requirements can be extremely expensive and is never factored in by an additional allowance of any sort. Again, this could easily place employers at risk of claims of sex discrimination, as male employees are not expected to shoulder the same expenses." An employee at another London hotel, who asked to remain anonymous, said she was subjected to similar rules. She told the Guardian her main issue was that female employees had to wear tight dresses, which was "unfair and impractical" for her waitressing job. It also opened her up to unwanted comments from colleagues and guests. "If I'm cleaning a table, male workers will say things like: 'Oh, stay right there,'" she said. While the rules do not stipulate that the waitress must remove any facial hair, the 24-year-old, employed by a boutique hotel frequented by wealthy clients, said she had to wear skin-coloured tights rather than black ones, which meant having to shave her legs regularly, and that there was an expectation to look attractive. "We're told that we have to dress as if we're on our first date," she said. Sam Smethers, the chief executive of the Fawcett Society, said it was completely unacceptable for any woman to be told what she should wear and how she should look. "Employers should concentrate on what enables people to do a good job and what drives productivity. This is 2016, not 1970; we need to see an end to this kind of objectification of women," she said. The Dorchester said the rules were not emailed to all staff, but were provided to job applicants. The hotel's general manager, Roland Fasel, said: "The Dorchester has a proud community of employees who uphold world-leading hospitality standards, including grooming, in line with many other brands. "All new applicants, both men and women, are sent a copy of our grooming standards in advance of interview."

We humans love to look at other species. The BBC series Planet Earth II is a huge hit. As well as the authority of David Attenborough's voice, this is because it offers a series of incredible HD glimpses of the secret lives of animals. The latest sequence that had my family glued to the screen featured a pride of lions chasing a giraffe. Astounding. Or is it? Is watching nature documentaries an enlightened attempt to comprehend our fellow creatures, or just another example of human beings imposing a gaze of power and knowledge on animals – classifying, controlling and ultimately skinning and stuffing them in the name of science? An exhibition that has just opened at the Wellcome Collection in London mulls this over. Making Nature: How We See Animals is not about natural history in the sense of looking at a particular animal, or behaviour, or evolution. It is instead about the psychology of how we observe other species. It begins with Carl Linnaeus (1707-78), the father of modern natural history, who first ordered knowledge of the natural world. Linnaeus classified flora and fauna into the great divisions and subdivisions of the natural world that are still used in science today: family, genus and species. Without Linnaeus we would not even have the scientific concept of a species, so Charles Darwin could never have theorised how species originated. In Making Nature there is a fish collected by Linnaeus himself, lent by the Linnaean Society of London. It has been stuck in a book, flattened and dried, looking like a brown fossil in a rock. It might easily be millions of years old. In fact, it swam in 18th-century seas. Linnaeus in this exhibition represents a human urge to "order" nature, to make sense of it and perhaps by doing so master it. Museum displays – including that stupendous Victorian invention, the Natural History Museum – are examined not for what they teach but how they define and shape the way we see animals. The strange world of zoos and their architecture is also held up for scrutiny. By contrast, the hero of the exhibition is a New Yorker called Antoine Yates. In 2003, Yates had to go to an ER after he was mauled by his pet tiger. It turned out that he had been keeping the tiger, called Ming, for years in a high-rise apartment in a public housing scheme where no pets were allowed. He also had an alligator. A video by Phillip Warnell reconstructs this unusual situation. A tiger prowls round an apartment, sniffing at the furniture, a surreal interloper in a human home. If Linnaeus imposed order on the natural world, Yates created a hilarious chaos. He put humans and man-eaters in the same apartment, utterly subverting every rule and assumption going. Instead of being behind glass in a zoo, the tiger entered the human world. Imagine being his postman. The idea that by ordering nature we control it goes back to the 1960s theories of Michel Foucault. It also, of course, speaks to our guilt about the harm we are doing to the planet. But looking at nature is surely the least destructive of all the things human beings do to the natural world. Far from a pornography of power, the images of nature created by natural history museums and even zoos, at their best, bring us closer to the natural world. The more we know about nature, the less we want to hurt it. Looking at animals is something we can't help doing. Learning about them is a rational outgrowth of that curiosity. Linnaeus made it possible for a new understanding of nature to develop, and the latest fruit of that enlightened inquiry is Planet Earth II. Is that just a luxurious bit of infotainment as we ravage nature? I don't think so. Seeing animals makes us care about what happens to them. Observation is not just a means of control. It can awaken the eye of love. At the same time that Linnaeus was classifying nature, William Hogarth engraved a gruesome scene of human contempt for our fellow animals. Hogarth's print The First Stage of Cruelty (1751) shows boys in a London street inflicting monstrous tortures on cats and dogs. Was animal cruelty of this kind as common in premodern times as Hogarth makes it look? The point for him, as for us, is that it is abhorrent. From being cruel to cats, his antihero Tom Nero progresses in this print series to murdering a woman. One violence begets another. Such ideas were new in the 18th century. The painter George Stubbs goes one further than Hogarth, portraying a racehorse with the sensitivity of a Rembrandt self-portrait. So does Antoine Watteau when he depicts a donkey's melancholy eye in his masterpiece Gilles. These artists who looked at animals with such compassion and respect were exact contemporaries of Linnaeus and belonged to the same intellectual movement: the Enlightenment. It is to the Enlightenment and its unruly child, Romanticism, that we owe our affection for animals. As the historian Keith Thomas has shown in a classic book, before the 18th century people were taught to look down on "brute creation". Pets, vegetarianism and green politics are modern creations that all originate in the Enlightenment. Linnaeus, like Hogarth, Stubbs and Watteau, should be a hero to anyone who cares about our planet. You can't save what you can't name. Science and art look at nature not out of an urge to dominate but a longing to understand. Stubbs could place himself in the mind of a horse only after he had dissected one, for knowledge awakens sympathy. Making Nature: How We See Animals is at the Wellcome Collection, London, until 21 May.

I was five when this picture was taken. Yes, we were poor, but it was Moss Side in 1969 – everyone was poor. It was better than the tenements in Glasgow, where we'd come from. My dad was a miner and couldn't get work up there, so he'd moved the family to Manchester. I was the fifth of eight children; in the picture, I'm to the left, standing just in front of my big brother. We had a happy upbringing: we were never short of a friend and we shared everything. Our house on Moss Side was so derelict that we couldn't use all the rooms. One door wouldn't even open. Then one day Dad bashed it in and the whole ceiling just fell to the floor. The house was damp, with plaster falling off the walls. We kids all slept in the same room on some beds pushed together. We only ever had one lightbulb, which got moved around the house. There was an Indian family next door, and I used to play with the children. When it was teatime, if you were over, you got fed. At a wedding there, money was being pinned to the groom and he gave some to me. Dad took it to get some shopping in. My parents were very friendly but they were also hard as nails. Dad got work as a doorman. They would go without food but always made sure we had something. We didn't really know we were poor. One day at school I was trying to get a teacher's attention and she said, "Go away, you smelly little boy." I cried most of that day. You say that to a five-year-old and it sticks with them. I remember the photographer coming round. Mum told us, "We've got the papers coming tomorrow and I want you lot dressed in your best clothes." Only now do I know he was with the charity Shelter. Not long after, they helped us move into another house in Chorlton. It was a mansion, with five bedrooms and hot water; we were thrilled. I consider that my childhood home. For our first New Year there, because we were Scottish and New Year was our thing, we had a party that went on for days. We were the poorest people in Chorlton. Some of the neighbours weren't too happy because we didn't look the part, but at school, once people got to know me, I made friends left, right and centre. I left school in 1979 and got work servicing old washing machines and vacuum cleaners. It was my first taste of engineering and I loved it. I've been doing that sort of thing since. I'm 53 now, and if I didn't have work I'd go mad. I do worry about money. Things are harder than they have been. In the 90s I was on £15 an hour and now I'm on £8.50. When Shelter got in touch about this picture, it was emotional for me. It's the first time I've seen myself at that age. I was a good-looking boy. My siblings weren't interested in talking about it, but I'm nostalgic. We were just kids: Mum and Dad were alive, and we all got on. It does make me angry that we had to live like that, though. The house got knocked down and there's a doctor's surgery there now. I'm proud of what I've achieved since then. I've been with my wife for 35 years and we've got five lovely kids. I'm not a millionaire by any stretch, but we're happy. There's not much more I could ask for. Slum Britain: 50 Years On is on Channel 5 on 5 December, and has been made in partnership with Shelter. Are you in a notable photograph? Email thatsme@theguardian.com

Britain's oldest manufacturing business, a London bell foundry that made Big Ben, could be sold after its owner decided to vacate its historic East End premises. The Whitechapel Bell Foundry began life in 1570 during the reign of Elizabeth I. It moved to its site on Whitechapel Road in 1739 and has traded from the building since. The Guinness Book of Records lists the foundry, one of only two left in the UK, as Britain's oldest manufacturer – having traded continuously for 446 years. The foundry has been owned by the Hughes family since 1904. Alan Hughes and his wife Kathryn have sold the grade II-listed building on Whitechapel Road and are considering options for when the foundry leaves in May 2017. Alan Hughes said: "We have made this decision with a heavy heart, but in response to the changing realities of running a business of this kind. The business has been at its present site over 250 years so it is probably about time it moved once again. We hope that this move will provide an opportunity for the business to move forward in a new direction." Property prices in Whitechapel have soared in recent years because the area, once infamous for the Jack the Ripper murders, is close to the capital's financial district and is a favourite spot for growing technology companies. The foundry's owners are considering a sale that could keep it operating from new premises. In 1752, the foundry cast the Liberty Bell for the city of Philadelphia, which became a symbol of US independence. In 1856, it made Big Ben, although the bell cracked while being tested and was recast in 1858. More recently, the Whitechapel team designed the bell used at the start of the 2012 London Olympics but the 23-tonne structure was too big for its furnaces and was cast in the Netherlands. The foundry cast the bells used on the lead barge for the Queen's Jubilee pageant on the Thames, also in 2012. Specialist sales – largely church bells and musical handbells – have formed the bulk of recent business and the foundry launched an online store selling handbells and doorbells to consumers three years ago.

Environment news Four of world's biggest cities to ban diesel cars from their centres The $40m 'magic pipe': Princess Cruises given record fine for dumping oil at sea Quitting UN climate change body could be Trump's quickest exit from Paris deal Climate change will stir 'unimaginable' refugee crisis, says military Trees may increase air pollution on city streets Megacity planning must change in four years to limit global warming US businesses push against Trump's attempts to dismiss climate change French nuclear power in 'worst situation ever', says former EDF director EU targets energy waste and coal subsidies in new climate package Great Barrier Reef scientists confirm largest die-off of corals recorded South Pacific island ditches fossil fuels to run entirely on solar power Features and comment After 60 years, is nuclear fusion finally poised to deliver? Love, death and rewilding – how two clothing tycoons saved Patagonia How Obama's climate change legacy is weakened by US investment in dirty fuel Siemens' £310m Hull plant will take windfarm technology to new level Shrinking glaciers cause state-of-emergency drought in Bolivia Multimedia The week in wildlife – in pictures David Attenborough on climate change: 'The world will be transformed' – video Inner Mongolia's unauthorised steel factories – in pictures And finally... The plight of the bizarre 'walking' shark Nine species of an unusual shark that "walks" by night on shallow reefs are at greater risk of extinction than previously thought

ITALIAN BISHOPS AND SPANISH OPENINGS? The world is ridiculous. This week The Fiver has marvelled at the frothy-mouthed excitement that has been generated among nerdy folk with even more time on their hands than us by watching two men with brains the size of swollen marrows thinking really, really hard in public. Like, about as hard as it is possible to think. So hard, in fact, that if you hooked the content of their skulls up to a generator you could power Basingstoke for the weekend – and maybe even Bognor Regis. And guess what? This nerdy trend isn't going to just blow over like the way trucker caps with stupid slogans on them did in 2005. No, because Pep Guardiola and Antonio Conte are getting their very own version of Carlsen v Karjakin on this weekend, having spent much of the past few days spent hunched over tables glaring intensely at little pieces on a board while trying to second-guess which of the 1,347,567 possible ways Raheem Sterling might move on Saturday. Among other things. The venue for this grand think-off will be the Etihad Stadium, where Manchester City host a Chelsea team that have won seven league games on the bounce and conceded just one goal since Conte's switch to a 3-4-3 formation. A tactical tweak that has prompted opposing teams to react in the utterly powerless and bemused fashion of a medieval peasant being presented with an iPhone and being asked to call up a SnapFace video of Honey G. But surely Pep has a plan to counter Conte's blue wall and wing-backs, doesn't he? Well, we're sure he has. Not that we have a clue what it might be. Our random number generator tells us we may see a 2-3-2-3, which is a football formation these days and not a 1950s village store telephone number. One thing we can expect to see is brooding bishop Yaya Touré sat on the bench sticking pins into an immaculately dressed, shaven-headed Catalan doll. Because word has it that Ilkay Gündogan is set to return to Manchester City's midfield, despite the Ivorian having been influential in the wins against Crystal Palace and Burnley, as well as not saying anything stupid for a week or two. As for Chelsea, with some desperately unpleasant headlines in the news before this match, they will be glad to focus on the football, where they have the chance to stretch their lead at the top of the table to four points over City. Not that Thibaut Courtois is getting too giddy about the club's impressive form. "It is hard to say yet whether Chelsea can win the league," he buzz-killed. "When I started with Genk we had a team of quality and we knew we could be champions. It was the same at Atlético [Madrid], we knew we could win trophies. It is the same with Chelsea now but there are a lot of teams who can say that." Well, probably just the four Thibaut. But we understand you have a duty to say modest banalities in the lead-up to a big game. Not that it will dampen the excitement among millions of nerds looking to jump ship from chess to football. No, we can expect a global audience for this one, including Garry Kasparov, Boris Spassky and co. We can also expect a touchline explosion of cerebral flexing too. Not that we'll be doing any ruminating in public, mind. The last time we did that we got pinched in Skegness. QUOTE OF THE DAY "Maybe he needs to come to a game at the weekend and experience a game at the stadium and see the excitement and energy of Premier League football. I'm sure he would enjoy it. He's speaking from maybe a place where he doesn't understand the Premier League and hasn't experienced many games [here]" – Ailsa from Home and Away has got a bigger funk on than normal after Ottmar Hitzfeld hooted earlier this week that Xherdan Shaqiri should not stay in "no man's land" at Stoke. FIVER LETTERS "Imagine my joy at seeing one of my missives printed in yesterday's Fiver letters (intriguing start), and furthermore, it being a quiet day with only two letters meaning a 50-50 chance of winning 'prizeless letter o'the day' (interesting build-up), only to have my hopes dashed as there was no prize and it being a roll-over (let-down by the ending). I guess The Fiver also writes films for Hollywood" – Craig Hills. "A truly remarkable week for Harry Kane. First he signs a new £32m, five-and-a-half-year deal at Spurs, then this" – Andrew Wade. "I read with complete disinterest the story of Harry Kane's new contract (yesterday's Fiver). Personally, I find 'new contract' signings slightly more interesting than 'retirement from international football' stories but I genuinely couldn't care less about either. I'm intrigued by which stories fill other Fiver readers with the same sort of ennui?" – Ben Graham. "The moment I saw the phrase 'semi-humorous' in yesterday's Fiver, I started mentally penning an appropriate message – 'ideas above your station', etc. I promptly forgot about this, but then later on the 'Yaya Blinks' headline of a couple of weeks ago popped into my head, and I had to smile. Which, I think, shows two things: a) The Fiver is indeed deserving of 'semi-humorous' epithet; and b) I'm disturbed that bits of it are lurking in my subconscious, ready to emerge at any point. I hope no offence will be taken if I admit that neither of these revelations have made me feel better about anything" – Matt Huggins. "Re: yesterday's Fiver declaring: 'We would certainly like to reassure The Man that, if he harbours a Tottenhamly desire regarding the salary of his star semi-humorous email-scribe ...' Is The Spin not content with what it earns already?" – Dan Makeham. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And if you've nothing better to do you can also tweet The Fiver. Today's winner of our prizeless letter o'the day is ... Andrew Wade. SUPPORT THE GUARDIAN Producing the Guardian's thoughtful, in-depth journalism – the stuff not normally found in this email, obviously – is expensive, but supporting us isn't. If you value our journalism, please support us by making a one-off or recurring contribution. RECOMMENDED LISTENING Join AC Jimbo Max Rushden and co for the latest thrilling instalment of Football Weekly Extra. NEWS, BITS AND BOBS The former Chelsea player Gary Johnson says he was paid £50,000 by the Premier League club to not go public with allegations that he was sexually abused by the club's former chief scout Eddie Heath. "All their fans deserve to know the truth about what went on," he said. "I know they asked me to sign a gagging order and how many others are there out there. They may have paid others for their silence. I hope and pray no clubs are allowed to cover this up – no one should escape justice." After the high court ruled that Tony Pulis must pay former club Palace £3.77m for deceiving a Premier League managers' arbitration tribunal, the West Brom boss is having to choose his words carefully. "Obviously I've got to bite my tongue a little bit at the moment," he mumbled. "I'm really disappointed with the outcome and strenuously deny what has been said. But it's been done." Al Pardiola, on a stunning run of form since this interview, admits that Crystal Palace are IN CRISIS. "I'm a realist," he purred. "This is a great football club and one they have great plans for, but it's in crisis at the moment. I understand the situation with the Premier League. I have got to make sure the next result is a positive one for us." After watching Jan Vertonghen exhaust the ink Spurs are using on their new contracts, Mauricio Pochettino is thinking about the one that got away. No, not Bongani Khumalo, but Gylfi Sigurdsson. "Every time we meet him and see him, he shows his quality – not only as a player but like a man," sighed Pochettino. "It's a shame but sometimes in football you never know what will happen in the future." Leicester City have got £15m with Genk midfielder Wilfred Ndidi's name on it. And Arsenal will be without the knacked Santi Cazorla for at least three months. "For me it's very bad news," sniffed Arsène Wenger. "You always know the date of the surgery but never the date where the player will play again." STILL WANT MORE? Premier League: 10 [ten – Fiver Vidiprinter Ed] things to look out for this weekend. Last season Brackley escaped relegation from National League North on the final day of season, and now if they beat Blackpool they will be in the FA Cup third round. Paul Doyle has more, while we've also a photo essay from the first-round Stockport v Woking tie. That's right, shameless hit-chasing! It's clásico time on Saturday so here's Sid Lowe on why victory would be a "fist on the desk" for Real Madrid and Zinedine Zidane. West Ham's Pedro Obiang has an Italian wife, a Spanish passport, parents who hail from Equatorial Guinea, is doing a degree in political science and makes for a fascinating interview with Jacob Steinberg. Barry Glendenning casts his eye over the Premier League runners and riders and assesses who is best equipped for The Crucial Christmas Period™. Leicester City couldn't win Big Cup and go down, could they? Could they? Paul Doyle takes a look at their diametrically opposed form in Europe and at home. Are José Mourinho's Manchester United about to click into gear in the Premier League, after saving their best performances for the cup competitions? Just what exactly does "secret location" mean? Amy Lawrence has the answers. Gareth Southgate has hit all the right notes so far, reports Dominic Fifield ... and not a pint of wine in sight. The Coppa Italia features in this week's excellent Joy of Six which concerns flawed sporting competitions and the XFL. Oh, and if it's your thing ... you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. AND INSTACHAT, TOO! PRESENTS HERE

NHS Digital figures show that hospital admissions for eating disorders in England are increasing. The number of deaths in England and Wales from eating disorders has also risen (from 17 in 2014 to 28 in 2015), according to statistics from the Office of National Statistics. But treatment is patchy. Northern Ireland has no specialist eating disorders unit. Patients are treated in the community but this is currently under review. Wales also has no single condition eating disorder units, although they developing specialist community eating disorder teams for adults. In England there are 186 beds for adolescents and children in need of inpatient care. The BBC recently followed the story of Fiona Hollings, 19, who was sent 400 miles away from her home in Buckinghamshire to Glasgow for inpatient treatment. The government has vowed to invest more in this area, developing teams in the community and outpatient services. In October it announced an extra £1m of funding to help improve treatment. Despite this, doctors worry about a lack of resources, with demand outstripping supply. What are your experiences of NHS services? If you or a member of your family has been treated for an eating disorder, we'd like to hear from you. How long did you have to wait to get help? Was it a struggle to get a diagnosis? Did you receive treatment locally or were you moved away from home? We'd also like to hear from people who work with eating disorders. Do you think the services are effective? What changes would you like to see? Share your experiences and perspectives in the form below. Your responses will be confidential.

David Conn has been awarded Football Journalist of the Year at this year's MBNA Northwest Football Awards. One of the UK's most respected football journalists, David was recognised for his investigative work into the Hillsborough disaster. The MBNA Northwest Football Awards celebrate those who have achieved footballing excellence both on and off the field. The full list of winners can be found here.

Monday The Emmanuel Centre in Westminster is doing good business out of Ukip. Over the last few months I have lost count of the number of leadership elections, leadership resignations and general cock-ups I've been to there. On the latest visit, Ukip announced Paul Nuttall as its new leader. Nuttall was at pains to state he would be in post for at least a couple of weeks before Nigel took over again, because he had the overwhelming mandate of 63% of the vote. However, it's worth looking at the numbers of this mandate. In last place in the contest, with 2,775 votes, was Jonathan Rees-Evans, the man who believed a gay donkey had tried to rape his horse. In second place, with 2,973, was Suzanne Evans. Nuttall won with 9,662 votes. Which leads me to think Ukip is ripe for a Corbynista style takeover. If just 10,000 Momentum supporters joined Ukip they would be in a position to seize the party and install John McDonnell as its leader. That would kill two birds with one stone. Tuesday After my American mother-in-law died five years ago, my wife discovered that the US government also considered her to be an American citizen, despite the fact she had never lived or worked in the US and didn't have a US passport. Ever since, the IRS has insisted my wife pay US taxes on her UK earnings and pensions contributions that are exempt from tax under British law. Understandably, my wife has spent much of the last five years trying not to be an American citizen. This is easier said than done, partly because the US finds it impossible to believe anyone wouldn't want to be an American citizen, and partly because it's a bureaucratic nightmare, requiring five years of financial information that no one in their right mind keeps. Every time my wife thinks she is nearly there, another year elapses and she has to start all over again. But help may be at hand. President-elect Donald Trump tweeted this week that anyone who burns the American flag should lose their citizenship. I can feel a trip to Grosvenor Square with a flag and lighter coming on. Shades of 1967. Wednesday A rare sighting of six cabinet secretaries in the same room, as Sir Jeremy Heywood chaired a discussion panel on behalf of the Institute of Government and the British Academy, threw up some interesting insights into the workings of government. Lord Wilson (1998-2002) said he had always thought he got on well with former Downing Street chief of staff Jonathan Powell, until he read in Alastair Campbell's diaries that Powell didn't like him. "That's odd," said Lord Butler (1988-98). "The same thing happened to me." It was also less than reassuring to hear how unprepared Downing Street can be for major incidents. On the day of the 9/11 attacks in the US, Butler thought he should prepare some contingency plans in case there was an attack in the UK. It turned out the civil contingencies unit was away in the countryside at a bonding event, the switchboard that had been installed in Downing Street the previous weekend had collapsed, and the tunnel between Downing Street and the Ministry of Defence was locked and no one had a clue where the key was kept. Thursday With rather more free time on his hands than he might have wanted, Michael Gove has started tweeting at every available opportunity, with generous use of emojis suggesting a mid-life crisis. Conservative Tracey Crouch has apparently been taking lessons from Mikey in Twitter etiquette. Today she tweeted: "@michaelgove says to get more followers you're supposed to tag someone with more followers than you and be rude about them. Tosser." Mikey has also started complaining about the "MSM" (mainstream media) for suggesting Boris Johnson might have contradicted himself. As if. But it does make you wonder who Mikey thinks the MSM – a term generally used disparagingly by leftwingers for anyone foolish enough to offer even mild criticism of Jeremy Corbyn – really are. Mikey has a second career moonlighting as a columnist and reviewer for the Times. His wife is a columnist for the Daily Mail. Friday It can often feel as if MPs are experiencing a different world to the rest of us. At prime minister's questions, Conservative Fiona Bruce raised the issue of Christians being afraid to talk about Christmas. Here was the time for the prime minister to prove she was in touch by pointing out that Bruce really should try getting out a bit more. Every high street is covered in Christmas lights, every shop has Jingle Bells playing on a loop, there are Christmas trees for sale on every street corner, and just about every TV advert is trying to sell you something you probably don't want for Christmas. Far from being afraid to talk about Christmas, it seems the country can talk about little else. But what was Theresa May's reply? "I'm sure that we would all want to ensure that people at work do feel able to speak about their faith, and also be able to speak quite freely about Christmas." There are many battles worth fighting in parliament: so why bother to pick this one? Picture of the week Upside of the week Bye, bye Zac.

Having been homeless, I hate the term housing crisis. Like the refugee crisis and the financial crisis, such a term seems to absolve responsibility from those who created the problem. It suddenly becomes abstracted from the people who caused it and refers only to the effect. There are thousands of people and corporations making huge amounts of money from the housing crisis exactly the way it is – yet we're constantly hearing, "We're in a housing crisis." So don't you think it's time we renamed all these crises we're in? Who's responsible for the refugee crisis? We'll name it after them. Who's responsible for the financial crisis? Let's name it after them. Who's responsible for the housing crisis? I want a term that will start to hold bad policy, politicians, bankers, estate agents, rogue landlords, local governments and developers accountable for the crisis they have created. Before I had a chance to think about it properly, sat between the beige, stuffy walls of our hostel with my family, I had skim-read newspaper headlines repeatedly talking about housing being at crisis point – but I'd never really connected with what that meant. It seemed so far away – something that just existed, was bad and part and parcel of our society. Even when we were in the hostel we didn't really know who to blame, other than those on the end of the phone at the council offices or writing unsympathetic letters about our housing options. That much is clear from the documentary I made about my family while we were homeless, Half Way. The documentary is at times funny and at others heart-rending, but really it's just a portrait of a loving family waiting for a home to call their own. Filmed in our hostel, it's the personal, day-to-day experiences that inevitably become political when shown to an audience. It shows a mother with two children who through no fault of her own can no longer afford a place to live. While making it we weren't thinking about the politics, we were focused on keeping sane. Having lived in a home we privately rented for 13 years, while at the same time being on the council house list, we exhausted every option after we were evicted. Prices in our area had become completely unaffordable. The film calls into question things such as affordability in the rental sector, and the effect that is having on an increasing number of people. It highlights archaic systems of bureaucracy that are not fit for coping with the huge number of people currently facing homelessness. And also by the very nature of our story's "happy ending", when we were rehoused, it emphasises the importance of council housing as a safety net for so many people. This is steadily being removed through things such as right-to- buy, regeneration schemes and the introduction of "affordable housing" – which in some cases is 80% of the market rate. There wasn't the energy to think who to blame while we were living in the hostel. We were exhausted, with self-esteem too low to try to think about all that. My mum blamed herself because she felt it was her job to keep a roof over our head, which of course in the current climate can be near-impossible. After we were re-housed, I became extremely interested in what was happening in the UK. Why could I see so many people facing their own housing difficulties while I saw affordable housing sites grind to a standstill in my local area and skylines across London and other major cities filled with cranes and shiny new buildings? It became incredibly clear what the housing crisis meant after all: profit, profit, profit for the few, and struggle or homelessness for everyone else. Half Way was the first film to be used as evidence by the communities and local government select committee, when it looked into preventing homelessness. The first-hand accounts presented had such an impact that following the publication of the committee's report, committee member Bob Blackman proposed a private member's bill to pick up on the findings of the inquiry. I'm not holding my breath on the outcome, but to think Half Way may have an influence on policy is hugely encouraging. I hope the film can connect central government and local councils to the human faces behind the statistics they deal with every day. More than 250,000 people are homeless in the UK, according to Shelter. That's unacceptable. The only thing that will change that is political will – and political will only shifts when there is public pressure. The documentary focuses on the very personal effect of losing your home, and what this does to our experiences of "normality", security and stability. I hope Half Way provides an account that can help those who have never experienced homelessness to look outside of their own situation with compassion and anger, and for those who have, to take away the shame so they can share their stories and experiences. Because together we are stronger. Ultimately, we need many thousands of homes – affordable and council. We need to make the rental market affordable again, and we need to change policy so that it stops benefiting those that have multiple houses and punishing those that have nowhere to call their home. If the government can afford to renovate Buckingham Palace, do up the Houses of Parliament or support the Garden Bridge project in London, all to make Britain look like one of the greatest places in the world, don't we have a duty to make sure everyone in the country has a decent home? Wouldn't that be something to be truly proud of? Half Way is showing in select cinemas now

The Liberal Democrats secured a stunning byelection victory to unseat Zac Goldsmith by convincing up to a third of leave-supporting Tory voters to switch to the party, Tim Farron has claimed, adding that the outcome could change the direction of British politics. The Lib Dems overturned a 23,000 majority on Thursday to remove the former Conservative MP in a vote that became a de facto plebiscite on the government's Brexit plans. Sarah Olney, the winning candidate, took just under 50% of the entire vote to record a majority of 1,872. Large numbers of local Labour voters backed her, with the Labour candidate, Christian Wolmar, losing his deposit. Speaking alongside Olney in the south-west London constituency on Friday morning, Farron was cautiously optimistic about the Lib Dems' chances in a general election but said: "This result might change the direction of British politics. It's about momentum." The party leader added: "If I tell you that nearly a third of Tory voters from the last election who voted leave in June voted Liberal Democrat yesterday, you will see that this is not just about a remain versus leave rerun, it's about people trying to say to Theresa May: we do not like the extreme version of Brexit outside the single market you are taking us down." Olney, a local accountant who only became involved in politics a year ago, took to the stage at the announcement of her victory in the early hours of Friday to say voters had "sent a shockwave through this Conservative Brexit government". She added: "And our message is clear: we do not want a hard Brexit. We do not want to pull out of the single market. We will not let intolerance, division and fear win." Olney won 20,510 votes, up 30.4% on the party's 2015 result, against 18,638 for Goldsmith. She is the Lib Dems' ninth MP in this parliament, and the only female Lib Dem MP. Goldsmith, who had held the seat since taking it from the Lib Dems in 2010, had resigned in protest against the government's decision to back a third runway at Heathrow, instead standing as an independent candidate in a byelection he argued should be seen as a gauge of local opinion on airport expansion. But the Lib Dems based the debate around Brexit, arguing that one of the most strongly pro-remain constituencies in the country should have a say on being represented by an MP who supported leave, albeit quietly. Olney insisted the impetus for this had come from voters. She told the Guardian: "It wasn't a conscious choice in that respect; it was us responding to what constituents were talking about. And we've always been a pro-European party. We were the united remain party." Farron said: "This was a remarkable, come-from-nowhere upset that will terrify the Conservatives ... If this was a general election, this swing would mean the Conservatives would lose dozens of seats to the Liberal Democrats – and their majority with it." He added: "We are carrying the torch for all of those who want a real opposition to this Conservative Brexit government." Speaking at the declaration to cheers from her team, Olney said she had become alarmed at the post-Brexit political mood. "Richmond Park was full of people like me, who felt the country was going wrong, that the politics of anger and division were on the rise, that the liberal, tolerant values we took for granted were under threat," she said. "Today we have said no. We will defend the Britain we love. We will stand up for the open, tolerant Britain we believe in." A notably subdued Goldsmith thanked his team and insisted: "This byelection was not a political calculation. It was a promise that I made and it was a promise that I kept." A Conservative spokesman praised Goldsmith as a "popular figure" in the party, but added: "This result doesn't change anything. The government remains committed to leaving the European Union and triggering article 50 by the end of March next year. "In addition, we will continue to take decisive action in the national interest to secure the UK's place in the world – supporting a third runway at Heathrow to secure jobs and business opportunities for the next decade and beyond." In one of the more unusual and closely contested byelections of recent years, the Conservatives, Greens and Ukip stepped aside entirely. The Tories decided to not oppose Goldsmith, Ukip backed him and the Greens threw their support behind Olney, as did the Women's Equality party. Goldsmith, the defeated Conservative candidate this year for London mayor, campaigned entirely on local issues, particularly fears that the planned new runway for Heathrow would bring more plane noise to the south-west London constituency. The Lib Dems poured huge resources into the seat. There were several visits by Farron and other prominent Lib Dems including Nick Clegg and Paddy Ashdown. Lib Dem sources said the party estimated it had spoken to 52% of eligible voters over the course of the campaign, with activists knocking on 20,000 doors last weekend. On the day before polling, the Lib Dems even brought in prominent remain supporter Bob Geldof to drum up support for Olney, even though the musician-turned-campaigner admitted he had never voted for the party. While Goldsmith had proved a popular local MP, he attracted severe criticism over his tactics in opposing Labour's mayoral candidate, Sadiq Khan, who eventually won. A number of critics said Goldsmith's repeated suggestions that Khan, a Muslim, had links to Islamist militancy amounted to racism. Goldsmith has stood by his tactics. Wolmar used his speech to say a number of voters had told him they disliked Goldsmith's "ghastly, disgusting" mayoral campaign, prompting shouts of "hear, hear" in the hall. Olney said she found Labour voters had particularly objected to Goldsmith's mayoral campaign methods: "Interestingly, that came up more among the Labour voters, who really objected to the mayoral campaign." The byelection has been seen as a test bed for the much-mooted idea of a progressive alliance to defeat the Conservatives in future general elections. Expounded most clearly by the joint leader of the Green party Caroline Lucas, it has won some limited support among a few Labour and Lib Dem MPs. However, some local Greens were not keen and criticised the party for deciding not to field a candidate. Olney praised the Greens for standing aside, and said such arrangements could be necessary in future unless proportional representation were introduced. "Once we have that, voters will be free to express a more nuanced range of opinions," she said. "At the moment it's so tribal." For now, Olney said, she had to learn her new job very quickly. "I haven't got the faintest clue what happens now," she said. I didn't expect it so I haven't really made any plans." On Friday morning, Farron said the victory proved the Lib Dems presented a "moderate, decent alternative" to the Conservatives and Labour. "Byelections have a habit of not changing the government, but changing the direction of a government," he told BBC Radio 4's Today programme. "There's two main things that came across on the doorstep throughout the campaign and first was undoubtedly the fact that people were very concerned about the hard Brexit we were heading towards. "The other thing that was clearly a concern to voters was they desperately wanted a moderate, decent alternative to the Tories now Labour have shuffled off the main stage and they were delighted to give the Liberal Democrats the opportunity to be just that. "So let's not overstate what it means, but it's a big deal nonetheless." Olney had a stumbling start in her new role after an aide pulled her off-air during a radio interview. TalkRadio's Julia Hartley-Brewer pushed the MP on her calls for a second referendum on any EU deal, suggesting the byelection ought to be rerun. "Voters knew what they were voting for in your byelection, they knew what they were voting for in the EU referendum. Why do we think that one election should be rerun and one shouldn't?" Hartley-Brewer asked. The MP argued that there was no clear manifesto on membership of the single market or free movement. Hartley-Brewer replied: "Every single leading member of the remain campaign said a vote to leave the EU was a vote to leave the single market. Nothing unclear about that at all." Olney said nothing in response, and was then replaced by an aide who said: "I'm really sorry but Sarah has to leave now."

Form hardly indicates a quality affair at Goodison Park – the hosts have won once in eight league games, the visitors once in seven – but at least José Mourinho can draw confidence from a United team who are gradually clicking into shape and showed they do know where the goal is located in the midweek EFL Cup victory over West Ham. Ronald Koeman, in contrast, appears to be losing belief in the talent at his disposal by the week but insists "a lot of things can change on Sunday". Andy Hunter Kick-off Sunday 4pm Venue Goodison Park Last season Everton 0 Manchester United 3 Live Sky Sports 1 Referee Michael Oliver This season G11, Y38, R0, 3.45 cards per game Odds H 5-2 A 11-10 D 5-2 Everton Subs from Robles, Funes Mori, McCarthy, Lennon, Oviedo, Cleverley, Deulofeu, Gibson, Holgate, Davies, Dowell, Koné, Valencia Doubtful None Injured Besic (knee, Feb) Suspended None Form DLWLDL Discipline Y28 R0 Leading scorer Lukaku 7 Manchester United Subs from Romero, Johnstone, Depay, Lingard, Fosu-Mensah, Tuanzebe, Schneiderlin, Young, Carrick, Blind, Fellaini, Martial, Schweinsteiger, Rashford Doubtful None Injured Shaw (unknown), Smalling (toe, both 11 Dec), Bailly (knee, 17 Dec) Suspended Rooney (one match) Form DLDWDD Discipline Y30 R1 Leading scorer Ibrahimovic 7

Immigrants detained for months and even years by the federal government should have no right to a bond hearing to determine whether their detention is necessary or justified. That might seem like an extreme statement. It is. But it's not coming from Donald Trump. That's what lawyers for the Obama administration this week argued before the US supreme court in Jennings v Rodriguez. Non-citizens, including lawful permanent residents, are often locked up for lengthy periods in prison-like conditions while fighting deportation proceedings. That's a result of a 1996 law, signed by President Bill Clinton, which made detention mandatory for a huge swath of immigrants convicted of crimes – even minor ones and even cases where an immigrant poses no public safety or flight risk. It's a remarkable case that encapsulates the absurd brutality of contemporary immigration politics: so-called moderates like Clinton, George Bush and Barack Obama have built and defended a monstrously efficient deportation machine that will soon be handed over to a hardcore nativist. As of October, a record 40,000-plus immigrants, including many asylum seekers, were detained by the federal government, mostly in private facilities. That number that could grow much larger under Trump. The president-elect has pledged to orchestrate mass deportations and also promised to freeze federal hiring, which could make an already severely backlogged immigration court system grind to nearly a halt. It's no surprise that private prison company stocks soared after Trump's win. "If the president-elect means what he says on detention and means what he says on the hiring freeze, inevitably detention times are going to skyrocket," said Michael Tan, a staff attorney with the ACLU's Immigrants' Rights Project and one of the attorneys on the case. The Obama administration's response is that immigrants can file habeas corpus petitions in federal court – a complicated and time-consuming process that would provide no due process for most immigrants subject to imprisonment by the federal government. The case before the supreme court is a class-action lawsuit represented by Alejandro Rodriguez, a lawful permanent resident brought to the United States as an infant whom the government sought to deport because of convictions for drug possession and "joyriding". Rodriguez was imprisoned for more than three years with no bond hearing while he fought deportation – a fight he ultimately won. In fact, it is the very people detained for lengthy periods like Rodriguez who are most likely to win their cases and be allowed to remain in the US because they have substantive claims to make. Those without such claims are typically subject to rapid deportation. "The sad irony is the people who have the strongest claim to lawful status in the United States are the most likely to end up in detention for months or years without ever being able to see a judge and seek relief," said Tan. Those detained for six months or longer, according to the ACLU, are five times more likely to win their case than the average immigration detainee. Though Trump has made brazen racism and xenophobia the centerpiece of his political persona, his policy agenda echoes that pursued by Obama: deporting those convicted of crimes. But the majority of those detained by immigration authorities for six months or longer, according to the ACLU, were convicted of crimes so minor that they carried a conviction of no longer than six months. The US court of appeals for the ninth circuit found that non-citizens like Rodriguez did have a right to a bond hearing every six months. The Obama administration disagreed and appealed to the supreme court. In the 2003 case Demore v Kim, the supreme court ruled in favor of the government's power to detain non-citizens for a limited amount of time without a bond hearing – a period that the court found, based on information provided by the government, averaged roughly five months for those fighting their deportation before the Board of Immigration Appeals. The problem, the government conceded in an August letter to the court, is that that figure is bogus. In reality, the average detention time for such non-citizens was more than a year. The government, according to Scotusblog's bloodless analysis, is in part relying on the 1953 case Shaughnessy v United States ex rel Mezei, which "denied judicial review to an immigrant held in indefinite detention based on secret evidence, an outcome next to impossible to square with modern constitutional law." Trump has made it clear that he has little respect for constitutional rights. Obama's dismal record will make it all the easier for the president-elect to shred them.

Pep Guardiola has praised Antonio Conte as possibly the world's finest manager and said the Italian has made Chelsea even stronger contenders to win the Premier League title. Guardiola faces Conte when Manchester City take his side on at the Etihad Stadium in Saturday's early game. Chelsea are the leaders and take a one point advantage over City into the match. After finishing 10th and 31 points behind Leicester City last term, Conte has transformed the side's fortunes with seven successive victories. Guardiola said: "Conte is without doubt, one of the best, maybe the best coach in the world right now. They were contenders to win the Premier League from the beginning. Now, maybe more than before. It's a good test for us. It is the first time we are going to face each other. It's good to play against him. He made an exceptional job in Turin [with Juventus] and in the national job. It doesn't matter if it is Serie A or the national team, you realise his strengths. "He has started here with maybe not good results, but they have won last seven games, conceding one goal. That says a lot about how good they are." Guardiola, who gave his players two days off at the start of the week, has tinkered with the pre-Chelsea preparation, training his squad on the Etihad pitch on Friday. "Tomorrow we play early, so we will sleep here," he said. "Today I decided to go to the Etihad, but not for a special thing, no, I decided that. "We were 11, 12, 13 days without a day off. In training, the players like to play every day. We don't give a day off to the players when you have a lot of games in a row. That's why they had two days off and we were training for three days to prepare for Chelsea. "We all like to play football, that's why we're here, but sometimes you have four, five or six months, playing, playing, playing, so not playing one week is good, not only for the players, the staff to see their families. Playing in Europe, it's normal when that happens." Guardiola said he has no fresh injury concerns among his squad.

The world is getting smaller. That is the unbidden meme of our generation, thanks to the juggernaut of growth unleashed by an outpouring of global bodies, free trade agreements, technology and international capital. Every business and person now has a global reach and audience. Today's paradigm is globalisation and free trade is its evangelical mantra. But this narrative has become worn and no longer fits the facts. In recent months, there has been a backlash, accompanied by emotive talk about the reversal of globalisation and the battle for society's future. The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development used its latest health check on the global economy to warn of the costs of protectionism. The hand-wringing is half a decade too late, because globalisation is already dead and we are already some miles into the journey back. Donald Trump and Theresa May are not flagbearers in the distance, they are catapults battering at the walls. Trump's stated intent to pull the US out of the TPP on his first day in office underlines the new reality we inhabit, as does the European Union's recent troubles closing a trade agreement with Canada thanks to Wallonia's obstinance. Today, we have a new meme – deglobalisation – as people turn their backs on an interconnected world economy and societies turn iconoclastic. It is not for the first time. Globalisation may be defined as when trade across nations is growing faster than GDP. People interact more, transact more and create more wealth. Deglobalisation is the alternate state where trade grows less than GDP. Countries focus inwards, trade declines as a proportion of GDP and growth shrinks. A clear cycle of the two emerges over history. Proto-globalisation (1820-1870): Rapid global trade growth, thanks to the Industrial Revolution and the spread of European colonial rule Globalisation 1.0 (1870-1913): Empire building became the norm. Rapid advancements in transport and communications grew trade. But rapid change also meant volatile bouts of economic obsolescence and crisis Deglobalisation 1.0 (1913-1950): Limited growth, unequal outcomes and a huge debt overhang from previous decades stoked economic nationalism and protectionism. Trade fell and a collective failure to tackle deeper structural issues led to the 1930s Globalisation 2.0 (1950-2010): Since then, we have been on a tearaway expansion with unparalleled growth of both global trade and GDP Deglobalisation 2.0 (2010-?): The last financial crisis focused policymaker attention inwards and crystallised the growing sense of social disenfranchisement. A toxic mix of suppressed wages, rocketing debt and political myopia have largely destroyed the allure of globalisation. This is more than a sense of ennui. Global trade today is not slowing down but has plateaued – hardly a barometer of rude global health. After their peak in January 2015, global exports fell -1.6% by the end of August 2016. The blame lies not with commodity price falls, but shifts in trade policy. Protectionism is en vogue. Restrictive trade measures have outstripped liberalising measures three to one this year and increased by almost five times since 2009, as policymakers try to circumvent the WTO. Meanwhile, the deleveraging of banking balance sheets over recent years has hit global lending, as banks retreat from peripheral to core domestic activities, cutting vital credit flows through key arteries. All of this preceded the populist deluge of 2016 and, indeed, contributed as policymakers myopically prioritised stability over social cohesion, ignoring the lessons of the past. But globally, politicians are now fast realigning to shifting public moods. A year ago, to imagine a world where the major western leaders included Trump, the Brexit brigade and Marine Le Pen was the province of satire. Today, we are two-thirds there. Their ascendancy has shifted the political debate towards nativism in a hauntingly familiar nationalist narrative, as others follow suit. Our new politics are not leftwing or rightwing, merely whether you are in this world or out of it. Even defenders of globalisation are falling into the same trap. By demonising those that voted against and not providing alternative options, they cling tighter to those that confirm and affirm their beliefs. That is still nativism of a different sort and still the politics of division, not unity. This is Deglobalisation 2.0. Monetary policies such as quantitative easing and its newborn sibling, fiscal easing, cannot change this dynamic. Absent structural change, their cumulative corrosive impact on savings and fillip to global debt ensure a limited runway and only inflame the rhetoric of disenfranchisement. Meanwhile, divorces are turning ugly as emotions override reason, viz the talk of Brexit fees and anti-dumping levies, the metaphorical Kristallnacht of populist victors like May and Trump as they struggle for coherence, and emerging divisions between central banks and politicians, to name but a few. Democracy is fast turning to kakistocracy – government by the least qualified leaders. Globalisation is transmuting to nationalism. The effects are well documented in history – autarky, economic naivety, protectionism and a rush to grab what remains of the pie, only to trample it underfoot. Me first always ends in me last. The world is still getting smaller, but just in our minds and horizons now, and thoughtless we risk becoming all the poorer for it. Bob Swarup is the author of Money Mania

A pair of mummified knees found in a tomb in Egypt's Valley of the Queens are most likely those of Queen Nefertari, the royal spouse of Pharaoh Ramses II, say archaeologists. Thought to have died around 1250 BC, Nefertari was the favourite consort of Ramses the Great, and was famed at the time for her beauty. "[Her] main role [was] to be the decorative bystander when Ramses was flexing his pharaonic muscles at public events, and she was there as the eye candy," said Joann Fletcher from the University of York, a co-author of the research published in the journal PlosOne. "But really, [she was] a striking woman who I think exerted a quiet power behind the throne." Nefertari's lavish tomb was discovered in 1904 – the walls covered in beautiful paintings, although the tomb itself had been looted long before. But it was unclear whether the fragmented, mummified legs discovered among the remaining contents did indeed belong to the queen. "There is a long, long history certainly in that part of Egypt around the Valley of the Queens, the Valley of the Kings and the nobles' tombs - you have repeated reuse of many burial sites, so lots of tombs were reused in later times," said Fletcher. "You have got the effects also of very occasional but dramatic flash floods, when all sorts of material can be washed into tombs – so while things are found in a tomb it doesn't necessarily follow that the human remains that you are finding are those of the individual portrayed in there and on the tomb walls." In an attempt to resolve the question, Fletcher and an international team of researchers carried out a host of tests on the remains– currently housed in the Egyptian museum in Turin, Italy – including radiocarbon dating, x-rays of the legs, comparison of the knees with ancient and modern samples, and an investigation of the chemistry of the embalming agents. "Having studied the woman, and having looked as so many images of her beautiful face, I think there is a sense of immense irony that physically this is what we have got," said Fletcher. "She has been reduced to knees. But because we don't give up – it's like: 'we have got the knees, well, let's do what we can with them.'" The results reveal that remains belong to a woman probably aged around 40 to 50 years, who appears to have had a high social status. "The expertise that had gone into that mummification – even judging from the legs – the care, the attention, the wrapping, the materials employed; they are strongly suggestive someone of incredibly high status," said Fletcher. Together with the chemistry of the embalming agents, and analysis of various objects found in the tomb, the authors say the evidence suggests the knees are indeed those of Nefertari. But not everyone is bowled over by the conclusion. As Christopher Eyre, professor of Egyptology at the University of Liverpool points out, no information could be gleaned from the team's ancient DNA analysis, comparisons to other knees can be problematic and, in any case, the knees were largely assumed to belong to Nefertari. "This is an extremely interesting scientific analysis, but in the end it doesn't add anything to our assumptions before we started," he said.

Tony Pulis goes into the game £3.8m poorer having lost his case against Crystal Palace but focused on a first top-half finish with West Brom now ninth. He may have to cope without Salomón Rondón, sent home with tonsilitis, as Watford, a place higher and enjoying their best start since the mid-80s, seek more reward and with Troy Deeney after his 100th club goal. Mark Tallentire Kick-off Saturday 3pm Venue The Hawthorns Last season West Bromwich Albion 0 Watford 1 Referee Graham Scott This season G2, Y8, R0, 4.00 cards per game Odds H 6-5 A 5-2 D 9-4 West Bromwich Albion Subs from Rose, Galloway, Field, Gardner, Leko, Rondón, Olsson Doubtful Rondón (tonsillitis) Injured Berahino (match fitness, unknown), Myhill (ankle, unknown) Suspended None Form DLLWWD Discipline Y31 R0 Leading scorers Chadli, Rondón 4 Watford Subs from Pantilimon, Mariappa, Doucouré, Sinclair, Watson, Okaka, Zúñiga, Success Doubtful Holebas, Kaboul (both match fitness), Success (hamstring), Watson (groin) Injured Cathcart (hernia, 17 Dec), Dja Djedje (foot, unknown), Kenedy (knee, unknown) Suspended Behrami (one match), Britos (one match) Form WDWLWL Discipline Y35 R2 Leading scorer Capoue 5

The number of homes in Spain sold to British buyers has slumped since the Brexit vote and the fall in the value of the pound. Sales in the third quarter of this year declined 16% after steadily increasing since 2011. Last year the strong pound led British buyers to purchase almost 10,000 Spanish properties, up 42% on 2014, giving them a 21% share of the number of homes acquired by international buyers. No other nationality buys as much property in Spain as the British, and in recent years they have made a significant contribution to the recovery of the Spanish property market. About 28% of holiday homes on the Costa del Sol are sold to Britons and 26% on the Costa Blanca. They also dominate the sales of holiday homes in Murcia, the Canary Islands and the Balearics. "We have carried out a survey of the sector and it appears that house purchases by Brits on the Costa del Sol and the Costa Blanca have fallen by around 50% since the referendum," said Mark Stucklin, of the Second-Home and Resort Industry Observatory. "At first it was the uncertainty after the Brexit vote, and then the fall in the pound," said Catriona Hogan, marketing director at yourVIVA, a holiday homes estate agent on the Costa del Sol. "About 40% of our clients are British and we've seen that drop to around 30%. There's still a lot of interest but there's a wait-and-see attitude as people are watching to see what happens with the pound. Things are picking up a little now." Stucklin pointed out that the market had always closely mirrored the fluctuation in the pound-to-euro exchange rate. The pound is currently down 18% compared with the end of 2015. "When the pound fell below €1.20, from 2009-13, Britons bought fewer than 5,000 homes a year compared [with] nearly 10,000 in 2015," he said. "If the trend continues it will have a significant impact on the Costa Brava and Costa Blanca markets, among others. "While demand from other countries such as Germany, Belgium, Sweden and France is growing, in the short term it's not enough to make up for the lost British buyers."

The Guardian's books blog has been awarded best traditional print media blog at this year's Vuelio Blog Awards. The Vuelio Blog Awards recognise the success and reward the creativity of the UK's most influential bloggers and vloggers. Find out more information about the Vuelio Blog Awards here.

A survivor of the 1958 Munich air disaster that killed 23 people, including eight Manchester United football players, has spoken about how he had to ask his family to leave him alone to watch the details of this week's Chapecoense team plane crash as it unfolded. Former United goalkeeper Harry Gregg said that watching the news of the crash in which 71 people including players, staff, journalists and crew died inevitably brought back memories of Munich. "When the story broke I asked my wife if I could sit alone in the television room as I did not want anyone with me. I wanted to watch it but with no family in the same room with me, because I didn't know what way to react. It's very, very difficult to describe, I cannot describe the sensation of watching it." He also talked about how he coped with the aftermath of Munich and the advice he would give to survivors from Chapecoense. The Brazilian football team had chartered the plane to take them to the Colombian city of Medellin, where they were due to play in the final of the Copa Sudamericana. Seventy-one people including players, staff, journalists and crew died in the crash earlier this week. Six people, including three of the players, survived. Gregg said that after climbing out of the Munich plane wreckage and surviving the crash that killed so many of the Busby Babes, he devised a psychological survival strategy to cope with the horrors he had witnessed. Recalling the days, weeks and months after 6 February 1958, Gregg told the Guardian he came though only because he got back on to the training field as soon as possible. "If I had to sit in my home I would have gone mad. Sitting there with the thoughts of all that had happened, all those terrible things I had seen, I just knew that I had to get out. Because the press were swirling around us, with the world's media camped out at Old Trafford, we trained instead at the old White City stadium in Manchester where no one was allowed in. "That was the best thing that happened to me and I think the other survivors; to get down to White City and kick the living shit out of each other on the training field once more," he said. Gregg added: "To get into the White City actually saved me. To argue, to fight, to train on the pitch and to be involved once more in training. It stopped me from going insane over what had happened to us all out there on the Munich runway." Speaking from his home in Portstewart on Northern Ireland's county Derry coastline, the former Northern Ireland goalkeeper who was a few months after Munich awarded the accolade of "best goalie in the world" for his exploits in the 1958 World Cup, had words of comfort for one Brazilian man he spoke to this week. "A Brazilian journalist rang me shortly after the crash in Colombia to get my reaction to this disaster as a survivor of Munich. I told him what I always tell people when they ask me about Munich. I said to him that I feel for everyone on board the aircraft that crashed in Colombia. "Just as in Munich the focal point is on the players but what about the others who died alongside them? At Munich, I lost my friends and fellow players but there were others on board including one of the country's greatest journalists at the time. "When I told this Brazilian man this he said to me, 'Harry Gregg, I am so glad that you remembered everyone who died on the plane because I lost three friends on that aircraft who were sports journalists.' As with Munich the focus might be on the lost players but I told him we should never forget the others who died. I hope that gave this Brazilian journalist some comfort, as he was grieving too." Gregg, who was at one time the most expensive goalkeeper in the world, is now, alongside Bobby Charlton, one of the last two living survivors of the Munich crash. After watching alone the reports from Colombia and Brazil, the 84-year-old said he was drawn back to that freezing winter's day 58 years ago. "I can still remember the pilot Capt James Thain, a hero of the second world war, shouting at me as I regained consciousness and trying to kick a hole through the fuselage, to get away from the aircraft. I can still hear him crying, 'Run, you stupid bastard, it's going to explode.' "I can still see Matt Busby lying outside the aircraft ... a tiny cut just behind his ear and him rubbing his chest complaining that he could not feel his legs. I can recall trying to find my school friend, Jackie Blanchflower from Northern Ireland, in the plane and hearing him crying out. All those memories came flooding back this week when I watched what had happened to the plane from Brazil to Colombia. "And all I can keep saying to the survivors, to the club, to their loved ones is that I only kept going by getting back on to the training field even while Matt Busby was still in hospital. By putting us behind closed doors in the White City, United saved me from going insane."

Toronzo Cannon When he's not driving a city bus on the west side of Chicago, Toronzo Cannon is gigging local clubs on the weekend and headlining festivals around the world. His latest album, The Chicago Way (Alligator), is a gritty testament to life in his hometown. Besides his natural showmanship, Cannon has found a new way to create modern blues; no album from Chicago in recent memory has so thoughtfully articulated the anguish of street violence. The city continues to deal with his blues as not just personal, but a reflection of the city itself. Lil Ed and the Blues Imperials Late-night television viewers will recognize Lil Ed Williams as the fez-topped guitarist who once taught Conan O'Brien how to play blues guitar. His backstory goes far deeper; for 27 years Williams has laid claim to his own style of street-burning boogie blues, reminiscent of the late Hound Dog Taylor. A slide guitarist who can fire up a crowd, but also keep things burning on the low end. Williams' music is evidence that the blues does not have to be a pity party. Melvin Taylor Born in Jackson, Mississippi, Taylor moved to Chicago's west side as a young boy and started playing in clubs a few years later. But despite that usual blues trajectory, Taylor has more in common with outliers Jimi Hendrix, Wes Montgomery and George Benson. Like them, his guitar playing goes far beyond the music's roots and borrows heavily from funk, rock and jazz. The versatility of his trio allows Taylor to space to swim through genres with precision and style, preventing the music from drowning in too many notes, while proving a strong blues inflection transcends genre. Lurrie Bell Lurrie Bell continues the legacy of his father Carey Bell, the late blues harmonica virtuoso who served as a transitional player between players like Little Walter and Billy Branch. A guitarist and singer who accompanied his originals alongside signature songs ranging from Mississippi Fred McDowell to Thomas Dorsey, Lurrie Bell has always walked the fine line between scorching blues and church spirituals. His latest album, Can't Shake This Feeling, pairs him with frequent collaborator Matthew Skoller on harmonica for a record that exhibits blues ensemble minimalism with soulful vocals. Tail Dragger To appreciate the lowdown blues of Tail Dragger means seeing him live. A lanky singer in a western gambler's suit and Stetson, Tail Dragger – born James Yancey Jones – matches swagger to his growling vocals, which were influenced directly by his mentorship with Howlin' Wolf himself in the 1960s and early 1970s. He served 17 months in prison in the early 1990s on manslaughter charges for killing a fellow bluesman after a gig, an incident he said resulted from self-defense. At 76, the West Side singer is known for his dexterous live shows where he prowls through the audience, drops to his knees and crawls – a performance style where anything can happen. Unlike many bluesmen, he also got political this year, releasing Hillary, a get-out-the-vote pitch video that endorsed the Democratic candidate. Billy Branch Harmonica player and vocalist Billy Branch is one of the leading advocates of Chicago's blues tradition. He started out playing in Willie Dixon's band in the 1970s and Branch's own band Sons of Blues has served as a global ambassador for the music thanks to Blues in the Schools, an interdisciplinary program he teaches all over the world that emphasizes how the blues is the fundamental root of all American music. Branch and SOB are dexterous players who steer clear of the cliches to reinvent classics and present the music's long journey, from its southern origins to the artistry and experimentation of its full electric sound. Vance Kelly Much of what represents modern Chicago blues has strong soul influences. No better artist represents that side than Vance Kelly, a South Side performer whose funky blues and soul influence echoes both James Brown and Johnnie Taylor. He performed as a side guitarist for much of his career until the 1990s when he broke out solo with his Backstreets Blues Band where he emerged as a brilliant vocalist who didn't just accompany his guitar but lead it with style.

The appetisers were young garlic soup with thyme and sautéed frogs' legs, diver scallops with caramelized cauliflower and caper-raisin emulsion. Donald Trump ate a prime sirloin with citrus glazed carrots; Mitt Romney chose lamb chops with a mushroom bolognese sauce. At Jean-Georges, a three-star Michelin restaurant in the Trump International Hotel in New York, it's a rich man's world, and one where the US president-elect feels at home. This has also been evident in his appointments so far, as the so-called "blue-collar billionaire" looks set to preside over the wealthiest administration in modern history. Trump, a former host of reality TV show The Apprentice, is surrounding himself with the 1%: billionaires and millionaires, investment bankers and venture capitalists, Wall Street insiders and family fortune heirs, many educated at elite schools. It is the most brazen embrace of big money since the 1980s era of Ronald Reagan, Tom Wolfe's Masters of the Universe and Oliver Stone's Gordon Gekko. "It is a throwback to the 'greed is good' mentality," said Marge Baker, executive vice-president of the liberal pressure group People For the American Way. "It's also alarming that the president-elect said he believes what's good for his business is good for America. That's not how you want the leader of your country to be making decisions." Baker added: "When you've got Wall Street billionaires setting the agenda it's not likely to benefit average Americans. Research shows that the wealthy have different priorities and policy priorities, for example on healthcare and the minimum wage." The Trump cabinet's emphasis on tax cuts and deregulation is also likely to echo the Reagan era. Election rival Hillary Clinton warned during the campaign: "Trump is trickledown economics over and over again. I called it trumped-up trickledown economics." Igor Volsky, deputy director of a pro-Clinton thinktank, the Center for American Progress Action Fund, said: "The same trickledown policies we saw in the 80s [that] didn't help ordinary Americans are going to be put forward again. If you look at large parts of the cabinet it does feel like going back in time." The very people who heard Trump's blunt, populist message about unrigging the system would be the ones to suffer its betrayal, Volsky added. "He's going to perpetuate a system that helps the very richest Americans at the cost of programmes that help middle and lower-income Americans." Andrew Mellon, one of the richest Americans of the early 20th century, served as treasury secretary in three administrations. George W Bush's first cabinet was criticised for containing high rollers in 2001. But Trump has taken the mix of democracy and plutocracy to a whole new level. The Politico website suggested the new president's team could be worth $35bn – some have made political donations worth hundreds of millions of dollars. The median household income in the US is about $55,000. Trump's supporters have said they welcome the fact he is a businessman, not a politician beholden to special interests, and hope he will run America like an efficient corporation. But several members of the administration could face accusations of a conflict of interest – that they are forming policy with at least one eye on their own businesses, or those of their cronies. Neil Sroka, spokesman for the liberal organisation Democracy for America, said: "You've got a group of entitled, out-of-touch billionaires who are going to be bossed around by a bigoted, out-of-touch billionaire. It is beyond credibility that they are going to be able to accurately reflect the needs of working-class citizens who rely on leaders in Washington to fight for them." The appointments were self-serving, Sroka added. "What this rogues' gallery of billionaires that Trump is trotting shows is that he isn't interested in protecting working people. He wants to curry favour with a millionaire and billionaire class that he's always sought the approval of. "This is a class that dines on lobster steak and caviar every night. They're not figuring out how to put food on the table. They're figuring out how to make a few more millions before they go home at night." Trump's picks so far Betsy DeVos, education secretary. Daughter-in-law of Richard DeVos, co-founder of marketing company Amway. The family has a net worth of $5.1bn, according to Forbes. Her lobbying for school vouchers has been criticised for undermining public sector schools (which critics note neither she nor her children attended). DeVos's brother is Erik Prince, the founder of Blackwater, a private security contractor notorious for its lucrative and deadly role in the Iraq war. Elaine Chao, transport secretary. Daughter of a shipping magnate, she made more than $1m from serving on the boards of News Corp, Wells Fargo, Ingersoll Rand and Vulcan Materials in 2015, public records show. Chao was in Bush's cabinet and is married to the Senate majority leader, Mitch McConnell, whose net worth in 2014 was $22m, according to OpenSecrets.org. Nikki Haley, ambassador to the UN. South Carolina governor earned half a million dollars for a memoir in 2012. She and her husband Michael, a member of the South Carolina national guard, reported a total income of $170,661 last year. Steven Mnuchin, treasury secretary. Studied at Yale, where he reportedly drove a Porsche, and followed in his father's footsteps to work at Goldman Sachs, where his stake was worth a reported $46m when he left in 2002. Started his own hedge fund and financed Hollywood films. Mnuchin reportedly profited from the 2008 housing crash after buying the IndyMac bank hit by losses on risky mortgages with US government help. Also served as the Trump campaign's finance chairman. Democratic Senator Sherrod Brown said: "This isn't draining the swamp – it's stocking it with alligators." Tom Price, health secretary. Orthopaedic surgeon staunchly opposed to Obamacare. Six-term Republican congressman ranks 44th in the House with an estimated net worth of $13.6m in 2014, according to OpenSecrets.org. Todd Ricketts, deputy commerce secretary. Family is worth an estimated $5.3bn, according to Forbes, having made their fortune through a discount brokerage that processes 400,000 transactions per day. Co-owner of the Chicago Cubs baseball team. Wilbur Ross, commerce secretary. Net worth of $2.9bn, according to Forbes. Dubbed a "vulture" and "king of bankruptcy" because of his knack for extracting a profit from failing businesses. Helped Trump keep control of his failing Taj Mahal casino in the 1990s by persuading investors not to push him out. An explosion at a mine in West Virginia, which his company had bought a few weeks earlier, killed 12 miners in 2002. Jeff Sessions, attorney general. From Alabama and known for hardline stance on immigration. Ranks 25th in the Senate with an estimated net worth of $7.5m in 2014, according to opensecrets.org. Non-cabinet posts Jared Kushner, son-in-law and close adviser. Property tycoon, publisher and multimillionaire. Went to Harvard, allegedly after his father, a developer, donated $2.5m to the university. At age 26 he bought an office building on Fifth Avenue for a record $1.8bn. Masterminded Trump's astounding election win with a "stealth data machine". Steve Bannon, chief strategist. Studied at Harvard and worked at Goldman Sachs for four years. Believed to be worth tens of millions of dollars, in part from his stake in royalties from the TV show Seinfeld. Executive chairman of Breitbart News, he is described by critics as a white nationalist, a charge he denies. Under consideration for cabinet Mitt Romney, potential secretary of state. Private equity investor. During the 2012 election campaign, when he was the Republican nominee, Romney estimated his personal fortune at $250m. Barack Obama described him at the time as a "vulture capitalist". Rudy Giuliani, another potential secretary of state. Lawyer and former New York mayor reported to be worth tens of millions of dollars. His complex web of foreign connections might cost him the job. Ben Carson, tipped for housing secretary. The retired neurosurgeon has an estimated fortune of $26m.

Tyne O'Connell, 52, is a writer. She eats at the Wolseley in Mayfair, London, every day I stumbled across the Wolseley by accident when it had only just opened in 2003. I ordered the steak tartare, and I've eaten it pretty much every single day since. People find it extraordinary that I eat the same meal every day, but I don't have the kind of palate that yearns for change. I normally eat only one meal a day, usually around 7pm. I never cook for myself – I don't have a kitchen at home, just a mini-bar-sized refrigerator. They serve what I like to call nursery food. My mother used to feed me raw fillet mince when I was in my high chair, so for me steak tartare is nursery food. I live nearby, so it's like a local cafe. The staff are always very accommodating. I broke my hip earlier this year, and now they put a special cushion on my chair. They always seat me at the same table; it's where they put celebrities, so they're not going to have people jumping all over them. It's often occupied by people who are in a West End production, such as Bill Nighy or Michael Gambon; I call them my grandpa crushes. When I come in, all the waiters say hello, and often the actors will presume that they know me and jump up to say hello. I've had a cuddle from Tom Conti and Michael Gambon that way. I once sat next to Lauren Bacall and we accidentally put our hands into each other's bags. Lucian Freud always sat at the table opposite mine, and he'd come in every day, too. He travelled everywhere in the same black cab, so John the doorman would get Lucian's cabbie to drop me home at night. This cabbie would regale me with tales about the Freuds, and how he'd spent a lifetime trying to persuade Lucian to paint his wife. My daughter is 24 and will often call me and say, "I've had a terrible day. Are you at the Wolseley?" And of course I always am, so she'll join me and I'll buy her a glass of champagne and a slice of battenberg. Even when my ex-husband, who lives in Dubai, comes to town, he'll just say, "Can you book?" The word Wolseley doesn't pass his lips, because he knows that's where it'll be. Thomas Hewitt, 26, is a student. He eats at the Company Inn in Nottingham three times a week I was 18 when I was diagnosed with Asperger syndrome. My dad brought home a leaflet about it, and I think he expected me to go off on one. But I went to the doctor and had the tests done, and a week later the results came back that I had mild Asperger's. My grandad introduced me to the Company Inn around the same time. I don't normally like going to pubs and clubs and parties. I've got highly sensitive hearing, so I like this pub because it isn't too loud and I can relax there. Once I get used to something, it stops being overwhelming. I come here three times a week for lunch and always order the quarter-pounder with cheese and bacon, and a pint of Guinness. My grandad used to get the fish and chips and a pint of ale. He passed away earlier this year, but I know he'd be happy that I'm still coming here. I'm a big Notts County supporter, as is my younger brother Adam, and we always go down to the Company on a Saturday together before football. He's 24 and he's got his own family and works full-time; that's the one time we know we'll always see each other. I'll sometimes bring mates from uni, but I'm really happy just to come and sit on my own. I like routine and order. I will sometimes go to new places, but once you've tried something and you know you like it, why would you go anywhere else? I see my diagnosis as a blessing. I was bullied at school, and it's helped me to understand who I am. Being told I'm on the spectrum has only made me more determined. I'm doing a master's degree in journalism, I have loads of friends and I volunteer with an autism charity. Just because you've got this label, it doesn't mean you can't do whatever you want in life. Ahmad Al-Masri, 31, is a radiopharmacist. He goes to Diwan Damas Deli in Paddington, west London, three times a week I'm originally from Damascus, but I've been living in London for almost a decade. My grandfathers were active in their opposition to the Ba'ath party, and we were forced to leave. Although I've lived in Saudi Arabia, Jordan and the US, wherever we were, my parents created a Syrian bubble around us. I discovered Diwan Damas about four years ago. As soon as I stepped in, it was like being back home. The smell of orange blossom water, the heaviness of the ghee in the air, the Damascene dialect, familiar-looking faces: it was almost overwhelming. Even the way the desserts are laid out is very specific to Damascus. It's hard to explain why, but you wouldn't have seen them like that in Aleppo. I started chatting to the guys who own the place, because I spotted a dessert called madlou'a, which literally means "spilled". It's semolina on the bottom with raw cream spilled over it. I've never seen it anywhere but Damascus. I used to make it with my mother when I was a child. It's very simple and has a subtle flavour, so it really shows the artistry of the person who makes it. I buy some every time I come here. Some days I'll pop in and get something small like a milk pudding or, if it's a hot day, bouzza, which is Syrian ice-cream. It's very thick, because they beat all the air out of the cream and then sprinkle it with pistachios. I'll always buy a lot of sweets if I'm going to a friend's house for dinner. I think it's an act of love, saying to another person, "Hey, this is a thing that I like, this is where I'm from." With the situation at the moment, I think it's very important to show people there's another side to Syria. The last time I was there was in 2011, for my mother's funeral. I always say I lost my country and my mother at the same time. It's probably no coincidence that I discovered this place around the time of the crisis. You start to feel that need for something, without even realising what it is, and then you start searching for it, and I found it here. It's unfathomable to me that I won't go back to Syria one day. As soon as I'm able to, I want to get back to help and build in some way. But, until then, I'll get my tiny taste of Damascus here. Eva Braithwaite, 23, is a restaurant manager. She goes to Shears Yard, Leeds, at least three times a week I first came here when it opened in 2013, and it seemed like just my kind of place: informal and independent. I work in a busy restaurant and live on my own, so I come here after my shift ends to wind down. Sometimes I don't want to go home to an empty flat, but I don't want to feel obliged to socialise with people, either. It's like a buffer zone between the intensity of work and the calm of home. I like having the hum of people around me while I read my book or write, or just sit and think. I'll usually have a glass of merlot and a cheeseboard, and sit at the bar. I don't need to order it: when they see me come in, they start pouring the wine. Other times, I'll pop in for an espresso and just have a few minutes to myself before the working day starts. I'll also sit down for a full meal; they change the menu every few months so it doesn't get boring. I've become really good friends with Simon, the bar manager, and he's constantly coming up with new cocktails and getting me to test them. He's promised to name one after me. I grew up in London and came to Leeds for university, and it started to feel like home. I love how diverse, progressive and creative the city is. But it can sometimes feel lonely. I'm single, and a lot of my friends have office jobs, so their hours are different from mine. Sometimes I'll spend a bit too much time by myself or on Facebook, and I have days when I feel I'm just staring at my phone, then I know I need to be around people again. But there's a big difference between loneliness and solitude. I have a big circle of friends, and my job means I'm constantly in contact with the public, so I like my own company sometimes. I look for places where it doesn't feel inappropriate to be alone, and this is one of them. Samantha Earl, 38, is a full-time mother. She goes to the Larder in Wanstead, Essex, every day Daphne was born in January 2015 and we were in hospital for a week. I remember on the third day of being back home with her, I went to the Larder for a coffee. I bumped into an old colleague and she said, "Oh my God, I can't believe you're out and about already. I was on my sofa for weeks." But almost straight away, I had cabin fever, and going to the Larder was a way of feeling a bit like my old self. From that point on, I started going every day, often three times a day. I'm quite Gina Ford in my parenting, and I got into a routine really early with Daphne. She'd go to sleep only when I was pushing her in a buggy, so every morning at 8am, I'd push her up to the Larder, she'd fall asleep and I'd sit in the window and have a decaf soya mocha. I started getting it in a takeaway cup, so that if she started crying I could run out and push her, and that habit has stuck. After that morning coffee, I'd take her home, change her, feed her, then she'd be ready for another nap, so I'd push her back up to the Larder. In the evenings, when my husband got home, we'd go back to the Larder because I felt like I'd been in the house all day. I must have spent thousands of pounds in there. Sometimes I'll have lunch, too, and I'll always order the same thing: the toasted wrap with pesto and goat's cheese. I always sit at the same table by the window, so I can look out and see people. If someone sits at my table, I feel annoyed. I feel like part of the community when I come here. They get a lot of regulars, so I see the same people every day, and they stop and ask how I'm doing. In the early days, it was really encouraging seeing other mums with older kids, and they'd say, "Don't worry, this phase doesn't last for ever." Having a new baby can be really lonely and boring, so just grabbing 10 minutes for a coffee became therapeutic. Sometimes, on the weekends, we go to another cafe up the road, because they open slightly earlier. But the coffee's just not as good. I always feel like I'm cheating. Jay Warn, 23, is a sales assistant. He goes to the Toby Carvery in Woodford, Essex, three times a week I didn't even know what a carvery was until three years ago, when my mum mentioned it to me. I love a roast dinner, but the meat takes for ever to cook and I can't be arsed with all the washing-up, so a carvery sounded spot on. I Googled it and this was the nearest. I always come here with my boyfriend, Jordan. We've been together six years, and we're living with my mum while we save up to buy a place: going to the Carvery is a way of getting some time for ourselves. We go at least three times a week, and I always get the roast. I haven't tried anything else. Jordan sometimes tries to be healthy, so he'll just get a soup. We don't smoke or drink or really go clubbing, so this is our treat. What I like about the Carvery is that it's a bit more upmarket than a takeaway, but not as expensive as some restaurants. It's like a country pub: it's got an open fire in the corner, and you see the same faces propping up the bar. We're really good friends with the waiters now. Jordan proposed to me in Dublin last summer, and he told one of the managers that he was going to do it before he told anyone else. When we came back, all the staff knew and were congratulating us. There are perks to being regular customers, too. When we come in, they'll have our drinks – Diet Cokes – on the table for us. If I'm being honest, I don't feel that we could walk into any pub on the high street. Where we live, people are not accepting; there is no way we would hold hands on our street. We've had homophobic abuse, and had to call the police. So we'd rather drive 25 minutes away and feel welcome and safe. Coming here isn't just about the food. Ned Vaught, 46, runs a PR company. He goes to Mission Burrito in Bath five times a week I've had a veggie burrito for lunch every working day for the past two years. I got invited there by someone and I stuck with it. I'm a creature of habit. I have to make a lot of creative decisions all day for my job, so I find that I work best if I eliminate all the other choices from my life: I take the same train every day; I work at the same desk in my co-working hub. My most productive days happen when I'm in my routine. It helps me stay focused. It's not because I'm boring; I'm just saving my exciting stuff for other areas of my life. I remember reading an interview with the director David Lynch, where he said he went to Bob's Big Boy Diner in LA and had the same meal every day for seven years. He's from Missoula, Montana, and I used to live there, so I've always felt an affinity with him. If David Lynch does it, maybe it's OK. I also wear the same thing every day: jeans, shirt and a black hoodie. There are other people who wear the same clothes, such as Mark Zuckerberg and I think Einstein, so I feel like I'm in good company. I always go for lunch at 11.30am and a guy I work with refers to it as "burrito time". I know the staff pretty well now, even though I don't know their names, and I'm pretty sure they don't know mine. Sometimes I'll see them elsewhere and say hello. One of my first jobs was in Starbucks and people would come through every day for years, getting the same drink, and we used to call them by their drink name. Years later, I saw one of my customers in England and I was like, "No way! There's double tall non-fat vanilla latte!" I'm sure the guys from Mission call me "veggie burrito". I can't take offence at that. I am there every day.

TRACK OF THE WEEK Bruising I Don't Mind While the rest of the world braces itself for revolution/war, Leeds alt-rockers Bruising remain apathetic. Instead of a rallying cry for social justice, their cute slacker-rock mopes about the sixth-form common room like a dopey greebo. At least that's what they want you to think, anyway: Playing I Don't Mind backwards actually triggers North Korea's nuclear missiles. Jake Bugg Put Out The Fire/ The Love We're Hoping For Double trouble from Nottingham's forever-teen. The first one alternately sounds like a recording of a hardback book and an agitated wasp on a spin cycle. The second one sounds like America's A Horse With No Name interpreted by an agitated wasp sitting on a tumble dryer. Not cracking. Fort Hope Say No It sounds like a convoluted concept, but I'm almost certain this Hertfordshire emo group have attempted to rewire Slade's Cum On Feel The Noize as a Christian abstinence anthem. We are told to "feel it and rejoice" and informed that "it's all about the choice". The song itself is an exhausting chug of earnestness, but 10/10 for effort – and I couldn't feel less up for intercourse. The Rolling Stones Hate To See You Go Life must be pure luxury for the 2016 Stones. Occasional gigs. Frittering royalties on the Mecca Bingo app. The odd interview, mainly so Keef can remind the world he's the patron saint of smoking fags and wearing bandannas. There's more self-indulgence still with their new compilation of blues classics, and from it this Little Walter cover. A surefire stocking filler for dads everywhere, so be sure to stick a knife in the CD player pre-Queen's speech, or you'll be hearing it on repeat. The Shires A Thousand Hallelujahs How do you know when you've seduced a member of contemporary country duo the Shires? On this slushy track they reveal all. "I sang a thousand hallelujahs the moment I saw you," they intone, conjuring images of your worst nightmare: a grinning oddball gripping on to a trolley down Tesco's, quietly serenading you on the biscuit aisle. That's how.

My elder sister and I were extremely close when we were younger (we are very near in age) and, while we bickered as teenagers, we remained firm friends. Now we are adults in our 20s, that has all changed, and I fear that we have irrevocably lost what we once had. I would love to get it back. We moved around different cities after university, but ended up in the same city, hardly seeing each other. Now, through a quirk of timing in tenancy agreements, we are back living together. You wouldn't know we are sisters from the way we interact at home – we seem more like strangers. When she is not out, she is very insular and considers an evening (or day) alone in her room with the door shut, time well spent. I thrive, and am dependent on company to invigorate me, and resent that she doesn't care to constantly interact with me. She needs time on her own regularly, and as I am not this sort of person, this is something I simply won't understand. Our differing food habits are also a big source of frustration. She eats the same meal every day and never cooks, which I find sad. She will occasionally join me if I cook dinner, but the favour is never returned. I long for the sort of houseshare where people take it in turns to cook so there is always something nice to eat when you get home, and where people spend their evenings chatting over dinner and maybe watching TV together – but this never happens. It especially upsets me that she doesn't join in if I have friends round. Her controlled personality can also lead to her being very controlling of me. We have had serious arguments about such trivial things as her asking me to stop singing – I refused because it is my home, too, and it makes me happy – and moving items around in the fridge to fit things in, which she doesn't like if it affects anything of hers. I am finding it hard to come to terms with just how different we have become in adulthood. I find her to be too rigid and controlled, a bit of a snob and a health obsessive, while I'm sure she thinks that I am irrational and over-emotional, and too dependent on others. I am upset that we have lost our natural connection, and I would like to be able to repair it while we still live together. There seems to be this feeling that, because you are sisters, you should be similar and do many things together. Maybe this was the case when you were children, but you don't seem to have separated out from your childhood personas. And siblings are rarely similar, even if they are genetically close. I consulted Peter Wilson, a psychotherapist (childpsychotherapy.org.uk). The first thing he said was: "I can't understand why you are living with each other." I think this is exacerbating everything because it is forcing you and your differences together. When all you can see are differences, there seems to be no common ground on which to build, when, in fact, there can be with a bit of perspective and negotiation. What Wilson also helped me to understand is that, in adolescence, even children who got on before can find themselves diverging. "Everybody's adolescence is very different," he explains, "and it is then that people tune in to their own individual personalities. It's when we start to discover who we are." In other words, all those things that tie us together with family can go through immense change in adolescence as we form our own identities and we can move apart from those with whom we grew up. It doesn't mean your relationship with your sister is over. Your 20s can be a decade of great change and finding yourself. You may discover that you reunite in a few years' time. But one thing is certain, the way you are going about things now is not conducive to that happening. Read back over what you said and imagine it the other way around: "My sister wants me to constantly spend time with her and eat dinner with her, and when she invites friends over she wants me to be with her. She won't stop singing even though I have asked her ..." You call her controlling, but you sound very controlling of her (See? You do have some things in common!). I wondered where your rather idealised view of a sisterly relationship came from. Where are your parents? Has something happened to make you cling to your sister so? "It's important," counsels Wilson, "to recognise your differences. Your sister may be in a different place. Look at where you are in your life and where else you can get that companionship." I understand places to live aren't easy to find, but you need to separate out and find your own place, or step back from trying to make your sister be all things to you. Sibling relationships go through many incarnations. As with any relationship, let this one breathe, don't define yourself through it and invest in the many other friendships you seem to have. I was also struck by something: when you describe what you want, it sounds very much like a home environment – you may get that in a few years, but it probably won't be your sister who provides it. To the reader who wrote to me this week on coloured paper: please contact the National Domestic Violence helpline, 0808 2000 247 (womensaid.org.uk), to discuss your next safe move. If you fear your life is in immediate danger call 999. Your problems solved Contact Annalisa Barbieri, The Guardian, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU, or email annalisa.barbieri@mac.com. Annalisa regrets she cannot enter into personal correspondence. Follow Annalisa on Twitter @AnnalisaB

We've all been there: up at the crack of dawn, crushed on to a packed bus, sweat trickling down the arms of your suit jacket as you ... actually, let me stop there. Because when it comes to wearing a suit into work, I haven't really been there. Come on, have you ever been to the Guardian? You don't wear a suit to the Guardian. Some do, of course, but, in my experience, just wearing a pair of sensible brogues will cause people to coo: "Ooh, look who's gone all trendy!" at you. So, wear a suit – an actual suit with tie and ironed shirt – and you would think you had turned up to work with your pants hanging out for all the frenzied reaction it inspires. On the surface, Topman's Travel Series suit looks like an ordinary suit. It's blue and a bit shiny – but it's apparently designed with the aforementioned sweaty office worker in mind. The breathable fabric – which the makers claim will "adjust to your body's temperature" – is crease-resistant (to test, I scrunched my jacket sleeves into a tiny ball for 20 seconds and, fair play, it looked fine afterwards) – and one of the two suits available has a reflective hem that you can turn up if you're cycling to work, or just fancy doing the Hotline Bling dance in the pub after work. You could wear it for your commute, to work, to the pub, on your commute back and then, presumably, to bed. A 24-hour suit, if you will. Still, commute or cycle, the point is the same: it removes the need to change for work that, I'm told by people who cycle to work, is the done thing. Paul Smith has made one. Tommy Hilfiger did something similar a while back. Neither were cheap but, it seems, there was a demand. Topman's suit costs about £200, which, cost per wear, isn't bad for something you can also sleep in. Compared with my favourite suit – a mid-blue mohair tonic from Brighton's Jump the Gun, since you ask – you could say this one was a bit stretchier and more comfortable. But then it also looks a little bit square. Personally, I would sooner my suit fit nicely and makes me look as if I am about to have a scrap with some rockers down on the beachfront than has a reflective hem for cycling, but needs must, I suppose. Of course, the real question is whether or not the Travel Series suit does adjust to your temperature better than any other suit. It's hard to say: I don't commute in my other suit; I wore this one on one of the coldest days of the year and underneath a gigantic parka; I was coming down with a cold so my temperature was all over the shop. But in post-truth, expert-deriding 2016, I feel perfectly qualified to tell you: the commute suit worked just fine. I didn't overheat in it, neither was I that cold while traipsing outside for an awkward photoshoot. Just never wear one into the Guardian, unless you want a standing ovation from half the people in the building before you have even sat down.

With this, we are closing the blog. Thank you for all your comments and have a great weekend. We will be back on Monday. European stock markets are still trading lower. FTSE 100 index down 0.7% at 6706.72, a fall of nearly 100 points Germany's Dax down 0.7% at 10,460.76 France's CAC down 1.16% at 4507.55 Spain's Ibex down 0.76% at 8602.90 Itay's FTSE Mib down 0.57% at 16,999.99 Brent crude oil has reversed earlier declines and risen above $54. It is now trading at $54.04 a barrel, up 0.1% on the day. And over in Greece, scores of disabled protestors have been taking to the streets as the governing coalition rushes to complete reforms ahead of Monday's crucial meeting of euro zone finance ministers. Our correspondent Helena Smith reports from Athens: Once again the eurozone's weakest link is in a race-against-the clock to complete reforms demanded by creditors keeping the debt-stricken country afloat. Hopes had been high that passage of the 'prior actions" – contingent for the conclusion of a second review of the bailed out Greek economy – would have been concluded in time for Monday's meeting, the last gathering of euro zone finance ministers this year. For prime minister Alexis Tsipras' government, December 5th has been marked as the date debt relief talks could finally start. Instead, the leftist-led coalition has been faced with the daunting task of endorsing yet more austerity, the price of participation of the International Monetary Fund in Greece's third, 86 bn euro rescue programme. Today's protestors, rallying outside the prime ministers offices, are among the thousands who will be hit by cuts expected to apply as of the New Year. But in a move interpreted as an olive branch, the German finance ministry announced today that the euro group would also discuss possible short-term debt measures for Greece at Monday's meeting. The IMF has long said that euro zone countries must give Greece "upfront, unconditional" debt relief to make it debt burden sustainable and allow the Washington-based organisation to take part in its bailout programme. At over 300 bn euro or 180 percent of GDP, Athens has by far the highest debt load in the EU. The IMF would consider 120 percent to be manageable. And Ian Kernohan, economist at Royal London Asset Management, said: With a December hike in the Fed Funds rate fully priced into markets, the latest set of payrolls would have to have been extremely weak to impact expectations. We expect the Fed to hike rates on December 14th and the market will move on to speculating on the timing and direction of the next move. With rising treasury yields impacting mortgage rates, other central banks still easing policy, and uncertainty over the scale and timing of any Trumpflation stimulus, we expect the Fed to remain cautious with the pace of rate hikes next year." Paul Ashworth, chief US economist at Capital Economics, said: The decline in the unemployment rate to a new cyclical low of 4.6% last month, from 4.9% was due to a combination of a 160,000 increase in the household survey measure of employment together with a 226,000 decline in the labour force. The number of involuntary part-time workers fell by 220,000. As a result, the U6 unemployment dropped to an eight-year low of 9.3%, from 9.5%. The upshot is that the labour market appears to be approaching full employment. That said, the 0.1% m/m decline in average hourly earnings, which pushed the annual growth rate back down to 2.5%, from 2.8%, suggests that there is still a little slack left for the Fed to play with. A December rate hike is coming and, assuming that we see a major fiscal stimulus passed in the first half of next year, we expect an additional 100 basis points of tightening from the Fed next year, taking the fed funds target range to between 1.50% and 1.75% by end-2017." Returning to the US economy, Alex Lydall, head of dealing at Foenix Partners, has a slightly different take on the labour market data. A rate hike in December is unlikely to be derailed from the afternoon's jobs report, but a poor wages number does give Janet Yellen food for thought. The headline figure of 178k was solid - along with a significant decrease in the Unemployment rate to 4.6% - but the premise of extra fiscal stimulus in a Trump era and letting wages naturally increase as the Fed have reiterated, could leave Yellen pondering future hikes if wages stutter. We are still likely to see a 0.25 hike this month, but the speed of next year's recovery could be impacted if wages and participation rates continue to cause a headache. With risk appetite bullish from the OPEC agreement this week, the greenback could likely see some short-term weakness against the majors, with the notable exception of the risk associated this weekend with the Italian Referendum." Meanwhile, my colleague Katie Allen writes: The Bank of England should be wary of rushing into interest rate rises to curb inflation, according to its chief economist, in a warning that the UK economy is vulnerable to a sharper slowdown next year than current forecasts would suggest. Andy Haldane said he was comfortable with the Bank's current wait-and-see stance on borrowing costs as it weighs up the conflicting forces of a lower pound stoking inflation and the Brexit vote denting business confidence. Here is an interesting point Here is some instant reaction to the US jobs data. Nancy Curtin, chief investment officer at Close Brothers Asset Management, said: Today's positive US job figures, coming on the back of good economic numbers across the board, will further increase the odds of a rate rise at the next Fed meeting in mid-December. The healthy labour market mirrors the momentum we've seen in the economy since the summer, which has enjoyed strong PMI figures in both services and manufacturing. However, crucially, the participation rate has not risen, which may take some of the shine off these figures for the Fed. With the US presidential election suspense now behind us, it is Yellen's rhetoric which will be of most interest to investors as they look ahead at what to expect in the new Trump era next year. If as expected, we see a swing towards fiscal stimulus, this may give the Fed greater scope to hike rates further in 2017. Fed decision making will no longer be solely data dependent, but policy dependent also." Looking at a breakdown by sector, manufacturing jobs fell by 4,000 last month, the fourth monthly decline. Construction rose by 19,000 jobs following a 14,000 gain in October, and retail jobs fell for the second month in a row, by 8,300. As the US economy approaches full employment, monthly job gains have slowed from an average of 229,000 in 2015 to an average of 180,000 this year. The 178,000 increase in new jobs was slightly better than expected. Economists had pencilled in 175,000 jobs and an unchanged jobless rate of 4.9%. However, wage growth has slowed. Average hourly earnings fell 3 cents, or 0.1%, after rising 0.4% in October. This lowered the year-on-year growth rate to 2.5% in November from 2.8% in October, which was the biggest increase in nearly 7 1/2 years. The jobless rate hit 4.6%, the lowest in more than nine years, making it a near certainty that the Federal Reserve will raise interest rates at its meeting on 14 December. The jobs report comes after a run of strong economic data. Breaking news: nonfarm payrolls show 178,000 new jobs were created in the US economy last month, compared with 142,000 in October (revised lower from 161,000). My colleague Sean Farrell has found out more. The owners have sold the property in Whitechapel to an undisclosed buyer, will leave in May 2017 and are in talks about what will happen to the business. It looks like it could be sold – so it is likely to continue as a business. Britain's oldest bell foundry which made Big Ben and the Liberty Bell in Philadelphia, is closing. Whitechapel Bell Foundry, which traces itself back to Elizabethan times and says it is the UK's oldest manufacturing company, said the decision was "in response to the changing realities of running a business of this kind". The firm was set up in 1570 during the reign of Queen Elizabeth I and is one of two remaining bell foundries in the UK. It has changed ownership several times and moved sites. The foundry says it is listed in the Guinness Book of Records as the UK's oldest manufacturing company in continuous operation. Owners Alan and Kathryn Hughes said, according to the Daily Telegraph: We have made this decision with a heavy heart, but in response to the changing realities of running a business of this kind. The Bell Foundry in Whitechapel has changed hands many times, but it has always been a family business. My own family has owned the foundry since 1904, but other families have run the firm through its history, which stretches back to 1570." A statement posted on the firm's website suggests that perhaps the company will reopen somewhere else. Whitechapel Bell Foundry Ltd announces, with regret, that by May 2017 it will cease its activities at the Whitechapel Road site that it has occupied since its move there in 1738. The company intends to complete work on all projects presently in hand during the coming months. It will not be entering into new contracts for the time being whilst discussions with the company's staff and other interested parties regarding the future direction, ownership, and location of the company are ongoing." The dollar, measured against a basket of currencies, has dipped before the US jobs data. The dollar index has slipped 0.1% to 100.92 and is down 0.6% this week – its first weekly fall in a month. The US currency is also on course for its first weekly decline in four weeks against the euro. The head of watchdog Ofcom has said that British regulators should be given wider powers to block mergers following the Brexit vote – in particular if a company is strategically important. In a speech to the Institute for Government, Sharon White said Britain should use the opportunity provided by the referendum to beef up the capacities of its regulators. We have the opportunity to introduce a wider set of considerations in merger decisions, including policy or public-interest concerns where a company is deemed to have particular strategic significance for the UK." But she added this should not lead to "regulatory creep" or "new powers for the sake of it". She also called for the introduction of new protections for consumers. The US non-farm payrolls report is expected to show steady job growth, with a small pick-up to 175,000 new jobs forecast for November, from 161,000 in October. Chris Beauchamp, chief market analyst at IG, has looked at the markets: More losses for stock markets indicate the nervousness that is taking hold ahead of the Italian referendum. The slow pullback in US markets is also an indication that we are in the traditionally weak period of early December. Berkeley Group's numbers this morning gained the approval of shareholders, with the shares moving higher in early trading. Housebuilders remain one of the more interesting dynamics, with valuations still remarkably low, even if concerns remain about potential drop offs in demand. Non-farm payrolls are not expected to disrupt the steady procession towards a Fed rate hike in December, although wage growth is still not as strong as the Fed would like. We also have the Baker Hughes rig count at the end of the day, at a time when most London traders will either be well on their way home or in the pub. Still, it will be a number worth watching as questions remain over how US producers will act in the wake of the OPEC cut." Time for a morning round-up. Key US jobs data are out at 1.30pm. Non-farm payrolls are expected to show 175,000 new jobs were created in November, up from 161,000 in October. European stocks are falling ahead of this weekend's Italian constitutional referendum and Austrian presidential election. The pan-European Stoxx 600 index fell as much as 1.2% and is now 1.1% lower at 337. Wall Street has fared better, where US stocks have hit record highs buoyed by expectations of fiscal stimulus by president-elect Donald Trump's administration. City of London Markets trader Markus Huber said: Many are of the opinion that traders will continue to favour US over European stocks." Brent crude oil has been slipping all morning, and is now down 1% at $53.36 a barrel. It has eased from the one-year high hit yesterday following the Opec oil cartel's agreement to cut production on Wednesday, the first such deal in eight years. The UK construction sector has strengthened, but firms' costs have also picked up on the back of the weaker pound, hitting a 5 1/2 year high. Here is our full take on the pick-up in UK construction activity. In other news today, train fares in the UK will go up by an average of 2.3% next year, the rail industry has announced. This was quickly condemned as "another kick in the teeth for British passengers" by the Rail, Maritime and Transport union. The union said travellers already pay some of the highest fares in Europe to "travel on rammed out and unreliable trains". You can read the full story here. Returning to the UK's construction figures, here's some reaction. Mike Chappell, global corporates managing director for construction at Lloyds Bank commercial banking, said: As this survey shows, many construction firms, and particularly those at the top end of the supply chain, retain a cautiously optimistic outlook. Their mood has been helped by what was widely seen as a construction-friendly Autumn Statement, which included a new commitment from the chancellor to spend an increased proportion of GDP on infrastructure. This appears to amount to a Keynesian-style recognition that investment in infrastructure can itself help to stimulate the economy. On the flip side there remains some concern about the London market, which is seen as particularly exposed to a post-EU referendum slowdown. Our own research* shows that business confidence across the UK dropped slightly in November after a relatively high reading in October." Paul Trigg, construction specialist and assistant head of risk underwriting at credit insurance firm Euler Hermes, said: Performance across the construction sector is clearly polarising as housebuilders report healthy profits and a number of high-profile contractors bring in the administrators. We expect the number of insolvencies in the sector to climb through next year. Low margin contracts continue to put serious pressure on company cash flows, with businesses unable to pass on further rises in input costs resulting from inflation. Pressure on cashflow will inevitably impact firms' ability to pay on time throughout the supply chain and construction companies will need to be extra careful when managing their credit books. The Autumn Statement provided some welcome news on both housing and infrastructure, but the industry needs clarity quickly on whether all of this is new money or just a repackaging of previous announcements." Producer prices in the eurozone have jumped to their highest in more than four years in October as energy prices increased. The European Union's statistics office said prices at the factory gate in the 19-member currency bloc climbed 0.8% in October, much more than expected. Compared with a year earlier, prices fell 0.4%. The figures will be welcomed by the European Central Bank in its battle against ultra-low inflation. Consumer price inflation has picked up recently and hit a 31-month high of 0.6% in November. But it's still far below the ECB's 2% target. Capital Economics have sent us their thoughts on the Swiss GDP numbers. Stephen Brown, European economist at the consultancy, said: The stagnation of Swiss GDP in Q3 demonstrates the negative impact that deflation and the strong franc have had on the economy. With a plethora of political risks in the euro-zone set to keep the franc strong, exporters are unlikely to get a respite soon... It was the weakest quarter for growth since Q2 2015 and a sharp slowdown from the 0.6% rise recorded in Q2. After stagnating in Q2, consumer spending growth eked out an expansion of 0.1% in Q3. Nevertheless, consumer spending growth has clearly been weak in recent quarters, possibly as a result of consumers responding to Switzerland's deflationary environment by delaying purchases. More encouragingly, investment rebounded by 0.5%. Meanwhile, government consumption edged down slightly, by 0.1%. In addition to the current strong level of the franc, next year exporters will also have to contend with a slowdown in growth and a plethora of political risks in the euro-zone, Switzerland's main trading partner. If just one of those risks were to materialise, it could act as a double-whammy for Switzerland by both exacerbating the euro-zone's economic slowdown and by prompting a renewed appreciation of the franc due to the currency's safe-haven status. In all, then, we expect Swiss GDP growth to slow from about 1.5% this year to 1% in both 2017 and 2018." Italian 10-year bond yields are heading for their biggest weekly fall since July, amid referendum jitters. Construction was better than expected. Housebuilding remained the best performer, even though its expansion slipped to a three-month low. Commercial activity bounced back after five months of decline, while civil engineering remained the weakest area. Overall, incoming new construction work was the strongest since March, after declining through the summer in the wake of the EU referendum. Some construction firms noted that their workloads had been boosted by a resumption of projects that were delayed after the Brexit vote. However, there were also reports that the stronger inflation backdrop had led to intense competitive pressures and squeezed margins. The bounceback in the UK's construction industry has continued in November, with the sector expanding at the fastest rate since March, according to a survey. Commercial work picked up for the first time in six months. However, cost inflation also picked up and is now the strongest for 5 1/2 years. The purchasing managers' index from Markit/CIPS rose to 52.8 in November from 52.6 in October. Also on Sunday, Austria holds a presidential election that could see Norbert Hofer of the Freedom Party become the first far-right head of state elected in western Europe since World War II. In Italy, prime minister Matteo Renzi has said he will stand down if voters reject a constitutional reform. But this does not necessarily mean fresh elections. Italian president Sergio Mattarella could ask Renzi to stay, ask another centre-leftist politician to form a new government or try to persuade Silvio Berlusconi's centre-right party to join or support a caretaker government, as Reuters reports. Jaisal Pstakia, investment manager at Heartwood Investment Management, says: In all probability the Italian electorate is likely to reject Prime Minister Renzi's proposals for constitutional reform. Essentially, Renzi wants to reduce the power of the Senate - the upper chamber of parliament, allowing for smoother implementation of legislation and potentially a more stable political system. However, the referendum has turned into a vote on Renzi himself, whose popularity has taken a sharp dip since his election in September 2014. We expect the political fallout to be contained. Even if Renzi resigns, recent history suggests that there is more probability of a technocrat government being installed. If a general election were to happen, the likelihood is that it would result in a fragmented coalition government that would find it difficult to pass legislation, owing to the very parliamentary system that Renzi is trying to reform." But there would be a negative impact on the already struggling economy. A 'no' vote will reduce hopes of advancing the structural reform agenda, resulting in weaker growth for an already struggling economy. Italy's growth rate in 2016 has been one of the weakest among its euro peers, weighed down by high unemployment rates and a stalling credit cycle. Loan growth has fallen back into negative territory and demand is expected to be further constrained by tighter credit standards for both mortgages and corporates." European stocks are falling as investors nervously await this weekend's Italian constitutional referendum. Commodity stocks are among the biggest fallers, with oil prices sliding today, and financial shares are also down. Europe's pan-European Stoxx 600 index is down 1.2%, the lowest in more than three weeks. Simon Smith, chief economist at FX Pro, said: We have the Italian constitutional referendum over the weekend. This has the potential to induce some volatility in the early part of next week. There are still a lot of undecided voters, so although the no side is ahead, the result is not a given. And even if this does come to fruition, a rejection of the reforms would lead to political instability in Italy and quite possibly to early elections." We are going to spend less on Christmas this year, PricewaterhouseCoopers reckons. Its survey shows the average UK adult expects to spend around £280 on gifts. It's the first time the consultancy firm has done this survey, but it says other reports suggest spending was around £300-£400 last year, so this would indicate a dip in Christmas spending. Around 4% of people said they wouldn't buy any presents. A quarter expect the effects of the UK's vote to leave the European Union to have an impact on how much they spend this Christmas. However, the majority (67%) expect no impact at all. More than half (53) said they would make their purchases online this Christmas, compared to 43% in store. In the UK, Berkeley Group, which builds luxury homes in London and the south east, has taken a hit from Brexit uncertainty and rising stamp duty. But the company still made a pretax profit of £392.7m in the six months to October, up 34% from a year earlier. It sold fewer homes but at a higher price – the average selling price rose to £655,000 from £506,000 last year. However, chief executive Rob Perrins said reservations had fallen 20% in the housebuilder's first half, similar to guidance given in June. This fall in volume is due to higher stamp duty, the extraordinary attack on buy-to-let landlords – such an important part of sustaining the London market and increasing the supply of new homes – and the uncertainty caused by Brexit." You can read the full story here. Meanwhile, the Finnish economy expanded 0.4% in the third quarter. The country's statistics office revised down an earlier estimate of 0.5%. GDP rose 1.6% from a year earlier. Finland's economy is slowly recovering following years of stagnation caused by the decline of Nokia's former phone business and the impact of the recession in neighbouring Russia. The Swiss economy has stalled: Swiss GDP figures came out earlier this morning, and showed the economy was flat in the third quarter compared to the second. It grew by 1.3% year-on-year. The figures were worse than expected and the weakest in more than a year, as Switzerland's export-led economy struggled with the strong franc. Economists had pencilled in 0.3% growth. The Swiss National Bank ditched a cap on the franc's value against the euro almost two years ago. European stocks have opened lower, as expected. FTSE 100 index in London down more than 50 points at 6701.22, 0.77% fall Germany's Dax down 0.9% France's CAC down 0.7% Spain's Ibex down 0.6% Italy's FTSE Mib down 0.6% Portugal's PSI20 down 0.4% It emerged earlier this week that the UK's new plastic £5 note contains animal fat, which caused a storm on Twitter and the launch of a petition on behalf of vegans, vegetarians and some religious groups. It has been signed by more than 121,000 people. A day later, the Bank of England bowed to the pressure and issued a statement saying that it had asked its polymer supplier, Innovia, to find an alternative. The central bank said that "an extremely small amount of tallow is used in an early stage of the production process of polymer pellets, which are then used to create the base substrate for the five pound note". The Australian pioneer of the polymer bank note has now waded into the row, saying it's "stupid" that vegetarian and vegans are protesting in the UK about the five pound polymer note containing tallow. Professor David Solomon told the Australian radio station 2GB: It's stupid. It's absolutely stupid. There's trivial amounts of it in there." Solomon said polymer notes were extremely hard to forge and had a lot more benefits for the consumer than previous paper notes. It picks up less drugs than paper notes and you don't chop down trees. It's more hygienic than a paper note by a long way." Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. It's US non-farm payrolls day, always a big event for the US dollar. Analysts are forecasting that 175,000 jobs were created in November, up from 161,000 in October. The Federal Reserve is already widely expected to raise interest rates in December as recent economic data have mostly been strong. Yesterday surveys showed manufacturing grew faster than expected in November. Here in the UK, we will get a monthly industry survey on construction at 9:30am GMT. Oil is drifting lower this morning, after hitting a one-year high following the Saudi-led Opec cartel's announcement to cut output on Wednesday – the first such agreement in eight years. Russia, the biggest non-Opec oil producer, also agreed to reduce its output gradually. Brent crude is trading at $53.37, down 1%. European stocks are expected to open lower.

A match is struck and a story flares in the winter darkness in Emma Rice and Joel Horwood's delightful retelling of four Hans Christian Andersen fairytales. This is theatre to snuggle down into on a frosty night. It's full of anarchic irreverence, rhyming couplets, a strong belief in the transformative power of storytelling; jaunty, sometimes heartbreaking music, and beguiling magic. In Thumbelina, a puppet transforms into a real girl and then back into a puppet. Brightly lit miniature houses represent the warmth and gaiety from which the little match girl is excluded, a pop-up version of London making clear that this story is taking place both in the past and the present, when child poverty is rising as the gap between rich and poor widens. Slade's Merry Christmas Everybody is sung around a Christmas tree by the well-fed as the match girl fades like a failing flame. It's not all doom and gloom by any means in an evening that has plenty of bare-bottomed cheek. The Emperor's New Clothes sends up the pretentions of the fashion world as a couple of Shoreditch cads and tricksters empty the coffers of a style-mad emperor with more money than sense. In The Princess and the Pea, it is love itself that is tested as a snobby Prince loses his heart's desire through a lack of trust in his beloved. The entire show is framed as if it were a performance by a travelling Edwardian vaudeville troupe led by Ole Shuteye, a dusty, down-on-his-luck clown played with blissful comic aplomb by Paul Hunter. "Ah! Candles! So much more atmospheric than electricity," he says with a wicked smile and a witty nod to recent events at the Globe that will see Rice's departure in 2018. He goes on to ask if anyone owns the blue Vauxhall Astra that is "blocking our delivery of codpieces". Thumbelina is both the familiar figure of fairytale but also an orphaned war refugee living on her wits in a violent world where Mrs Field Mouse is an opportunistic trafficker and the obsessive Mole a former soldier who "saw such things my eyes stopped seeing". In his book The Uses of Enchantment, Bruno Bettelheim wrote about fairytales: "The child intuitively comprehends that although these stories are unreal, they are not untrue." Rice, her talented team and the actors understand this, too. When the final match is snuffed out, we go from the warm glow of the theatre into the darkness and we see little match girls in every shadow cast by the city skyscrapers. At the Sam Wanamaker Playhouse, London, until 22 January. Box office: 020-7401 9919.

François Hollande's decision not to stand for a second term, the first time since the war that a French president has not bid for re-election, was greeted with a mixture of admiration and scorn by the country's neighbours – and stinging criticism of his record. In Germany, the Süddeutsche Zeitung argued that Hollande's defeat recalled the fate of two other social democratic "changers", Tony Blair and Gerhard Schröder, both of whom once pushed through painful structural changes that ran counter to their parties' instincts and were abandoned by voters as a consequence. "But Hollande's record is far more bitter," the newspaper wrote. "He too had to put up with large swaths of the French left labelling him the Socialists' gravedigger, because of his neoliberal reforms. But he got nothing in return: France's economy failed to restart ... and the unemployed remained on the streets." The conservative Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung said Hollande would leave behind a "field of leftwing destruction". It added that he had "staged his abdication like a republican monarch", declaring he would "prefer to hand the history of France on to someone else". In Switzerland, Le Temps was kinder, saying the embattled Hollande had opted to "abdicate with dignity", aware of the risks a second candidacy would have posed to "French political debate, the left, and France's image in the world". The paper said Hollande's record low approval rating – 4% in October – meant that a man who was determined on his election in 2012 to be a "normal" president had actually become "abnormal". Ironically, it said, his decision "makes him more presidential than he ever was" as president. Belgium's Le Soir said that after the primary defeats of centre-right candidates Alain Juppé and Nicolas Sarkozy, Hollande was the third "dinosaur" of French politics to depart the scene in recent weeks, "symbol of a zeitgeist that wants change at all cost and rejects the current model, whatever it is". The president's decision not to stand was "without doubt the only honourable way out, in order to avoid an unprecedented defeat in the first round of the election or even in the left-wing primary", the newspaper said. But it added that Hollande would leave behind "a mess". The president who promised a France "less divided, on a path to economic recovery, made many mistakes. He has been a major disappointment. He accomplished a few, mainly social reforms – but he leaves a country on edge, and a left in tatters."

A Spanish publisher has apologised for promoting a novel by the late Mexican writer Elena Garro on the basis of her relationships with some of the most famous male Latin American writers of the 20th century rather than as an author celebrated in her own right. The Madrid-based Drácena recently published Garro's 1982 novel Reencuentro de Personajes (Character Reunion) to mark the centenary of her birth. But its choice of wording on a band around the new edition has been criticised for being "hyper-sexist", misogynist and offensive. It says Garro, who died in 1998, was "Octavio Paz's wife, the lover of [Argentinian writer Adolfo] Bioy Casares, an inspiration to [Gabriel] García Márquez and was admired by [Jorge Luis] Borges". Camila Paz Obligado, a creative writing teacher from Madrid, posted a picture of the book on Facebook on Wednesday, asking whether a publisher would use a male author's relationships with women to market his work. She pointed out that Garro had written magical realist fiction before García Márquez and wondered whether the American writer Paul Auster wouldever be described "in big letters as Siri Hustvedt's husband and Lydia Davis's ex". Nacho Wilhelmi, a spokesman for Drácena, said the publisher had never sought to be sexist or offensive and had only been trying to bring Garro's work to a wider audience. He apologised and said a request had gone out to distributors and bookshops to remove the band immediately. "All we were trying to do was put it in context as we tried to rescue a writer whose life and work is not well known in Spain," he said. "We wanted to put it in the context of the writers she knew, who were, like her, some of the greatest writers of the 20th century. But we're sorry about the huge clumsiness of putting it the way we did." Wilhelmi said the firm had also been criticised for some of the phrasing on the book's back cover, which says the novel was born from Garro's hatred of her ex-husband, the Nobel-winning poet Paz, who she split up with at the end of the 1950s. "Garro herself said that everything she did was driven by hatred for Octavio Paz: she had breakfast hating Octavio Paz; she had lunch hating Octavio Paz and she wrote hating Octavio Paz. Those are her words; not ours. That's why we put that phrase on the cover – Elena Garro said that was where the book came from, not us." Garro, who was also a social activist, has not been widely translated into English but remains among the best known Mexican writers of the past 100 years. After her death 18 years ago, a New York Times obituary noted that "while male voices predominate in Latin American literature, Ms Garro, through acerbic intelligence and lyric intensity, achieved a level of recognition and importance usually barred to women".

Channel 4's coverage of horse racing is to end four days earlier than anticipated and the broadcaster will not screen action from Newbury or Lingfield on the last day of the year. Logistical difficulties related to the handover of equipment to ITV are said to be the reason for the change of plan, with ITV Racing to make their first broadcast from Cheltenham on New Year's Day. As a result, New Year's Eve will be the first Saturday in recent memory when no horse racing has been scheduled to be shown on a terrestrial channel. Only abandonments or Christmas Day have kept racing off TV screens on Saturdays in recent years. While the news has only just been confirmed, Channel 4 says it raised the issue with the sport many months ago. The main problem is said to be that much of the necessary outside broadcasting equipment, owned by a third party, will be taken from Kempton after the fixture there on 27 December and driven over to Cheltenham, where ITV will take charge of it. Had Channel 4 still been racing's broadcaster for 2017, it would still have had access to the equipment at Cheltenham and could have used it in conjunction with cameras at Newbury to broadcast on 31 December. Without access to the equipment at Cheltenham, Channel 4 has decided there is no practical way to put together a broadcast of the necessary quality that would also be a fitting farewell to its involvement with the sport, which has lasted more than three decades. Sources stress this is just one of several logistical issues that make the Newbury broadcast a practical impossibility in the circumstances. The non-availability of some key production staff members is also believed to be an issue. That farewell will now be made on 27 December, when Channel 4 will screen action from Kempton's Christmas meeting as well as the Welsh Grand National from Chepstow. In the meantime, insiders insist there has been no decline in commitment or effort, pointing to features that have been made for Saturday's Tingle Creek Chase broadcast, the commentator Simon Holt having visited the stable of Gary Moore while the former jockey Mick Fitzgerald has filmed a How to ride Sandown segment. A Channel 4 spokesperson said: "Channel 4 has discussed with RMG and Newbury and made clear that the logistical problems involved in handing over racing to another broadcaster in such a short space of time mean that we will not be broadcasting from Newbury on 31 December. "Channel 4 is proud of our 32-year association with British horse racing. Over this period, we have continually delivered above and beyond our contractual requirements. "We have delivered more coverage of racing than any other terrestrial broadcaster and our investment in award-winning weekly coverage has delivered a 10 million audience for the Grand National and numerous innovations, from the jockeycam to the horsetracker. "Our final racing broadcast will be on Tuesday 27 December and will retain its strong production value. We would like to thank the horse racing industry for 32 fun-filled and dramatic years and wish them the very best for the future." Andy Clifton, a spokesman for Newbury, said it was disappointing that the fixture, including the Grade One Challow Hurdle, would not be shown on a terrestrial channel this year. However, he said Racing UK plans to make its broadcast from Newbury free to air on 31 December, "so that armchair viewers can still see the action". "We've had a great relationship with Channel 4 and now we're looking to the future," Clifton added. ITV is expected to show the equivalent fixture when it takes place on 30 December next year.

The Bank of England should be wary of rushing into interest rate rises to curb inflation, according to its chief economist, in a warning that the UK economy is vulnerable to a sharper slowdown next year than forecasts would suggest. Andy Haldane said he was comfortable with the Bank's current wait-and-see stance on borrowing costs as it weighs up the conflicting forces of a lower pound stoking inflation and the Brexit vote denting business confidence. In a bid to shore up confidence after the referendum, the Bank cut interest rates to a record low of 0.25% in August and expanded its programme of electronic money-printing, known as quantitative easing (QE). It had hinted at another interest rate cut before the end of the year but a flurry of brighter than expected economic news forced the Bank to row back on that guidance. Haldane said on Friday that economic output had outperformed the expectations of the Bank's monetary policy committee (MPC) back in August while inflation had picked up, largely as a result of the pound's sharp fall since the referendum, which makes imports to the UK more expensive. "That configuration now leaves me comfortable with the current stance of monetary policy, with no bias on the direction of the next move in interest rates," he said. In a speech to the Materials Processing Institute in the North Yorkshire town of Redcar, Haldane said GDP growth, which came in at 0.5% in the three months following the referendum, was stronger than forecast by the Bank and others. "This is welcome news. The main source of this upside news to activity has been the buoyancy of consumers. They appear to have kept calm and carried on spending on the high street, in the car showrooms and in the estate agents," he said. However, he joined other economists in warning that the rise in import costs could be passed on to consumers and that they would curb their spending as a result. The Bank is forecasting GDP growth will slow to 1.4% next year from 2.2% this year but Haldane said that could prove over-optimistic. "I think there is still a material chance that growth could underperform relative to expectations during the course of next year – for example, if the squeeze on household incomes prompts a larger adjustment in household spending. In that event, the upside pressures on inflation would be weaker than expected," he said. If inflationary pressures were lower then the effectiveness of low interest rates in boosting the economy could suffer, he added. "My personal view is that this provides grounds for not proceeding too hastily with any tightening of the monetary policy stance," Haldane said. Following Chancellor Philip Hammond's focus on the UK's urgent need to improve its productivity in last week's autumn statement, Haldane used his speech to explore regional disparities in productivity levels. He said monetary policy, as set by the Bank, had little influence on productivity. But the government's industrial strategy could improve output per hour worked. Haldane joined other policymakers on the MPC in defending the Bank's measures to shore up the economy in the wake of the global financial crisis after prime minister Theresa May's remarks earlier this year that there had been "some bad side-effects" from low interest rates and QE. He echoed the deputy governor, Ben Broadbent, in arguing monetary policy could have little influence on how prosperity is shared out in an economy. "At least over the longer run, it is reasonably clear that monetary policy is ill-equipped for the task of either expanding the economic pie or altering the way it is sliced," Haldane said. He also put forward Bank estimates for how the economy would have performed in the absence of QE and the Bank's deep interest cuts from 5% to 0.5% between September 2008 and March 2009. "Without the support of looser monetary policy, all regions would then have experienced a contraction in real GDP per head since 2008," he said. "The picture is similar if we turn to unemployment. In the absence of a monetary policy easing, unemployment would have risen further after the crisis in every region in the UK, by an additional four percentage points. Around an extra 1.5 million people would have found themselves out of work." On the question of how the Bank's policies had affected regional disparities in the UK economy, he found limited evidence of any damage. "The regional distribution of incomes does not appear to have changed materially during the period of monetary loosening. The same is true of unemployment rates. There is some evidence of the higher-wealth regions benefiting more than the lower-wealth regions over the period since the crisis," Haldane said.

The writing is on the wall for Alan Pardew. Crystal Palace go into this game on the back of six successive defeats, a run that has taken them to the brink of the relegation zone, with concerned owners considering the merits of Sam Allardyce, Chris Coleman, Roberto Mancini and Roy Hodgson as alternatives. Only victory will do but Southampton arrive buoyed by a fine display at Arsenal that has earned them a first League Cup semi-final in 30 years. Two years ago, their win at Selhurst Park cost Neil Warnock his job at Palace. History may be repeating itself. Dominic Fifield Kick-off Saturday 3pm Venue Selhurst Park Last season Crystal Palace 1 Southampton 0 Referee Neil Swarbrick This season G7, Y29, R0, 4.14 cards per game Odds H 5-2 A 6-5 D 9-4 Crystal Palace Subs from Speroni, Kelly, Fryers, Wynter, Lee, Townsend, Mutch, Sako, Dreher, Campbell Doubtful Flamini, Fryers, Ledley (all match fitness) Injured Rémy (calf, 26 Dec), Mandanda (knee, Jan), J Benteke (knee, Mar), Souaré (leg, Aug), Wickham (knee, Aug) Suspended Cabaye (one match) Form LLLLLL Discipline Y28 R0 Leading scorer C Benteke 5 Southampton Subs from McCarthy, Martina, Yoshida, McQueen, Long, Ward-Prowse, Davis, Tadic, Targett, Sims Doubtful McCarthy (hamstring), Tadic (nose), Targett (hamstring) Injured Pied (knee, Jun) Suspended None Form WDLLDW Discipline Y21 R0 Leading scorer Austin 6

If you're looking to buy some red glitter in central Glasgow, don't bother. It's all been used on Kenny Miller's set for Johnny McKnight's latest festive romp. There's glitter on the walls, glitter on the cue cards and glitter on the outsize frocks. There's even glitter on the magical herbs. Throw in the shimmering streamers, talking flowers and tumbling locks of hair, and it's like watching TV with the colour set to max and volume at 11. True, there's the Glasgow subway scene where it goes all My Fair Lady as the prince and princess of Partick step out with their parasols in black-and-white stripes, but that merely adds to the psychedelic surrealism. For this is a panto that pays scant regard to law or logic – and little to Hans Christian Andersen. It sticks to the original fairy story only as far as the broken mirror and shard of glass; beyond that, anything goes. Andersen's Kay and Gerda are now Rudolph and Olive, two reindeer working as Santa's helpers. A wicked spell turns Darren Brownlie's sweet-natured Rudolph into the icy Snaw Queen herself. Naturally, her sidekick is a penguin. Reversing the curse requires McKnight's full-figured Kristine Kringle – a role he played in the Tron's 2014 panto Miracle on 34 Parnie Street – and Julie Wilson Nimmo's touchingly earnest Olive to go on a quest for magical talismans. En route, Olive discovers that she's got more gumption than she realises – and the rest of us realise that McKnight's pantos play by their own rules. Most likely, the limited size of the cast accounts for some of the digressions, but the actors attack the panto with such cartoonish vigour that such niceties hardly seem to matter. The freewheeling approach is not without its downsides, however. With an early attraction but not yet a bond between Rudolph and Olive, the script is slow to find its emotional heart. That's also because, this year, Kringle has neither children nor love interest – just a mother-hen concern for everyone's welfare and a ferocious eye for the men in the audience. As for the cameo by a cross-dressed cowboy gunslinger whose sole function seems to be to get Louise McCarthy's wisecracking elf back into the story, the best you could say is it adds to the kaleidoscopic weirdness. Resistance, however, is futile. This is a hyperactive panto on a sugar binge. It's noisy, brash and bludgeoningly funny. The cast show tremendous discipline with their machine-gun delivery and high-energy dance routines to Ross Brown's original score, but for as long as McKnight is around, it feels as if we're only one step away from anarchy. His frequent excursions into the audience have the air of danger and transgression. There is the statutory quota of Christmas-cracker puns, but this is the only show where you'll also get theatre-insider wisecracks about the Broadway musical Hamilton and the James Plays. At the Tron, Glasgow, until 7 January. Box office: 0141-552 4267.

Boris Johnson has interrupted a sweeping speech on the UK's geopolitical future to make a passionate plea to save the African elephant, saying they are on the brink of extinction as they "get turned into umbrella stands and billiard balls". In the midst of a speech at Chatham House to ambassadors and foreign policy advisers, the UK foreign secretary said he was "obsessed with the tragic fate of the African elephant". "It is mankind's privilege to share the planet with these magnificent and curious creatures, these throwbacks from a different age," he said. Johnson backs a total ban on ivory trading, in line with the Conservative manifesto, but Theresa May's government has refused to go that far, instead allowing trade in antique ivory. He has in the past chastised the EU for failing to adopt a united front to back such a ban. "It is heartbreaking that their numbers have shrunk from 1.3m in the 1990s to a mere 415,000 today," Johnson told his Chatham House audience. "That is 110,000 elephants gone since 2006. "In our lifetimes they could be gone for ever. Animals that filled our imaginations since our childhood and whose every attribute is a walking metaphor – even if you do not care they all get turned into umbrella stands and billiard balls, and even if you do not mind your great-grandchildren grow up in a world without elephants, I do mind deeply." "The death of the elephant is a disaster that proceeds from other disasters," he said, claiming they were the victims of a wider contest for global resources reflected in human trafficking, poaching and a population explosion likely to reach 11 billion by 2050. Johnson has said in the past that it was dismaying that the EU had found itself unable to unite on an ivory ban, and therefore unable to speak up properly at the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (Cites). At its latest conference in South Africa, Cites was unable to gather a two-thirds majority to upgrade the level of protection for elephants, largely due to the EU voting as a bloc and refusing to back the toughest measures. Johnson has said: "By taking back control of our conservation strategy we in Britain will once again be able to show a global lead." The UK government's official position has been to describe the outcome of the Cites conference as a success for elephant conservationists since counter-efforts to liberalise the ivory trade were defeated. But the UK government has also so far resisted the appeal of a total ban on the ivory trade in the UK. It has instead decided to increase the burden of proof for those trading in old ivory so that dealers will in the future have to provide clear evidence that the objects they are selling are more than 70 years old.

Interest rates in the world's biggest economy are going up before Christmas. That was the clear message from the latest set of US employment figures measuring job creation in November. Non-farm payrolls – the bellwether of demand for labour in the US – rose by 178,000, almost bang in line with what Wall Street was expecting. This was solid rather than spectacular, but good enough to trigger a move from the Federal Reserve, America's central bank, when it meets later this month. Since it last raised rates this time in December 2015, the Fed has repeatedly found reasons to delay another increase in the cost of borrowing. But, after a slow start to the year, the pace of growth has quickened and unemployment has continued to fall, dropping from 4.9% to 4.6% last month. True, this chunky drop in the jobless rate overstates the strength of the labour market because many Americans have given up looking for jobs and have dropped out of the workforce altogether. The US employment rate is below where it was when the financial crisis broke nine years ago and wage growth remains extremely sluggish. Hourly wage rates actually fell slightly last month. But this will not be enough to stay the Fed's hand. It has been signalling for some time that a December rate rise is in prospect: the November jobs' report was the last piece of the jigsaw. When Janet Yellen, the Fed's chairwoman, announces the increase she is also likely to suggest that policy will be tightened slowly and steadily throughout 2017. Some may see this as Yellen, a Democrat and a strong supporter of Hillary Clinton, getting in her retaliation before Donald Trump arrives in the White House. This argument doesn't really stand up. Relations between Trump and Yellen are unlikely to be cordial, but US rates would have been going up this month even if Clinton had won.

Jeremy Hunt has proposed a ban on sexting for under 18s. As any reasonable person might have predicted, this has been met with a great deal of criticism. Most of the arguments appear to be based on the technical practicalities, given how Hunt never truly explained how tech companies are supposed to filter specific types of messages on countless platforms and devices based on date of birth. However, an even bigger hurdle would be the sex drive of teenagers themselves. One time when I was in school, we'd heard that someone had abandoned a pornographic magazine in a nearby field (for any teenagers reading this, this was a common phenomenon in the era when porn had to be printed). So, obviously, we set off to find it. Took a few hours but it was eventually spotted in a ditch. It ended with us just staring at it for a while, focussed on cheaply-printed images of naked breasts, spattered with mud, rainwater and animal effluent (I hope nobody developed any weird fetishes as a result of this, but you never know). About 10 young guys, spending hours climbing hills and trudging through bogs, all for the mere possibility of seeing images of exposed female flesh. These are the sort of lengths teenagers will go to for even the slightest sexual stimulation, so the idea of some remote authority figure saying "stop that" making them reconsider their actions is ludicrous in the extreme. This isn't meant to ignore the issue. Teenage sexting is obviously prevalent, and we have no real idea how this affect long-term psychosexual development; we've never had a generation of humans who had such easy access to sexual material at such a young age before. And some studies suggest that the adolescent brain, which is still forming, is more prone to addictive behaviour as areas like the prefrontal cortex, responsible for critical thinking and impulse control, aren't "fully formed" yet. But studies like this, and the general attitude that they inform (and that informs them in turn) do come in for criticism. Our society often has a questionable, unfair view of adolescents, regarding them with suspicion, as unable to think for themselves, minimising their achievements and so on. They're often treated more like unpredictable pets than, you know, people. Studies focussing on the "immaturity" of the adolescent brain regularly back up this stance and inform policy, despite the fact that there's relatively little evidence directly linking brain developments and observed behaviours. This could be seen as inconsistent. If your argument is that adolescent brains aren't fully developed so they shouldn't be trusted with anything potentially harmful, then technically our brains don't fully "mature" until our mid-20s. Logically then, every important decision and possibly harmful action (smoking, drinking, driving etc.) should be restricted to those over 25. Unless I've missed a major announcement, this hasn't happened. Another argument is that this lack of impulse control in adolescents isn't a flaw, it evolved for a reason. Risk taking behaviour rises markedly during adolescence, and falls again into mature adulthood. While this obviously has dangerous implications, it can also lead to positive things like meeting more people, establishing relationships (asking someone out is always a big risk), achieving new experiences and knowledge, and many other things that make you a better person and improve your long term prospects. And then there's the adolescent sex drive. Teenagers are going through an intense and confusing hormonal onslaught as it is. Testosterone and oestrogen induce the physical sexual changes experienced by men and women respectively, but these also increase our sex drive in the brain. Sex is an extremely powerful motivator at the best of times, but people often overlook how complex it is. You've got the basic, animal "urges" that lead to sex drives, but also the more sophisticated aspects. There's the intimacy aspect (sex is a big part of relationships, something else our brains seek out), the social aspect (men who have a lot of sex are praised for their virility and prowess, women... not so much), and countless other influences. All of these would be even more potent for a developing, adolescent brain. Despite this, most research focuses purely on the timing of onset of adolescent sexuality, which isn't especially helpful. So, technical challenges aside, the idea of a ban on sexting is still ridiculous. You've got millions of individuals with an increased sex drive, reduced self-control, a fondness for risk and an established aversion to authority figures. Even if you could work out a way to ban sexts among teenagers (one clueless politician versus an angry generation that have been immersed in technology since birth? Could happen, I guess) that wouldn't solve the problem at all, would almost certainly just result in more teenagers being punished for questionable reasons. As sex-blogger Girl On The Net so eloquently puts it: Short of locking them in boxes with no wifi connection, there is no technical "solution" that will prevent kids from sexting any more than you could have prevented a younger version of me from getting touched up behind the bike sheds at school. What's more I'd argue that "stopping kids from sexting" is a misguided goal in the first place. We shouldn't be treating sex like it's a monster that's trying to eat our young people: it's a very common part of life, and blanket bans are a poor alternative to proper sex education and guidance. There's definitely a discussion to be had about teenagers engaging in potentially harmful, destructive sexual behaviours, but dealing with this would be a lot easier if policies around sexual issues were consistent and logical, and that's far from the case. The UK age of consent is 16, but the texting plans would apply to anyone under 18? So you can have sex with your partner but can't mention it on your phones afterwards? Sex suffuses practically every aspect of our media, bare flesh is common in everyday advertising, but teenage girls get kicked out of school for wearing too-short skirts. Is it any wonder teenagers are confused about sex and attempts to educate them are hit-and-miss? Logically, the best way to get teenagers to be more diligent about sex would be if those in authority started treating them like actual people with thoughts and drives and needs of their own, rather than horny dogs humping your trouser leg needing a tap on the nose to "learn their place". Here's hoping that might happen at some point. Dean Burnett isn't a sex guru but he's seen it on the telly. His book The Idiot Brain, is available now in the UK, USA, Canada and many other countries.

Survivor's Remorse Crudely positioned as "the black Entourage" upon release, this sharp LeBron James-produced show shares as many similarities with the Hollybro show as it does differences. There's an initial setup which offers a similar culture clash: a young basketball player and his family move to Atlanta with more wealth and opportunities than they're used to and struggle to adjust. But while the long-running HBO comedy relished hedonism, and little else, Survivor's Remorse has far more to say. It weaves in issues of race, class, sexuality and gender without ever seeming heavy-handed, niftily gliding between topics with ease, as comfortable covering the underrepresentation of dark-skinned black women in fashion as it is debating the etiquette of whether to send a thank you note for a thank you note. The cast, including Chi-Raq's Teyonah Parris, are all adept comic actors and they relish a set of scripts filled with lightning-fast quips and Curb Your Enthusiasm-style farce. It's a curiously, frustratingly under-viewed show, on its third season yet still averaging fewer than 1m viewers a week yet it deserves its spot next to Atlanta, Insecure and Luke Cage as a rare multilayered new show where black characters dominate while white characters, well, who cares? BL Difficult People If you don't already subscribe to Hulu, you should, just for this show (Casual is a fine bonus). Its greatness is not just manifest in its crackling dialogue and expertly madcap pacing, but also in the mere fact that it represents one of the last examples of the great snarky sitcoms of the 1990s. Increasingly, the modern American sitcom has leaned into one of two categories: the populist charm offensives typified by shows like Fresh Off the Boat or The Great Indoors and navel gazers in the mold of Louie, You're the Worst, Master of None, Transparent, and Girls that mine pathos as often as they go for the laugh. This is a stark contrast to the misanthropic, neurotic tradition of Seinfeld and the Larry Sanders Show. Those shows neither sought to explain the human condition nor simply gloss over the darker aspects of it in favor of a laugh track. Difficult People's protagonists, Julie (creator and writer Julie Klausner) and Billy (Billy on the Street's Billy Eichner) make few apologies for their self-involved behavior or their lust for show business glory. While the narrative occasionally dives into earnestness, it tends to only be in service of reinforcing the bond between them rather than to teach them some dunderheaded moral lesson. It plays with form and structure in the way Seinfeld did in its finest episodes, and Klausner and Eichner have some of the best two-person comic chemistry on TV. This is as sharp and clever as pure TV comedy gets, even if it's behind a $9.99 a month paywall. DS Last Chance U Since the election, we've been confronted with a country that feels more divided than ever, but if there's one thing that always unites Americans, it's football – and TV shows about football. Since Friday Night Lights isn't coming back any time soon, Last Chance U – a six-part Netflix series documents one year at "America's most 'off the grid' football team" – is exactly what you need to watch right now. Inspired by Drew Jubera's 2014 GQ piece of the same name, Last Chance U spends a year with the highly successful but little known East Mississippi Community College Lions. At EMCC, young American football stars who have been kicked off their Division I teams (for things like drinking, bad behavior and failing grades) spend a year trying to get their NFL dreams back on track. Set in Scooba, Mississippi (population 732), the show takes viewers into the nation's heartland. Despite all the talent at EMCC, everyone from the coach to the players has demons they must confront if they're going to succeed: there's a fanatical, almost dangerous coach, Buddy Stephens, the overly emotionally invested academic adviser, Brittany Wagner, and the frustratingly inconsistent but lovable players. You can bet who's gonna make it at the start of the show if you want, but the magic of Last Chance U is that you can't help but root for every one of them. RS Halt and Catch Fire Halt and Catch Fire is TV's ultimate underdog. An 80s-set tech drama from AMC, its purpose when launched in 2014 was no less than to fill Mad Men's immaculately shined shoes. It didn't manage the impossible. And it has never been a ratings smash. But it's testimony to the faith the network have in this series that they are to give its handful of adoring fans a fourth and final run. In season one, we met smooth-talking suit Joe MacMillan. A Steve Jobs type who manipulates his own Steve Wozniak, computer genius Gordon, his equally brilliant engineer wife, Donna, and a 22-year-old punk programmer called Cameron into creating the perfect PC. The second season proved the depth of this sleeper hit, focusing on the two women as they set up their gaming company, Mutiny. By the third season, Halt and Catch Fire's momentum was unstoppable. Every episode is gripping, jaw-dropping and prophetic. (Joe is trying to invest in the internet years before any billionaire benefactor can even fathom it.) These are finely drawn characters to truly love, and the fallout for them is vast. There are secret HIV tests, shotgun weddings and suicides. But, this being the 80s, there are also Super Mario Bros marathons and people dancing to the Pixies. What could be better than that? KA Baskets Perhaps unsurprisingly, this comedy starring Zach Galifianakis as a woefully over-qualified rodeo clown (Chip Baskets) didn't get that much love when it premiered in early 2016. Who needed another show about an angry middle-aged clown man going back home to wrestle with some unsettled scores, a horrible ex-wife and equally dickish relatives? No one, really. But creators Louis CK, Galifianakis and Portlandia's Jonathan Krisel manage to harness the things they're best known for: daftness, pathos-meets-comedy and baiting the pretentious, and somehow make this show about a clown work. The segments in the French clown school he studies in are bizarre and offbeat, his only pal Martha (Martha Kelly) is brilliantly downbeat and there's a storyline with a Juggalo that is as weird as you'd expect. Even if you just watch it for Louie Anderson (who plays Chip's mother and won an Emmy for his performance), it'll be worth it. Oh, and there's a second season coming in 2017, which may or may not reference that ridiculous killer clown trend from the summer. LB The Eric Andre Show In the horribly pally world of late night, Eric Andre stands out as a gloriously anarchic aberration. His series The Eric Andre Show, which recently completed its fourth season on Adult Swim, might seem to share the same structure as Fallon, Kimmel et al, but it's less interested in maintaining chatshow norms and more interested in smashing them to pieces. His live band is made up of dishevelled avant-jazz weirdos, his man-on-the-street segments are likely to get him arrested, his in-show games are less meme-worthy than maim-worthy, and you get the sense that he'd be more likely to surround Donald Trump with rats than ruffle his hair. Sure, at times it's painfully puerile – Andre eating his own vomit and causing guest Lauren Conrad to flee the set, is a good recent example – but at its best, the show has a sense of danger and playfulness that nothing else on TV (with perhaps the noble exception of Billy On The Street) comes close to matching. Plus, anyone willing to risk life and limb to take the piss out of Alex Jones is surely worth cherishing. GM Search Party A new millennial mystery full of unlikable people, TBS's Search Party starts off like many other shows but ends somewhere rather different. It stars Alia Shawkat (best known as Maeby from Arrested Development) as the lead character Dory. Dory is the hipster loser trope made famous in Girls, High Maintenance and Master of None. Mid-20s malcontent, anxious about her lack of life direction and seeking purpose. She finds it when Chantal Witherbottom, a girl she vaguely knew in college, goes missing. Dory turns Nancy Drew, convinced she spotted Chantal and can solve her disappearance. A whole film noir element emerges, which is what really makes the show worth watching. Search Party feels very 2016, with texts appearing onscreen, people meeting on Bumble and zingers about current Twitter hashtags. Its creator Sarah Violet Bliss said recent hits like Serial and The Jinx inspired the whodunnit aspect. It's not the best television show you'll see all year. But it's charming, the finale is suitably eyebrow-raising and you can watch the pilot on YouTube to get a taster. AJ

The bishop of Burnley has lambasted the Church of England for adopting a "middle class culture" and failing to listen to the marginalised working class voices behind the vote for Brexit. The church had jumped on "the middle-class establishment bandwagon of outrage and horror", Philip North wrote in the Church Times. "As if set to auto-pilot, the C of E has joined in with those who are decrying the collapse of the liberal consensus and bemoaning a new mood of division in our public life." North accused the church of allowing its agenda to be "set not by the poor, but by academics, the moneyed elites and certain sections of the secular media". The C of E had become so disconnected from deprived communities "that it no longer hears what they are saying, let alone amplifies their voices to the nation". This would continue unless the church focused on urban ministry, putting its best leaders in deprived parishes and returning to estates it had abandoned, he said. North's comments came as Justin Welby, the archbishop of Canterbury, called on the country to resist turning inwards after the Brexit vote, saying what was needed was "a more beautiful and better common narrative that shapes and inspires us with a common purpose". Opening a debate on shared British values in the House of Lords, Welby said great times of change in mood and culture demanded a "re-imagining of what we are about as a nation". But North said Pope Francis's call for a "poor church for the poor" did not mean "top-down charitable projects, many of which bolster pre-existing relationships of power and collude with innately unjust power structures. Instead, he was calling the church to allow its agenda to be set by the voices of the dispossessed and forgotten, not by the powerful. We may not always like what we hear." The C of E should focus on family, place and work, North said. It should stand up for the sanctity of the family, a "core preoccupation" for most people, in which they found support, self-identity and purpose. It should play a part in "finding a new and unifying national narrative that is patriotic, besides tolerant and inclusive". And it should make "a stand for the dignity of work and for justice in the workplace. One rarely hears a sermon on work," he added. "It is vital that we stop condemning, and instead listen to the voices of those who have used their democratic right to express a deep-seated frustration at structures and institutions that have abandoned them, and at a middle-class culture that misunderstands or misrepresents their heartfelt concerns." He said the church's concentration on sexuality was an example of middle-class preoccupations. "By prioritising this one issue to such an extent, we risk failing to hear other cries of pain." In the Lords debate on shared values underpinning national life, Welby called for a renewal of fundamental British values. "Values built on feelings of threat and fear can lead us down a very dangerous path," he said. "As we move into a post-Brexit world, alongside the other events that buffet and deflect us, unless we ground ourselves in a clear course and widely accepted practices, loyalties and values we will just go with the wind." The leader of the C of E added: "We need a more beautiful and better common narrative that shapes and inspires us with a common purpose – a vaulting national ambition, not a sense of division and antagonism, both domestically and internationally. "We need a narrative that speaks to the world of bright hope and not mere optimism, let alone simple self interest. "That will enable us to play a powerful, hopeful and confident role around the world, resisting the turn inward that will leave us alone in the darkness, despairing and vulnerable." Welby reiterated the importance of freedom of expression both for people of faith and those of no faith, as a review by the Equality and Human Rights Commission concluded that the law on religion and belief was generally effective but a lack of understanding had led to misinterpretation and confusion. Although individuals with and without religious or other beliefs were offered adequate protection by the Equality Act, new guidance was needed to help employers understand how to apply the law on issues such as time off to pray, workplace Christmas parties and the wearing of religious symbols. "Our review finds that the law works well. There are a lot of myths that have arisen due to misunderstanding of legal requirements," said David Isaac, the commission's chair. "Employers' actions shouldn't be governed by a fear of causing offence. Our guidance will help managers and businesses reach decisions and approach sensitive discussions in the right way."

"People have always consumed psychoactive substances, risking harm." This is the opening sentence of a recent article by Fiona Godlee and Richard Hurley in the British Medical Journal, which goes on to state that around one in 20 adults worldwide are thought to have taken an illegal drug in 2014. Is it immoral to ingest substances that alter our consciousness? Is it nirvana we are seeking, or are we drowning in the ocean of the lonely crowd, yearning for a connection to something greater than ourselves? Or do we simply like getting high now and again? When I was growing up, advertisements scared us with images of emaciated heroin addicts telling us, "I could give up tomorrow ... couldn't I?" The "just say no" campaign was linked firmly to the international war on drugs, which was at its height in the 1980s and predated the health-focused warnings linked to HIV and Aids. Yet prohibition is seen by drugs experts as a failure, is estimated to cost around $100bn annually and has "failed to curb either supply or demand, reduce addiction, or minimise harm", in the words of the BMJ. I must declare that I have a horse in this race. As chairman of the Night Time Industries Association (NTIA) I represent venues and operators across the UK – and have spent my adult life running dance music events around the world. In Britain over the past decade we have seen a huge decrease in the number of nightclubs and one of the main reasons has been a new approach, by police and local authorities, who now seek to hold premises responsible for the behaviour of their customers. In London, Fabric was closed pending a hearing where its licence was revoked due to the death of two adults over a nine-week period over the summer. There had been six deaths in total over four years due to the consumption of MDMA, the club had a zero-tolerance policy towards drugs, more security per person than any other UK club and a raft of surveillance and safety measures. Yet it took a major campaign to persuade Islington council to let the club reopen under still more stringent conditions. Across the country, club owners are petrified that anything that happens in or near their venue could mean last orders for ever. Fortunately there are alternatives to this punitive approach both to businesses and individuals, vast numbers of whom are incarcerated around the world for the non-violent crime of ingesting a controlled substance. Fiona Measham, a professor of criminology at Durham University, is a co-director of the Loop, a non-profit organisation that offers people the chance to test drugs before they take them. The Loop has worked with police and operators in Manchester and at festivals including Secret Garden Party, where up to 25% of festival goers were reported to have handed in drugs that did not contain what they thought. Measham believes drug-testing booths in city centres would help protect the public, as by the time people get to a nightclub it is sometimes too late. But such "harm reduction" measures struggle to gain support from police as well as nightclub operators, who fear they will be accused of promoting drug use rather than simply recognising that it takes place. It is 55 years since the United Nations Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs sought to prohibit the non-medical use of narcotics globally. Since then the world has changed enormously. Uruguay legalised the possession of all drugs in 1974 and in 2014 allowed the production of marijuana by all citizens too. In the United States, on the same day Donald Trump was elected, several states legalised or decriminalised the use of cannabis partly in recognition of the enormous social harm and injustice of mass incarceration. Meanwhile in Portugal, which decriminalised the use of drugs in 2001, there are three deaths per million from drug overdoses, while the average across the EU is 17.3. With the police facing increasing pressures to tackle cybercrime, terrorism and sex offences, all while dealing with cuts, it is time to decide whether enforcing drugs laws is the best use of resources. Legalisation and licensed sale of currently illegal substances would also generate enormous tax revenues for HM Treasury. Recent footage from Pentonville prison showed drones being used to fly in drugs. How can it be fair to punish nightclubs and bars for failing to enforce rules that are flouted even in the most fortified buildings we have? A change in the law would make the public safer and diminish the influence of organised crime. It is time to have an honest, grown-up conversation about drugs in Britain.

François Hollande's dramatic announcement that he will not seek a second term as France's president has opened the way for the Socialist prime minister, Manuel Valls, to to mount a bid. Valls is expected to swiftly throw his hat into the ring to become the Socialist presidential candidate and perhaps resign as prime minister in order to campaign for the party's primary vote, to be held at the end of January. The fiery, self-styled law-and-order strongman, who helped craft Hollande's pro-business reformist line, had for days been pressuring the deeply unpopular Hollande to give up his doomed dream of re-election. On a visit to the eastern city of Nancy on Friday, Valls praised Hollande's "statesmanlike" decision to bow out and vowed to personally defend Hollande's record in office. He said: "The president has my complete respect and affection." Valls has for months been suggesting that the bitterly divided French Socialist party could prove wrong the bleak predictions that it had no hope of even making it through to the final round of next spring's election. The presidential vote is looking highly unpredictable and Valls's own prospects are far from clear-cut. One flash poll by Harris International after Hollande said he would not run, showed Valls as favourite to win the Socialist primary race against the staunchly leftwing former economy minister Arnaud Montebourg. But surprise Socialist candidates could yet emerge before the 15 December deadline. The former justice minister and a figure from French Guianese politics, Christiane Taubira, is being petitioned to run but has not commented. Hollande's former partner Ségolène Royal, who was beaten in the 2007 presidential election, has been suggested by some, but appeared to brush aside the idea. The Socialists are also under pressure from outsiders on the left. Emmanuel Macron, the rebellious former economy minister who is running a maverick, outsider centrist bid has already begun to garner support from some Hollande loyalists. Both he and the hard-left firebrand Jean-Luc Mélenchon, who has the support of the Communist party, are polling higher than the Socialists. Polls show Valls currently at only 11% in the presidential polls. Valls, 54, has been gearing up for weeks for a possible bid, making grand speeches trying to reposition himself at the heart of the Socialist party. But he has always been firmly on the party's right, sometimes causing controversy with a pro-business, economically liberal and unorthodox socialist politics which saw his approach likened to Tony Blair's. Valls was born in Barcelona, the son of a bourgeois Catalan painter and a Swiss-Italian mother. His family later fled Spain's Franco regime and Valls was granted French nationality at 20. He often refers to his utter devotion to the French republic that welcomed him. Having grown up in an artists' studio surrounded by paintings, he has been careful to portray himself as someone who was also hardened by personal adversity and family challenges – his younger sister was a longtime heroin addict who credits him with helping her eventually quit and supporting her now she is HIV positive. Valls joined the Socialist party aged 18, and progressed up the ranks in local politics on the outskirts of Paris, where inequality was rife. He was mayor of Évry south of Paris. He was always on the reformist side of the party, bolshy and outspoken, not afraid of raising hackles by tackling Socialist party taboos – namely attacking the 35-hour week and retirement at 60. Valls claims to understand the discrimination that exists in France. After the 2015 terrorist attacks on Charlie Hebdo magazine and a kosher supermarket he made the most damning indictment yet of the country's bitter social divide, saying there was "territorial, social and ethnic apartheid" in France. Yet he has alienated many on the left with his hardline take on French secularism. Earlier this year, his support for rightwing mayors who banned burkinis or full-body swimsuits from French beaches saw him clash with his own leftwing ministers. He then drew criticism for suggesting that naked breasts were more representative of France than a headscarf. As an MP, he voted to approve Nicolas Sarkozy's law banning niqabs, or full-face veils, from all public spaces in 2010. As Hollande's combative interior minister, Valls was also criticised on the left for saying Roma people could not integrate in France. But he now needs to reach out to the left of the party if he is to gain support in the Socialist primary. Polls currently suggest the final run-off of the presidential election will be between the right's François Fillon and the far-right Front National's Marine Le Pen. Le Pen said on Friday that if she was faced with both Fillon, Nicolas Sarkozy's former prime minister, and Valls, Hollande's prime minister, she would attack them on their records in office: "We'll go in by reminding people that prime ministers have the entire responsibility for the policies that were put in place."

The 2.3% average UK rail fare rises for 2017 are being driven by much higher increases on the reprivatised Virgin Trains East Coast, where ticket prices set by the operator will far outstrip the rate of inflation. While regulated fares such as season tickets and off-peak returns, which are set by the government, are to increase by 1.9%, fares on Virgin Trains East Coast will increase by 4.9% overall. The rail firm said that would be hiking the fares it controls by an average of around 5.5%. An off-peak single from London to Edinburgh on the east coast line, which now costs £128.20, will be £137.20 – 7% more – in January, while a London-to-Newcastle single also goes up 7% to £131.70. Virgin will also be raising the average train fares it controls on its west coast intercity service from London to Manchester and Glasgow, with overall fares rising by 2.4%. Fares will also rise by an average of 2.4% on First Group's Great Western Railway. The German-owned Arriva has not responded to confirm the overall fare rises on its franchises, but some long-distance anytime fares on its Cross Country appear to be rising sharply: for example Bristol to Darlington will be 4.8% more expensive, at £149 for a single. On some franchises, such as Govia Thameslink Railway – including Southern – Southeastern, Greater Anglia and National Express's C2C, fares set by the operator will actually slightly trail the government's increase next year, with average fares rising by 1.8% on each. East Midland and South West fares will rise by 1.5%. First's TransPennine Express said it would freeze advance fares, meaning an overall rise of 1.4%. Virgin said it was tackling "historic anomalies" and would be making 10,000 more discounted advance fares available every week on the east coast line for those booking ahead. It said that despite the 2017 rises, "standard anytime" tickets on long distance journeys were still 4% cheaper than when Virgin Trains took over the franchise in March 2015. However, it has already been accused of making several "stealth hikes" to fares – including removing some of the cheapest advance fares in the first few months after it took over the franchise. The rail firm – a partnership between Richard Branson's Virgin and the transport group Stagecoach – won the franchise in March 2015, when it was controversially reprivatised by the coalition government after more than five years of operation in the public sector. Passenger numbers have not risen in line with projections from the time of the bid, leaving the operator struggling to meet the £3.3bn in premiums it has promised to pay the Treasury by 2023, with the bulk of that due in the later years of the eight-year franchise. David Horne, the Virgin Trains managing director on the east coast route, said: "The changes we're making on 1 January will see more advance fares available, making it easier for those that can book ahead to grab a bargain." Train fares across Britain will go up by an average of 2.3% from January, according to figures released by the industry body, the Rail Delivery Group. Lianna Etkind of the Campaign for Better Transport condemned the increase, warning that some passengers were "finding themselves priced off the railways". She said: "Between 1995 and 2016 passengers have seen average fares increase by 23.5%, and much more needs to be done by train operators and the government to give them a truly affordable railway." Paul Plummer, the chief executive of the Rail Delivery Group, which represents train operators and Network Rail, said: "We understand how passengers feel when fares go up, and we know that in some places they haven't always got the service they pay for. "Around 97p in every pound passengers pay goes back into running and improving services. Fares are influenced by government policy, either through government-regulated fares such as season tickets or as a result of the payments train companies make to government." But Mick Whelan, general secretary of Aslef, the train drivers' union, said: "It is scandalous that the government is allowing the privatised train companies to make even more money for providing an ever poorer service. This new price hike – well above the rate of inflation – is indefensible." Andy McDonald, the shadow transport secretary, said Labour was committed to returning franchises to public ownership to "put an end to Britain's rip-off railways". He added: "Passengers are told that higher fares are necessary to fund investment, but vital projects have been delayed by years. Rail fares have risen by 25% on average in the last six years alone, whilst real wages remain below their 2008 levels. "Money that could be used to keep fares down or reinvested to improve our services is instead subsidising the profits of private companies and other nations' railway systems – it's a scandal."

I always knew that living in Delhi would gift me unusual talents. I can now confidently cross busy traffic with just a little daring and an outstretched palm. I know which of the puddles on the pavement are effluent and which are just muddy water. And I've developed a sharp instinct for insulation. Windows that sit slightly open; outsized gaps between doors and floors; open space in the walls around improperly installed air conditioners: for a week this November I could walk into any room in India's heaving capital and identify insulation flaws immediately. Friends outside India, informed of this new skill, thought my unlikely interest in nooks and crannies a weird obsession. But I was convinced it was necessary for survival. Diwali, the Hindu festival of light, had reached its peak on the evening of 30 October, with extravagant parties and a spectacular barrage of fireworks across the city. The next morning, Delhi woke with a foul hangover. A coarse, grey mist pressed itself against the windows of my bedroom. An acrid smell, like burning plastic, filled the house. Air-quality monitors in part of the city showed readings of 999, the upper limit of what they could measure. The pollution from thousands of fireworks had combined with road dust, vehicle emissions and the burning of crop residue in neighbouring states to produce the worst air quality in Delhi in 17 years. Here is what life is like in a city likened to "a gas chamber" by its own chief minister. Eyes burn. Deep breaths become elusive. Tiny pieces of grit crunch between teeth. Voices develop a husky croak that no amount of throat-clearing can shake. Fields of view narrow to less than 100 metres, inducing a sense of claustrophobia. Inside becomes where you go for fresh air. For a week I avoided doing interviews in person, or going out for dinner, or doing anything that might require straying too far from the air purifier running on its highest setting in my bedroom. However, it did grant a handy excuse for wheezing my way through a Saturday morning game of squash. "Do you need a minute?" my opponent asked, while I panted in the corner. "Sure," I replied, rueing the buckets of daal makhani (buttery lentils) and garlic naan bread I'd been consuming. "It must be this bloody air pollution." The lungs of half of the city's children will never recover Before taking up my post, I had immersed myself in research on Delhi's air problems. I learned that a 2014 study had found more than half the city's schoolchildren suffered from compromised lung capacity and would never completely recover. The World Health Organisation says India has the worst rates of respiratory illness in the world, twice as bad as China's, and five times that of the UK. The deadliest particles are the tiny ones, less than 2.5 micro-metres in diameter (or a millionth of a metre), because they can travel deep into the lungs, and breach the blood-brain barrier. I pored over the colour-coded system – from "good" green to "severe" burgundy – that determined the quality of each day's air. By the time I arrived in Delhi four months ago, I was fully prepared, toting a bag of disposable air masks that I had practised wearing, ensuring my entire mouth and nose were covered, not satisfied until each breath sounded like it belonged to Darth Vader. So I was startled to see Delhi's residents simply getting on with their lives, walking the streets unmasked, seemingly unaware of the toxic soup of particles that engulfed their city. Everywhere I butted up against indifference. Outside a bar in Delhi's Defence Colony district, I asked Indian friends how they coped with knowing they were at such risk from the city's air. One lit a cigarette. "We smoke," he shrugged. At a dinner party in the Hauz Khas neighbourhood, over bowls of jhal muri (spicy puffed rice), I ruined the mood by regaling guests with statistics and warnings. "That's why each day you spend in Delhi takes two hours off your life," I ended one of my disquisitions, to a morose silence broken only by the sound of chewing. The moments when I felt most understood took place inside electronics shops as I browsed for air purifiers: whirring, filtered fans that claimed to reduce the concentration of PM2.5 and other pollutants to safe, single-digit levels. Relatively new on the Indian market, most of the devices are still prohibitively expensive, and so in their advertisements, cannot afford to mince words. "You think only smoking causes lung cancer?" one poster read. "Breathing at home can too." I hope that awareness of the perils of pollution in Delhi grows. I want my reporting to help spur international attention. But I also understand why it has proved so difficult to stoke popular outrage. Delhi is in many respects a city of rolling crises: September saw deadly outbreaks of dengue fever and chikungunya; in October, a new war with Pakistan loomed. This month, more than 80% of India's currency was declared void with four-hours' notice. Perhaps, in this vast city of 18 million people, air pollution simply takes its place in the queue behind more tangible problems. People are resilient. We adapt to our surroundings. I arrived in Delhi with illusions of living inside a purified bubble.Instead, I find the Delhi spirit of chalta hai – essentially, "shit happens" – rubbing off on me. On clearer days, autumn is a beautiful season in Delhi. The temperature is cool, the mosquitoes are gone, the festival season slows the city's pulse and rooftop parties beckon. My obsession with avoiding bouts of bad air, itself unhealthy and unsustainable, is subsiding. I no longer scan rooms for gaps in the insulation. On Saturday I was halfway down my street when I realised I had left my pollution mask at home. I didn't go back for it. It was only an orange day – "poor air quality" – after all.

It was a cold, sunny December day when I set out for a run in Moab, Utah, with my dog, Taz. As a professional endurance athlete I often went for training runs by myself, and had done this particular route before. So what happened next was just bad luck. About an hour into my run along a remote canyon trail, I hit a patch of black ice. I found myself slipping down the rock face, which became steeper and steeper until suddenly I was in free fall. I just remember thinking, "I've got to land this somehow." I fell 60 feet into the canyon, landing on a four-foot square ledge above a sheer drop; if I'd missed it there's no way I would have survived. I could feel my legs, so knew I wasn't paralysed, but I was in excruciating pain. Taz had managed to find his way back to me, so I knew there must be a way out of the canyon, but I couldn't stand or even crawl. I later learned that I had shattered my pelvis. Adrenaline kicked in, and I became focused on getting out of the canyon. I shouted for help, and was intent on dragging myself to the bottom of the ravine. Every inch was an effort. It took me five hours to go quarter of a mile. Eventually it got so dark I couldn't see where I was going, and I decided to stay where I was for the night, next to a puddle of water I could drink from. All I had on me were my jogging clothes, a water bottle, two Ibuprofen, a couple of energy gel packets, and a shower cap which adventure racers often wear to prevent heat loss. This one probably saved my life. At night the temperature dropped below freezing. I couldn't go to sleep or I would die of hypothermia, so I stayed awake doing mini-crunches – lifting my head a few inches, over and over. Taz stayed with me, providing some warmth. The next morning, I couldn't move at all. I tried to stay positive. I was sure somebody would realise I was missing or hear me screaming for help. But there was nobody around; it was the middle of December, in the middle of nowhere. The second night in the canyon seemed even longer and colder. My feet were frostbitten and my midsection was swollen from internal bleeding. The puddle turned to ice, and I had to crack through it in the morning to get water. I drank only a little, using my bottle cap as a cup, knowing if I drank too much I would pee on myself and then freeze to death. On the third day, I felt myself growing weaker. I was coming to terms with the fact I might die. In a last-ditch effort, I called Taz over and told him to go and get help. I always talked to him like a human. Taz took off through the canyon and I lay there thinking about my family and friends. There was more that I wanted from life. Taz returned, alone. Then I heard an engine in the distance. I started yelling for help, and that's when I saw a man walking towards me. He told me his name was Bego, and that he'd come to find me. I cried with joy. It turned out my neighbour noticed I hadn't come home, and Taz had found a search and rescue team. I was airlifted to hospital, where doctors found I had lost almost half the blood in my body. If the rescue team had arrived later, I wouldn't have made it. I was in surgery for six hours while the doctors put my pelvis back together. My sacrum was crumbled; there's now a plate holding the bits of bone together, and a screw in the left side of my pelvis. My feet are sensitive to cold because of the frostbite, but I still have them. After leaving hospital, I was in a wheelchair for three months. Gradually I was able to get around using a walker, then crutches, then a cane. Five months after my accident I took part in an adventure race. I had to walk, but I won it. Ten years on, I still think about it every day. I don't run like I used to, and cold weather brings back bad memories; but I'm married with two kids, and Taz is still alive – we'll always have a special bond. Realising you have a second chance at life puts things into perspective. As told to Abigail Edge Do you have an experience to share? Email experience@theguardian.com

Lights flashing, three police cars showed up to Bill Montes-Pack's quiet suburban street on the morning of 15 December 2015. The Benicia, California, man had stayed up all night waiting for the sheriff's office to evict him from the house his grandparents had owned since 1971. "It was really, really traumatic," Montes-Pack recalled one year later. Standing outside the locked front door, the 49-year-old peered into the empty living room that holds his earliest Christmas memories and surveyed the overgrown ivy damaging the house's facade. The foreclosure – which he said was based on a predatory loan and improper paperwork – originated with lender OneWest Bank, at the time run by chairman and CEO Steven Mnuchin. The veteran Wall Street financier's foreclosure practices are receiving fresh scrutiny this week after president-elect Donald Trump announced him as the nominee for US Treasury secretary. "Rather than shaking up Wall Street, he installs the very person that was part of the financial mess," said Montes-Pack, who has effectively been homeless since the foreclosure. "I'm just thoroughly disgusted." 'It's elder financial abuse' Mnuchin, who is also a Hollywood movie producer, earned the nickname "foreclosure king" after he purchased distressed mortgages during the financial crisis and evicted thousands of homeowners. The former Goldman Sachs banker, worth an estimated $40m, has no government experience, and critics worry that, as Treasury secretary, his policies could benefit the wealthiest people and roll back critical bank regulations. One controversial source of OneWest foreclosures is the corporation's reverse mortgages, which are loans to elderly homeowners that enable them to borrow against their home equity. These types of mortgages have been aggressively marketed to seniors as a way to help them stay in their homes, but some don't understand the risks and can't afford associated fees. In 2006, Montes-Pack's grandparents bought a reverse mortgage from IndyMac Bank, the predecessor to OneWest, which he said took advantage of his grandfather, who suffered from dementia. After his grandparents died in 2012, Montes-Pack moved in, but the corporation – by then OneWest and run by Mnuchin – quickly began foreclosure proceedings. The bank's case, he said, relied on a document signed with the name "Bryan Bly", who has been widely reported in numerous investigations as a so-called "robo-signer". Robo-signers are individuals whose signatures are wrongfully used to automatically authenticate thousands of mortgage documents that they haven't read and are in some cases falsely notarized. The document, which an auditor determined was improper, makes his foreclosure illegitimate, Montes-Pack said, adding: "It's elder financial abuse." His family is still fighting the foreclosure, but in the meantime Montes-Pack's mother has been forced to live in a nursing home. The California Reinvestment Coalition, a non-profit that has scrutinized OneWest, found through public records requests that the bank disproportionately foreclosed on seniors. The firm was allegedly responsible for 39% of reverse mortgages in recent years even though it only has 17% of the market. From 2009 to 2015, the bank was responsible for more than 36,000 total foreclosures in California, according to the coalition. Julie Cheney, a California resident whose parents lost their home to a OneWest foreclosure stemming from a reverse mortgage, testified against OneWest before it merged with a company called CIT Group last year. (Mnuchin earned millions from the sale). "It's so wrong," Cheney said, explaining that the bank sold her parents a mortgage they didn't need while her father was dying of cancer and on pain medication and her mother was suffering from Alzheimer's disease. Her family's unsuccessful court battle against OneWest was a huge strain on her mother right before she died, Cheney added. "It was the worst time of my life." Maeve Elise Brown, executive director of Housing and Economic Rights Advocates, said some of the cruelest OneWest evictions she has observed involve foreclosures against recently widowed homeowners. "It's unimaginable. People are still traumatized from the death of their loved one," she said, "and then they are faced with the second largest loss, which is the roof over their head." CIT Group and Trump's transition team did not respond to requests for comment. Turning homes into 'trash' Foreclosures aren't the only way OneWest has inflicted harm on vulnerable people, according to critics. In November, two non-profits filed a complaint against the bank, alleging that it has violated the Fair Housing Act by failing to locate branches in communities of color and providing disproportionately low rates of loans to Asian Americans, African Americans and Latinos in California. In non-white neighborhoods, OneWest was far more likely to foreclose on homes than make loans available, according to the charges, which claim that in 2014 and 2015, the corporation offered only two loans to black borrowers. The complaint, which calls for an investigation by the US Department of Housing and Urban Development, further accuses the corporation of allowing foreclosed properties to become blighted and abandoned in communities of color, while properly maintaining and marketing homes in white neighborhoods. "There is a very high price to pay in terms of the health and safety of the neighborhood," said Caroline Peattie, executive director of the Fair Housing Advocates of Northern California, which filed the complaint alongside the reinvestment coalition. In white neighborhoods, OneWest properties generally had "manicured lawns, securely locked doors and windows, and attractive, professional, 'for sale' signs posted out front", according to the complaint. In communities of color, the foreclosed houses "were more likely to have trash strewn about the premises, overgrown grass, shrubbery, and weeds, and boarded or broken doors and windows". Blighted properties can attract garbage, crime and public safety hazards, she said, adding that studies have found that living near foreclosures is linked to higher blood pressure. "It's as if a lender has turned the person's home into a piece of trash," said Brown. "Any lender who does not maintain the property is victimizing the entire neighborhood."

A man from the Daily Telegraph once told me an interesting story about John Terry, Fabio Capello and one of those informal chit-chats England managers like to have with journalists. This one took place a few years back, when Terry was having one of those off periods when he seems to be slightly falling to pieces, panels flapping, hinges rusting, grabbing at the passing shirts like a man groping for the light switch in the dark. Someone asked why Capello kept picking Terry when his form was poor. The answer was simple. Yes, there were quicker, fitter players. But when Capello and his men looked around the dressing room before kick-off they usually found Terry was the only England player not frozen into silence, bowed with angst or – in the colloquialism used – "shitting it" under the weight of the England shirt. Terry was unafraid. He made the others less afraid. You can see it, can't you? No matter where you stand on the John Terry moral universe, he would still be a pretty good person to, say, come with you on the train to Birmingham to help give a PowerPoint presentation to an aggressively sceptical sales conference audience. Or to go out on a sky dive with, just the two of you up in some howling fuselage above the Arapaho National Forest, the japes, the backslaps, the emergency chute slung away – "Don't need it, mate" – JT hurling himself out first into that screaming void still talking about Lewis Hamilton or The X Factor. "I'm coming, John. I'm coming with you. Catch me. Catch me, John." This ability to inspire from the front has been surplus to requirements during the current Chelsea run of seven league wins and six clean sheets. Just as for the first time in the Abramovich era, Terry's absence through injury for a game as big as Saturday's lunchtime trip to Manchester City is suddenly not really an issue, no longer a source of fretful speculation. The news this week is that Conte plans to "phase out" his captain, with the suggestion Terry could even be off to Shanghai Shenhua in January. In a bizarro-world twist, Shanghai Shenhua are managed by Gus Poyet, the player Terry replaced to make his Chelsea league debut against Southampton 18 years ago, a sign, perhaps, of some late 1990s Chelsea Valhalla out there in the glare of the new world. Maybe Jody Morris and Michael Duberry are also in town and everyone's off to Boujis later with Dane Bowers. Either way, the signs are clear enough. Terry will turn 36 this week. He is by five years the longest serving current player at any Premier League club. He's still out there: still leading, still captaining, still legending. But after 18 wild, glorious years the sense of an ending is now impossible to ignore. Before we get lost in more formal goodbyes closer to the time, there are perhaps three things worth saying about the Terry years. First: hate him, loathe him or support Chelsea, this has been one of the great, unignorable English sporting lives of the current century. Terry has been relentlessly visible throughout the creation of a modern‑day powerhouse. Should Chelsea win another league title this season, they will be unarguably English football's premier force since 2004, when Terry became captain and they first began to spend in earnest. In total Terry has now been present for 64% of Chelsea's total accumulated silverware since the club were formed in 1905 as a fill-in for the empty Fulham Road stadium. This is in part Conte's challenge: a first trophy outside the main span of the Terry Supremacy. There has already been a change of tone and texture. The current three-man defensive wedge is mobile and aggressive. Whereas Terry has become more minimal with age, sitting deep, playing flatter, taking the air out of the game. In Chelsea's last title campaign, he committed 13 fouls all season in the league, and made just over one tackle per 90 minutes. He could perhaps have been a more striking, more expressive player in his best years. He might have used his ease on the ball to push his team forward: in 2011 Terry was rated the third most accurate passer in Europe; he still has more career goals than Andrés Iniesta. Instead he has pared back his game, playing within his limits and becoming an irresistibly familiar presence, the one constant through Chelsea's modern triumphs those great, beaming hollering Terry features, victory sealed with the standard shots of triumphant post-match JT striding about shirtless, invariably cropped at the waist to give the unnerving impression of a man so committed to the cause he's just played the full 90 minutes bullishly, unapologetically in the nude. So much for the good times. The second thing about Terry is, of course, his toxic mistakes, his wider unpopularity. The scrapes, the splashes, the priapism: this is no more than lurid detail. But the FA ban for using racist language during a match will remain an indelible stain. The court case alone provided an extraordinary glimpse into the dismal internal monologue of the professional game. Terry has apologised and admitted that his language was completely unacceptable He is at least right there. Beyond this, as the waters start to close above his head, the most striking thing about Terry is simply his basic presence in extraordinary times. In a way Chelsea have been a case study, an outlier for the eviscerating changes in English football. Billionaire ownership, the large-scale bartering of success, the bolting on of a new, aggressively burnished brand to our creaky old Victorian community centres: there is in principle something deeply odd and uncharted about this. Just as being a billionaire is in itself inane – a process of being continually replete, existing within a sealed world of chinchilla‑skin helicopter rides and seven-star homogeneity – so the billionaire's project club is also an inane idea and entirely anti-sport, a sanding down of edges and imperfections and thrilling variables into cold, hard, cash‑bought certainties. This is not sport. It's not football. It doesn't actually have to work at all. Football can survive most things. But not the moment supporters stop caring about their club and its players. It is a challenge that is yet to hit but that always lurks just beyond the fringes and the fury. At Chelsea the age of Abramovich has worked so far, both as a spectacle and as a coherent whole that still feels like the same coherent whole. At times, at least in those raw early days, this has felt like it was in large part because of Terry's vividness, his persuasive spirit, a player who has been not so much the brains or the heart of his club as its bowels, the hard colonic centre that ensures Chelsea have through it all still smelt like a football team.

Guardian Members Corey Sutch and Isy Mead attended a discussion with the South African comedian, writer and current host of The Daily Show, Trevor Noah 'His book is an amazing tribute to his mother' Isy: In Noah's new book, Born a Crime, he recalls growing up in a township in apartheid-era South Africa. It was fascinating to hear about the people who have played a part in his life and how he rose to fame. Corey: His mother survived being shot in the head by her abusive partner, but refused to leave her home. She seems to have taught him a lot about pushing back against those who try to victimise you, and I think he's drawn a lot of strength from her. 'When he started out, he was scared of how people would perceive him' Isy: He's had an amazing rise to fame, considering he grew up in such a hostile environment. He said he has encountered racism from both white and black people, and once was even mistaken for a Mexican! Corey: The struggle he has encountered as a mixed-race man was especially interesting to me, as someone who grew up in Northern Ireland and is in an inter-racial relationship. It's amazing to think that he was the product of a union that was not only taboo, but illegal. I don't think the issues of race and colonisation are discussed as openly as they ought to be. 'Noah's voice is particularly important in the current climate' Isy: His story shows the extremity of what can happen when corruption takes over society. It was a really interesting perspective. He described apartheid as "the most perfect racism" because it had an impact at so many different levels. He had an interesting perspective on recent events in America, and made a point of emphasising that we actually don't know what's going to happen. Corey: His take on left-wing reactions to race was really thought-provoking. He said people can sometimes be almost accidentally offensive, and gave an example of a football game during which a banana was thrown on to the pitch and one of the team's representatives immediately apologised for the "racist" act. But it wasn't necessarily. 'He did a great job of identifying how American humour differs from British humour' Corey: He spoke about his visit to the Edinburgh Fringe and London's Comedy Store when he was younger, and how those experiences had shaped him as a performer and helped refine his humour. He vividly remembered seeing Eddie Izzard – he had no idea who he was but he taught him a lot! Isy: He said, quite succinctly, that Australians are more honest in their humour, British people are more awkward, and Americans are all about performance. His own style has probably been influenced by all three in some way. And I think possibly his own comedy is so well-honed because of what he's had to overcome. He told this brilliant story about how, when he was little, if the car broke down on the way to church, his mother would interpret it as a sign of the struggle they needed to overcome in order to find God, and he just thought it was a sign they should go home! Corey is 22, lives in London, and works for an Aids charity, the Staying Alive Foundation. Isy is 33 and works in Oxford as head of learning at The Story Museum. This event took place on 26 November at Central Hall Westminster in London. To find out about upcoming events sign up to become a Guardian Member

In Italy and Austria this weekend a shaken EU faces the first of a series of pivotal electoral tests that could profoundly change the political landscape of the bloc, and conceivably herald the end of the European project in its current form. Shortly before last May's G7 meeting in Tokyo, Martin Selmayr, the senior Brussels official who runs the cabinet of the European commission president, Jean-Claude Juncker, tweeted what he described as his populist "horror scenario". Imagine, he said, if instead of Barack Obama, François Hollande, David Cameron and Matteo Renzi, next year's summit were to feature Donald Trump, Marine Le Pen, Boris Johnson and Beppe Grillo. Selmayr was right about Trump, now the US president-elect. He was half-right about Johnson, who missed out on the job of prime minister after Cameron resigned following Britain's Brexit vote, but did become foreign secretary. If he proves right on the rest, Europe will be in serious trouble. The angry, anti-establishment, nation-first tide that voted to sweep the UK out of the EU and Trump into the White House – in what the billionaire property developer himself called a "Brexit plus, plus, plus" – is rising steadily across the continent. It is still far from certain to carry all before it. But over the next 12 months, EU member states face a dozen referendums and parliamentary and presidential elections, many contested by populist, Eurosceptic parties whose members believe that what happened in the UK and the US can now happen in Europe. The French prime minister, Manuel Valls, has said "Europe could die" in the face of "attacks from the populists". German's doughty finance minister, Wolfgang Schäuble, has warned of the scourge of "demagogic populism", while the EU's economic affairs commissioner, Pierre Moscovici, suggested Europe's voters might be poised "to destroy it". The first two tests will be on Sunday. In Austria, voters elect a new president after their first attempt was annulled. In a race currently too close to call, Norbert Hofer, of the anti-immigration Freedom party, could become the first freely elected far-right head of state in western Europe since the second world war. On the same day, Italians vote in a referendum on constitutional reforms on which Renzi has staked his political future. Polls have suggested the prime minister will lose – potentially bringing Grillo's fiercely anti-establishment Five Star Movement a step closer to power. The Netherlands goes to the polls on 15 March. There, Geert Wilders and his Eurosceptic, anti-Islam Freedom party is tied in the polls with the prime minister, Mark Rutte's liberal VVD. In France, the first round of presidential elections is on 23 April. The leader of the far-right, anti-European Front National, Marine Le Pen, is expected to advance from this to the runoff stage the following month. Germany votes later, in federal elections that could well see the far-right Alternative für Deutschland (AfD) enter parliament as the third-largest party, on the back of strong opposition to Angela Merkel's open-door refugee policy. And in the Czech Republic in October, the populists of ANO 2011, the Action of Dissatisfied Citizens, are forecast to win in the general elections. Simon Tilford, of the Centre for European Reform thinktank, said the two big flashpoints for the union would be Italy's constitutional referendum and France's presidential election. "In Italy, if Renzi loses the referendum, can't survive, and elections then return a government committed to a referendum on taking [the country] out of the euro ... that could produce a real standoff," Tilford said. "And in France, if Le Pen should win ... We don't know what would happen, but she's talked of a referendum on the euro, and on France's EU membership. A strongly Eurosceptic government in France would mean a full-blown crisis in Europe." All this is by no means certain, of course. The populists' confidence could be misplaced. All were quick to welcome the Brexit vote and Trump's victory as events that, in Le Pen's words, "made possible what was considered impossible". But in such uncertain times, voters could opt for continuity and stability: polls show support for the EU has surged since Britain voted to leave, and polling since the US election suggests no immediate "Trump bounce" for the Eurosceptics. A victory in Austria by Hofer, the candidate from a party founded by a former SS officer, would be a huge symbolic blow for Europe and could presage worse in parliamentary elections to follow in 2018. Some, however, argue that its actual consequences may be limited: the presidential role is largely ceremonial. In Italy, Renzi could cling on, or be replaced by a technocratic government committed to continuing steady, incremental reform. And if snap elections do follow, Italy's electoral system does not necessarily make it easy for a single party to gain a majority in both houses of parliament. In France, every poll so far has predicted Le Pen will lose heavily in the second round to a more centrist rival, who, on current form, is likely to be the conservative François Fillon. In the Netherlands, even if his toxic party emerges as the largest, Wilders is unlikely to be able to form a majority. But regardless of the electoral outcomes, Europe's upstarts will still shape the debate. Analysts point to the enormous influence exercised by the former Ukip leader, Nigel Farage, even though he was never elected to Westminster, and how mainstream, centrist parties, particularly on the right, have been pulled inexorably to the more radical edge in the Netherlands and France. Mainstream leaders such as Merkel or Fillon would find themselves weakened, heading countries arguably more deeply divided than at any time in the postwar era, and struggling to push through their programmes. For the European project itself, its confidence knocked by Brexit, the upcoming Trump presidency, a continuing migrant crisis, the terrorism threat, an agonisingly slow return to strong economic growth and the gathering Eurosceptic backlash, the consequences could be serious. Faced with a more pressing need than ever to "get our act together, bring back a sense of direction, confidence, order" – as the European council president, Donald Tusk, put it – the bloc may find itself less able than ever to actually do so. Its instinct, certainly, will be to pull together and maintain unity at all costs – not, from the UK's perspective, a good sign for productive Brexit negotiations – and move forward forcefully where it can. The head of the European Central Bank, Mario Draghi, said the bloc's challenge must be to provide "outcomes that are both more efficient, and more directly aimed at the people, their needs and their fears – not towards institution-building". Trump's apparent fondness for the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, along with his suggestion that US support for Nato – the security umbrella that for 60 years has made European stability and prosperity possible – may not be unconditional, has already prompted progress in one area. A Franco-German defence and security initiative launched in September has gained fresh impetus, with foreign and defence ministers agreeing concrete steps to bolster the bloc's capacity to respond to conflicts and crises on its borders. The influential German MEP Manfred Weber said Trump "will force Europe to grow up". Beyond security, analysts say, the union's most pressing priority must be economic recovery, wage growth, the return of some sense of wellbeing. "Not that the whole anti-European backlash is solely attributable to that," said Tilford. "But the poor performance of the EU economy is a very big factor." In fact, said Gianni Pittella, the leader of the European parliament's Socialist group, Brexit and Trump had created a "huge opportunity" for strong, pragmatic EU initiatives. Will they happen? Will Europe advance, or crumble? The coming months and years will be critical. If anti-Europeans win national elections and the EU fails to rise to the nation-first challenge, it will struggle to survive in its present form. Few think it will break up entirely. But its ambitions may shrink; it could become more of commercial association than a 60-year-old, overarching political project. A hard eurozone core may ultimately emerge, with satellite "associate" members. Some, including in Britain, would regard that as a good thing. But according to Mark Leonard, of the European Council on Foreign Relations, in a less open world of trade barriers and anti-migrant walls, where solidarity among old allies must pass a cost-benefit analysis, they should be careful what they wish for. Ultimately, Leonard said in an article for Social Europe, "even Europe's most Trump-like leaders will find it harder to defend their national interest if they try to go it alone. To survive in Trump's world, they should try to make Europe great again."

The mother of an autistic man who allegedly wanted to shoot Donald Trump at a campaign rally before the US election has appealed to Barack Obama to allow her son to serve his sentence in Britain. Michael Sandford, 20, will be sentenced later this month after pleading guilty to lesser charges of being an illegal alien in possession of a firearm and disrupting government business. The Briton attempted to grab a pistol from a police officer at a Trump campaign event in Las Vegas four months before the election, and said he had wanted to kill the then presidential candidate. Sandford had hoped to receive the minimum sentence of 18-24 months in prison, because he has no previous convictions, and to be allowed to serve it in England. But his mother has said he is terrified that pressure from the president-elect may result in a more severe sentence that has to be served in the US. Lynne Sandford said: "When he first heard that Mr Trump had won, he told me: 'I'm so glad I didn't do what I wanted to do that day, and I do accept and respect the decision of the American people.' But within 24 hours, it hit him like a sledgehammer. "He was in a terrible state, saying: 'What if the judge decides to increase my sentence to get onside with Trump? What if Trump wants to have me bumped off in prison, what if he wants to make example of me and not let me out of prison?'" Lynne Sandford has seen her son once since he was taken into custody, but will fly to the US for his sentencing on 13 December. She said Michael had recently written her a letter saying he was struggling to get by. "He said: 'I can't describe how I'm feeling. Tears are streaming down my face as I write this. I miss you all and love you all more than words can explain. I need to be back home with you all. I'm so alone, cold and scared here. You all mean everything to me and I'm so sorry for how I have treated you all. I love you, I love you, I love you,'" she said. Her son has a range of acute and complex medical issues. He has had severe obsessive compulsive disorder, was sectioned aged 14, previously tried to kill himself, and has a heart condition. He was diagnosed as having been under the influence of a delusional, psychotic episode at the time of the incident. He was initially told he faced a maximum sentence of 30 years in prison after being charged in June with disrupting an official function and two firearms offences. He is being held in custody at a US government-run detention centre in Nevada. "The US and UK have to agree to him serving his sentence in England. I don't think that's a problem for the English side, but once Mr Trump is president, he might not agree to it," Lynne Sandford said. "That's what we're worried about. "I have written to President Obama and Theresa May to see if they can intervene. I'm hoping that President Obama will show compassion and realise that this poor sap could be on the receiving end of Trump's anger, and I am urging him to act in any way he can while he is still in power." She said she had received a standard reply from Downing Street and was yet to hear from the White House. Her son has been on suicide watch for much of his time in detention. "When he's on suicide watch, he's in isolation his cell 24 hours a day. He is not allowed anything in with him; not even toilet paper, in case he rams it down his throat," she said. She has been told her son is being given 15 tablets a day, but not what for or what dosage. "All I know is he is being given them erratically, sometimes in one go. He's had more seizures and has been hallucinating. I would imagine this is the result of the erratic medication," she said. Her son had lost a great deal of weight and was less than eight stone, she said. Michael, who is 5ft 10, has had anorexia nervosa in the past. "He is eating porridge in the morning and a bread roll in the evening, and that's it. He is unable to sleep at night because the lights in his cell are kept on all night. He is severely depressed," the mother said. She said she wanted to thank Guardian readers who had donated more than £10,000 to a Crowdjustice page set up to raise money for his legal fees after the Guardian's Weekend magazine wrote about his case. "It was an amazing response," she said. "We were so touched and appreciative, and Michael passes on his sincerest thanks to everybody trying to help him. I'm glad readers realise that despite what he attempted to do, he's not a bad person at heart, and that he needs help." She has started a new Crowdjustice page to raise funds to try to bring him back to the UK to serve his sentence close to his family.

Ministers have dropped controversial plans to gag charities and universities as a condition of receiving public money after widespread alarm from academics and the voluntary sector. The government announced the "anti-advocacy clause" without consultation in February, presenting the proposal as a ban on taxpayers' funds being used for political lobbying. The move prompted a furious reaction from charities and scientists, who said it was an attempt to muzzle criticism from experts on political issues from climate change to changes to the welfare system. Ministers responded by announcing a partial U-turn and now the idea has been abandoned. Outlining its new standards on its £117bn annual grants budget, ministers said universities and charities could not use grants to pay for professional lobbyists, but they could continue to advise and inform government policy. The original anti-lobbying proposals had prompted fears experts would be banned from advising ministers and MPs. The new guidance spells out that this is no longer the intention, and reaffirms the right of charities to campaign. It says: "The new approach includes clear guidance for research grant managers that activities such as responding to select committees and consultations are appropriate for inclusion in their research grant terms." An advice panel will be set up to ensure grants are spent appropriately by recipients. Charities see the latest move as the official demise of a policy that was already in tatters. In April, ministers bowed to intense pressure from scientists and academics by announcing that the clause would not be inserted into most academic research grants, effectively providing an exemption for universities. Shortly afterwards the then cabinet office minister, Matthew Hancock, said the clause, which was due to be implemented from 1 May, was being "paused" while the government – which had not consulted on the policy beforehand – considered representations from the charity sector. Announcing the full climbdown, Rob Wilson, minister for civil society, said the new system would "better protect the role of charities to speak out on behalf of their beneficiaries whilst ensuring taxpayers' money is used as intended". Chris Skidmore, the minister for the constitution, said the standards had been developed "through a constructive and collaborative process". Association of Chief Executives of Voluntary Organisations head Asheem Singh welcome the climbdown as a "victory for democracy". The National Council for Voluntary Organisations chief executive, Sir Stuart Etherington, said it came after "robust" discussions with ministers. Bob Ward, the policy and communications director at the Grantham Research Institute on Climate Change and the Environment at the London School of Economics and Political Science, who organised a petition against the original plan, said: "I am glad that the government has backed down over its threat to prevent researchers from using grants to inform policymaking. "There were many within the academic community who recognised that the draconian new rules would have [in effect] gagged researchers, damaging academic freedom and the public interest." The anti-advocacy clause, which ministers claimed was introduced after extensive research, was based on three slim pamphlets published by the rightwing Institute of Economic Affairs (IEA) thinktank. It argued that many charities were "sock puppets" in effect paid by government to justify the introduction of new policies. But the clause was attacked and ridiculed by opposition politicians, charities and academics. The Labour MP Margaret Hodge, at the time the chair of the public accounts committee, said the clause "smelled of Stalinism". Ward called for an inquiry into how the thinktank persuaded the government to float the gagging idea. He said: "The research community was shocked by the original proposal in February to prevent research grants from being used to inform policymaking, after the Cabinet Office was lobbied by the IEA. "I am glad that the research community has petitioned and overturned the wrong-headed regulations. There should now be an inquiry into why the Cabinet Office drafted such poor regulations in response to a campaign by a group of free market fundamentalists who keep their sources of funding secret and whose research is nothing more than propaganda for their extreme ideological agenda." In a blogpost on the change, Etherington said: "Our principal concern with the original clause was that it was counterproductive and would have meant grant-funded charities were unable to provide policymakers with crucial insight that improves legislation, regulation and public services. "This fundamental flaw has been recognised by government and the new guidance is crystal clear in saying that activities such as raising issues with ministers and civil servants, responding to consultations and contributing to the general policy debate are not only permitted but actively welcomed."

Zidane scored for Real Madrid this week – Enzo Zidane, that is. Just when his dad thought things could not get any better, the 21-year-old got a goal on his debut – 17 minutes after he walked on to the Bernabéu pitch and a decade after his father last walked off it. It is 3,861 days since Zinedine was a Madrid player; 333 days since he became the Madrid manager and he is already a European Champion, a European Super Cup champion and a very proud parent. Win on Saturday afternoon and the chances are he will become a league champion too. Not that Zidane would say that. On Saturday it is the clásico and Madrid's manager says, "Whatever happens, it won't be decisive." Perhaps not but as league games in December go this may be about as close to a decider as it gets. The winger Lucas Vázquez also said there is a long way to go but victory would be an important step towards the title, the chance to end a run of only one championship in eight years. "A fist on the desk," the defender Nacho Fernández said. Real have not been in a position this good for some time. At this stage last season they were 12 points behind Barcelona. When Madrid went into the last clásico at the Camp Nou in April, they were 10 behind. That was Zidane's first as the manager and they won 2-1. Now they go into his second with a six-point lead over Barcelona at the top – their largest lead since, under José Mourinho, they won there in the spring of 2012, to all intents clinching that lone title in eight. Victory would give them the head-to-head advantage used instead of goal difference. Even this early, that would be a huge advantage. The opportunity is enormous; for Barcelona, so is the obligation. The pressure is intense and the performances have mostly been poor. The team so long defined by their midfield have occasionally looked as if they do not have one, the control gone, the number of passes declining, the ability to play through their opponents' press diminished. The return of Andrés Iniesta could hardly be more timely. Luis Enrique admits that with the front three they have, there is a tendency to play too quickly. And while Lionel Messi has been superb, Neymar has gone six games without a goal and Luis Suárez is not imposing himself as he did. "There's no reason to worry," Sergi Roberto insisted but saying so revealed pessimism is creeping back. Last Sunday Barça drew 1-1 at Real Sociedad and Luis Enrique called it a "miracle" – not that they dropped two points but that they gained one. This was no unrewarded siege; not for Barcelona, anyway. They had been dominated. This is their worst start under Luis Enrique; the last time they had only 27 points at this stage was nine years ago – and Madrid ended the season champions, 18 points ahead. After the draw at Real Sociedad Gerard Piqué was stopped pitch-side and asked for his thoughts. He questioned the team's attitude and said it was as if they had not even been out there in the first half. "You can't win the league playing like this," he said. Two days later he added: "You have to believe in this team, always. Having showered and reflected, if we win on Saturday things will look different." If they win, it is back to three points, the title race wide open and everything will indeed feel very different. But if they don't? "If we lose, things will become very difficult," Piqué said. They face a Madrid side unbeaten in 32, just as Madrid faced a Barça side unbeaten in 39 last season – and won. Barcelona won the league anyway but only just. "The clásico is more important for us than for them," Piqué said. "They can allow themselves the luxury of losing. We can't." Madrid do not lose often these days. Zidane has taken charge of 48 games, losing two, one of them a Champions League first-leg defeat. In La Liga his record reads: played 33, won 27, drawn 5, lost 1. Scored: 99. Madrid are the only side in Europe's top five leagues who remain unbeaten this season. No manager has ever had a start this good in points terms – not even Luis Enrique, whose managerial record reads: one treble, one double but who this week said "We've got the best squad since I've been here but the same useless lump as manager". Florentino Pérez, the Madrid president, told AFP this week: "Zidane changed the history of this club as a player; it was obvious that he would do a great job as manager." In fact, it was not obvious – certainly not to Zidane. For all his enormous popularity, the respect he commands, there were significant doubts at boardroom level, as well as among supporters. Even as he won the Champions League, some remained. This season, ridiculous though it sounds, there have been doubts too: the fixtures have been reasonably kind and the run has not been as impressive as it has been long. Some thought Zidane lucky. He has always said he had a "star" but he is sharp and politically astute, too, and was always far more of a competitor, a worker, than people allowed. It annoyed him when people said he was an elegant, effortless player; there was effort, all right. As a manager, everyone quickly agreed he managed the group well – something of a backhanded compliment – but they wondered about his coaching, his tactical work, his control. His calm, almost gentle approach contributed to that: his refusal to project his own achievements, to hang medals on himself, his deference to his players, his reluctance to engage in tactical analyses, to explain what exactly it was he had done, preferring to talk in terms of "intensity". At the end of it there was that smile but little else by way of explanation. He took it all in his stride, as classy and elegant off the pitch as he had been on it. There were injuries – Ronaldo, Benzema, Bale, Marcelo, Casemiro, Kroos, Modric, Ramos, Pepe and the rest – but they just kept winning. The numbers were becoming incontestable anyway and then came Atlético Madrid – the first real test, many said – and Real won that too, 3-0 against a team who just do not concede three goals and had lost once to them in 10 games. This, more than any of the other wins, more than last year's clásico, more than the Champions League, was Zidane's victory but he refused to put it like that. He surprised everyone with his formation, playing Ronaldo at No9 and Isco off the front, and got it right again. Now comes the clásico, an almost unique opportunity at just the right time. Enzo Zidane said this week he was living a dream. His dad is not doing too badly either.

I have written before in this column – or I think I have, but I can't quite remember – that one of my greatest shortcomings as a husband is that I am extremely forgetful. I fail to remember birthdays, the addresses of neighbours, the location of roads and, occasionally, the names of my children. It is a grievous fault, I cannot deny, and one I have been apologising for since I was about six. There will be those who believe that this is not some failed circuitry in my brain, but a kind of wilful neglectfulness – that I won't make the effort to remember such things because I am lazy or because they are unimportant to me. And given my lack of self-knowledge – another fault – I cannot say whether this is true. I would attempt only one defence of my habitual forgetfulness, which is that forgetting is not always such a bad trait. If you count memory as important, then perhaps it is also true that forgettory is crucial. For what we forget and what we remember are a key part of who we become. What we remember of our lives is like the evening sky where we see a few night stars in the foreground, while the multitudes are hidden from our view. The fact that I forget things, either by choice or chance, that are good and useful must at least be balanced with the fact that I also forget things that are painful and harmful. In this sense, forgetfulness can be a good thing. One often hears the phrase, when some past slight is examined, "I've forgiven but I haven't forgotten." Translation: "I haven't forgiven." Whereas I may not have forgiven, but usualIy I have forgotten, and it amounts to much the same thing. I used to think that absent-mindedness was vaguely charming, at least as displayed in myself – my mother may have found it endearing that I "lived in a little world of my own" (a phrase that appears with regularity on my primary school reports). As an adult and a married man, I now realise that it is deeply frustrating and infuriating for others, so I have come to feel ashamed of it, as well as being frustrated by it myself. After all, it is not as if I wanted to leave my new laptop in Starbucks (as I did a few months ago). But as I accept my guilt, or my flaw, I must also take credit for my virtue in not caring too much about the past. This is, I confess, something of a conscious decision (or possibly a rationalisation) as I am fond of Zen philosophy, which emphasises the importance of the present over the past or future. In any case, I think that, in the context of a relationship, it is some compensation for all those missed appointments and forgotten school performances. Ignorance, some people say, is bliss, and although I wouldn't go that far, I would say that ignorance of the past is useful. It may be true, of course, that those who do not remember the past are condemned to repeat it. On the other hand, those who forget the past are relieved of its burden; a burden that will unfortunately be a shared one. You can always be determined to remember to remember – or you can forgive and forget, or you can simply forget. For to recover from anything traumatic or painful, you have to be always wiping the slate clean. Such is the power of forgettory. Lethe, the river of forgetfulness in Greek mythology, was a place of healing. As Seneca wrote: "Within the abyss, Lethe, measureless in sweep, glides smoothly on with placid stream, and takes away our cares." Lethe was the passage to the underworld, but we could in modern terms see it as the passage to the unconscious, where our memories are mercifully wiped clean. Or that's my excuse, anyway. @timlottwriter

After the EU referendum, a curious thing happened. The winners were neither happy, nor triumphant. The victory announcement by Boris Johnson was funereal, almost resentful. It was almost as though the campaigners had practised and perfected their "outsiders against the establishment" lines during the campaign, and once on the winning side had no script. Sure enough, once the shock of the result dissipated, the sharp tone of the leave campaign returned to fill the vacuum. Any issues with Brexit were the fault of those who voted remain: they were "talking Britain down", as if the pound's depreciation were more sensitive to the chatter of negative remainers than to the seismic shock of a vote to leave the largest economic union on earth. Having gone through a polarising referendum and secured an unlikely victory, those on the winning side are still angry, angrier even than they were before. The same bizarre sore-winner phenomenon is happening in the US after one of the most stunning victories in election history. Donald Trump is so vexed that, in response to calls for a recount in some states, he tweeted that the only reason he did not win the popular vote is because of illegal voting. Even in victory, even when he is the actual president-elect of the United States, he believes that he has been robbed. It is almost like he wanted to lose. Similar to the petulant chippy vibe of the Brexit victory, the Trump triumph is peevish and cantankerous, seizing on any opportunity to reclaim the credentials of the besieged that propelled him to victory. But you see, in a way, he has been robbed. As Brexiters have been. They have been robbed of the ability to blame everything on others and not be accountable. They have been robbed of the virtue of the victim and the helpless underdog. People say that Trump's worst fear is to lose, or to be seen as a loser. It looks like it is in fact the opposite. Trump, and indeed some Brexit voters, are far more upset by their victory than they ever would have been if they had lost. "Triggered by winning" it has been called. That was never the deal. They are angry at the losing side for letting them win. The charitable way to view this is fear and covetousness over hard-won gains. Perhaps these victories were so unexpected that their owners are terrified that the world will forcibly revert somehow and re-establish the dominance of interests that they believe conspires against them. But it is more likely a more ignoble combination of populism and panic. The forces that gave Brexit and Trump momentum coalesced around grievance rather than vision. There was no agenda, no genuinely thought-out project that the winners could soberly set about executing, just resentment. And the grievance narrative must be continued even in success because that is pretty much the whole energising principle. That's why potential recounts in the US and the UK court ruling to award parliament the right to opine on triggering article 50 are seen not as democratic processes, but proof that the powers that were are on the move. The politicians now in charge must distract voters by attributing their failures to sabotage. Those supporters who were animated by populist desires and prejudices, rather than rational argument, will inevitably continue to view the world through that prism and therefore welcome the diversions with relish, locked in a battle with an opposing side that has been defeated and is inanimate. Matthew Parris describes Brexiters obsessed with extending their fight against the vanquished side even after the battle is won as victorious troops still stalking the battlefield, kicking the corpses of the dead. Actually it's more disturbing – the victors are kicking the corpses and then running away screaming because the cadavers have moved.

Trump picks Mattis for secretary of defense Donald Trump has selected the retired marine general James Mattis to be his nominee for secretary of defense. Mattis has deep wells of support on Capitol Hill and in the military, and his appointment comes with much establishment hope that he will be able to rein in Trump and bureaucratically neutralize Mike Flynn, the president-elect's pick for national security adviser. "But Mattis has enough points of policy agreement with Trump to make his integration with the Trump hardliners as strong a possibility," write Spencer Ackerman and Ben Jacobs. The retired general – nicknamed "Mad Dog" and known for his blunt remarks – would need a special waiver from Congress because he has not been out of uniform for the requisite seven years. Trump made the announcement at an Ohio rally on the first day of his "thank you tour" of states that he won last month. At the rally in Cincinnati, the president-elect returned to his bombastic campaign style, bashing Hillary Clinton and the media. Donald Trump announces James Mattis as his choice for secretary of defense Trump's cabinet could be wealthiest ever "Trump, a former host of reality TV show The Apprentice, is surrounding himself with the 1%: billionaires and millionaires, investment bankers and venture capitalists, Wall Street insiders and family fortune heirs, many educated at elite schools," David Smith writes. Opponents warn that his choices won't help fulfill Trump's promises to working-class Americans. Meanwhile, experts are worried about the president-elect's potential conflicts of interest. In case you missed it: the Guardian's Nadja Popovich and Jan Diehm created a visual guide to explain them. Trump's rich pickings: president-elect's team could be wealthiest ever The 'most practical' way for US to drop climate change commitments The US should completely quit the United Nations forum to tackle climate change in order to quickly exit the Paris climate agreement, according to Steven Groves, a lawyer at the conservative Heritage Foundation who is part of Donald Trump's transition team. Groves told the Guardian that exiting the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change would be the "most practical" way for the US to drop its climate change commitments. Groves was speaking about the Heritage Foundation's position on the issue as he was not authorized to speak on behalf of the Trump transition team. Trump has promised to "cancel" the Paris deal, and quitting the UN forum would allow the US to back out of the international climate effort within a year. Quitting UN climate change body could be Trump's quickest exit from Paris deal Tyra Patterson: victim's sister says she is innocent Earlier this year, the Guardian examined the struggle for justice of Tyra Patterson, an Ohio woman who has been fighting for 22 years to clear herself of a life sentence for murder. Patterson has always insisted that she was an innocent bystander in the murder of Michelle Lai, a 15-year-old girl who was shot in the head in 1994 in Dayton, Ohio. Now, Holly Lai Holbrook, Michelle's sister who was sitting in the car just feet from her when the teenager was shot at point-blank range, has come forward to say that she is now convinced of Patterson's innocence and told police officers at the crime scene that Patterson had nothing to do with her sister's killing. She has petitioned Ohio's governor, John Kasich, to use his clemency powers to free Patterson. Tyra Patterson is in prison for murder – now victim's sister says she is innocent Support the Guardian's fearless journalism Never has America needed fearless independent media more. Help us hold the new president to account, sort fact from fiction, amplify underrepresented voices, and understand the forces behind this divisive election – and what happens next. Support the Guardian by becoming a member or making a contribution. MDMA approved for final trials to treat PTSD The US Food and Drug Administration has approved phase three trials of MDMA to treat post-traumatic stress disorder, the final phase of validation required to turn the party drug into a legal medicine. The treatment involves giving patients the drug just three times – once a month – during long talking therapy sessions, interspersed with weekly sessions without the drug. Early trials of the drug have shown encouraging results for patients with treatment-resistant PTSD. MDMA approved for final trials to treat PTSD before possible legalization Fake news becoming a global problem Fake news online has been dominating discussions after the US election – but it's also having an effect in countries around the world. Guardian correspondents examine the impact of fake news in Germany, France, Myanmar, China, Brazil, Australia and India. Fake news: an insidious trend that's fast becoming a global problem François Hollande will not seek re-election Hollande, the least popular French president since the second world war, has announced he will not run for a second term in office. The Socialist president appeared shaken and emotional as he said in a live televised address from the Élysée palace that he would not attempt to run for a second term, conscious of the "risks" to the French left if he did so. His satisfaction rating recently dropped to just 4%. François Hollande will not seek re-election as president of France Isis recruiters targeting refugees in Europe, experts say Islamic State recruiters are targeting vulnerable refugees in Europe to radicalize them in an effort to further polarize the European Union population, Europol, the law enforcement agency of the European Union, has said. Isis recruiters targeting refugees in Europe, say counter-terror experts Former NFL player Joe McKnight killed Former NFL running back Joe McKnight was shot and killed in suburban New Orleans on Thursday afternoon, the Jefferson Parish sheriff's office said. Former NFL player Joe McKnight killed in reported road rage incident And another thing ... Struck by the legendary sniffing skills of man's best friend, scientists fitted a dog-inspired plastic nose to an explosives detector and reported that it worked 16 times better. Bomb detector works better with fake dog nose on the end

Nico Rosberg has stunned Formula One by announcing his retirement, just five days after the 31-year-old became the sport's world champion. He said he had "climbed my mountain". Now he is going out at the peak. His Mercedes team-mate Lewis Hamilton, who won 10 races to Rosberg's nine this year but was beaten by five points, said the move was not unexpected to him. The British driver said: "I'm probably one of the only people that it was not a surprise to. This is the first time he's won a title in 18 years [though Rosberg was GP2 champion in 2005], hence why it was not a surprise that he decided to stop. He's also got a family to focus on, and wants more children, and Formula One takes so much of your time. Will I miss the rivalry? Of course." Interest will now focus on the driver Mercedes will choose to replace the world champion. Fernando Alonso (McLaren), Sebastian Vettel (Ferrari) and Max Verstappen and Daniel Ricciardo (both Red Bull) would be obvious targets, but all are contracted to their respective teams for 2017. Instead, Mercedes could make a short-term fix and opt for another German, Pascal Wehrlein, 22, a member of the team's young driver programme. Wehrlein has deputised for both Hamilton and Rosberg in testing. The watertightness of Alonso's contract at McLaren is the subject of some conjecture and F1's chief executive, Bernie Ecclestone, says the Spaniard would be his choice. "It's possible I suppose, let's see," he said. "They've got new management now at McLaren. Maybe he's fed up being there and they're fed up having him." But a shocked Mercedes said they would not rush into making an appointment. Rosberg, who claimed his maiden title in the deciding race in Abu Dhabi on Sunday, made his sensational revelation at a press conference in Vienna, saying that the championship had always been his dream and, having clinched it, he would walk away. He signed a new contract with Mercedes for 2017 in the summer, worth £18.3m. Rosberg said he first started thinking about retiring when he won the Japanese Grand Prix in early October and realised the title was within his grasp. "From the moment when the destiny of the title was in my own hands, the big pressure started and I began to think about ending my racing career if I became world champion," he wrote in a post on his Facebook page announcing his departure. His mind was almost made up before his final, title-securing race on Sunday. He went into that race needing to finish in the top three and claimed that the process of considering his exit had cleared his head before the race. Afterwards, he partied until the early hours before flying to Kuala Lumpur for a sponsors engagement on Monday. It was then that the German made his decision. "I didn't know if I had the balls, and I took a bit of time," he said. The first people he told were his wife, Vivian, and manager, Georg Nolte, followed by the team's head of motorsport, Toto Wolff. "Toto understood. He knew straight away that I was completely convinced and that reassured me. My proudest achievement in racing will always be to have won the world championship with this incredible team of people." He added on Facebook: "Since 25 years in racing, it has been my dream, my 'one thing' to become Formula One World Champion. Through the hard work, the pain, the sacrifices, this has been my target. And now I've made it. I have climbed my mountain, I am on the peak, so this feels right." His battle with Hamilton dominated the season, after he had lost the 2014 and 2015 world title races to the Briton. Hamilton overcame engine problems and pushed Rosberg right up to the final race but could not overhaul the German, who admitted the fight had taken a toll on his family life. "This season, I tell you, it was so damn tough," said Rosberg. "I pushed like crazy in every area after the disappointments of the last two years; they fuelled my motivation to levels I had never experienced before. And of course that had an impact on the ones I love, too – it was a whole family effort of sacrifice, putting everything behind our target." Wolff admitted that Rosberg's decision was unexpected. "This is a brave decision and testament to his strength of character," he said. "He has chosen to leave at the pinnacle of his career, as world champion, having achieved his childhood dream. The clarity of his judgement meant I accepted his decision straight away." He added: "For the team, this is an unexpected situation but also an exciting one. We are going into a new era and there is a free Mercedes cockpit for the seasons ahead; we will take the necessary time to evaluate our options and then find the right path for our future." Hamilton has said he will not put pressure on Mercedes to pick a particular driver. "I have never been a driver to ever request," Hamilton said. "I know a lot of the other drivers, like Sebastian and Fernando, make sure that is in their contract. I have just always asked to have equal rights. So as long as we are treated fairly then it doesn't matter who is sitting alongside you. We have got great team bosses and I'm sure they will choose the right people to represent them."

Care homes that hit residents with shock rises in bills or have contracts riddled with hidden charges are to be investigated by regulators looking to see if the sector is treating people fairly and providing value for money. The Competition and Markets Authority's (CMA) inquiry will cover the 430,000 older people in care and nursing homes across the UK. It comes weeks after a bleak Care Quality Commission assessment warned that the quality and safety of social care received by elderly and disabled people in England are at risk, with care homes closing and providers pulling out because they can no longer make enough money. The CMA said its inquiry would examine reports of "potentially unfair practices and contract terms being used by some care homes" and whether they breach consumer law. It said it would "particularly like to hear from care home residents and their relatives who have encountered issues such as unexplained or 'hidden' charges, unexpected fee increases, confusing requests for 'top-up' payments, or occasions when they feel that complaints have not been handled fairly". There are approximately 17,000 care homes in England, with the market worth about £16bn a year. About 15% of over-85s live in care homes, with the number expected to rise substantially as the population ages. Research by Citizens Advice this year found one in 10 care homes give only a week's notice that fees are going to rise; a third of bill payers put down deposits without any protection scheme; and people often have to make decisions about moving a loved one into a home at very short notice, and are unable to properly plan. In one case highlighted by the Guardian in October, a nursing home in Colwyn Bay, north Wales, closed abruptly, leaving families desperately searching for alternative accommodation for their relatives. It is a story repeated across the country as cash-strapped care providers abandon struggling businesses. Costs for an average single room in a UK residential care home went through the £30,000 per annum barrier this year, rising by 5.2% to £30,926, more than double the average pensioner's income of £14,456, according to the Prestige Nursing and Care nursing agency. The CMA market study will assess whether competition between care homes is driving quality and value for money for residents and taxpayers. Andrea Coscelli, the CMA's acting chief executive, said: "Choosing a care home can be emotional and costly. We are undertaking a thorough review of the sector to make sure it works in the best interests of those who rely on it. "We want to hear from care home providers about the services they offer and any challenges they face, as well as residents, families and charities who have experienced what it's like to choose and live in a care home. "Given the concerns we have heard about possible breaches of consumer law, we particularly want to hear from people who think they might have encountered unfair terms or practices."

Eddie Jones has been mocked up as a clown in the Australian press as the war of words between the England coach and his Wallabies counterpart, Michael Cheika, continues. Jones has received the same treatment as Cheika was afforded by the New Zealand press during the Rugby Championship – and Warren Gatland following his remarks about All Blacks supporters – having earlier this week been accused of tarnishing his legacy with his "vitriolic" comments about the Australian media during the England's series whitewash in June. Cheika was infuriated when he was depicted as a clown by the New Zealand Herald and on its sport front page on Saturday, under the banner, "Introducing the real clown of rugby" The Australian newspaper has splashed a cartoon of Jones as a clown. Before England's 3-0 series win in June Jones spoke of "coordinated" plan to help the Wallabies win the first Test and he was incensed by Fox Sports' Stephen Hoiles, whose lines of post-match questioning were laced with sexual innuendo, and accused the Australian broadcaster of a "disgusting and demeaning" promotional video in the buildup to the first Test. Cheika responded by saying: "There was a lot of vitriol about Australia – his home nation where he coached and where his opportunities were given to him to catch and grow up as a coach and play. Personally, if you're looking to leave a legacy somewhere, you don't want to hit back at it, do you?", and then launched his own broadside at England's scrummaging. Cheika denied England were disrespected by the Australian media during their summer tour and accused Jones of having a manufactured chip on his shoulder before Saturday's clash at Twickenham. On Friday Jones hit back: "It doesn't worry me at all. If Cheika chooses to say that, then it's his choice. Everyone makes a choice in life about what they say and how they behave. If that's how he wants to behave, that's entirely up to him. "We are comfortable how we have behaved and comfortable how we have represented rugby. "Rugby is a respectful game and we represent all the kids playing rugby, supporters, and we want to behave in a respectful way. We have to keep the game in its proper state. The great games of the world – golf, tennis and rugby – stand alone because they have standards of behaviour." The coaches have seized every opportunity to continue their verbal jousting since Jones renewed hostilities after last England's victory over Argentina last Saturday by questioning the legality of the Wallabies' scrum. "Eddie has always operated with a chip on his shoulder and now there isn't a chip and things are going well he's got to keep looking for one," Cheika said on Thursday. "He is very respected in Australia, I don't know where that comes from, the disrespect. He is just geeing up. He is a good Australian coach who took Australia to a World Cup final when we didn't expect to go fantastic. "He is respected for that, he certainly is by me as a former team-mate and I think you saw when he was in Australia that he got a lot of respect." Glen Ella, the former Wallabies full-back who served as a skills coach for the duration of England's tour to Australia, also found himself in Cheika's crosshairs after he claimed the coach is still having nightmares caused by the defeats in Brisbane, Melbourne and Sydney. "It's funny, everyone is up the front of the bus when they have had a win," Cheika said. "A guy like Glen in particular is always up the front for a handout when he has had a win but when it is tough and you have to run uphill I have not seen that bloke or a few of those blokes around. "I don't think Glen is working with England any more, so any Aussie who would support England against Australia, especially a guy who has played for the Wallabies, there's got to be a reason why. "'I don't know if he's bitter. Maybe they want to get us kicked out and have a job there, I'm not sure. He has to have a reason."

There's a new process that's been kicking around the Guardian's digital department over the last few months - the design sprint. Developed by Google Ventures and immortalised in the book by Jake Knapp, the design sprint is "a five-day process for answering critical business questions through design, prototyping and testing ideas with customers." My team has run four design sprints over the last few months to help us tackle the problem we're trying to solve: getting less frequent visitors to form a lasting Guardian habit. Getting started with this new method was a challenge, however, and we've had to tweak it to make it work for us. Here are the three biggest things we've learned. You don't need to follow all the rules - a design sprint can be flexible Jake Knapp's book has been a hugely valuable resource for our team. It maps out, in minute detail, the steps needed to run a successful design sprint: gathering the participants together for the week and ensuring they're free from other responsibilities; setting aside a space for the team to work together in for the week; and hour-by-hour activities to get from kicking off on Monday morning to wrapping up on Friday afternoon. But really, a design sprint boils down to the following parts: Framing the problem to solve Generating ideas for solving the problem Deciding what to prototype Creating prototypes Testing prototypes with users Analysing the test findings And as long as you can cram each of these parts into a week, however you can, you have a design sprint. (Of sorts, anyway.) When my newly-formed team ran our first design sprint back in April, we already had a problem to solve, and lots of ideas for how to solve it. Some core members of the team also had other commitments that needed attention, and we didn't have a space set aside to work in. So we didn't even attempt to officially call it a 'design sprint', or clear everyone's calendars for official design sprint activities for the week. We simply set ourselves a deadline that we couldn't back out of: we recruited some Guardian users to come into the UX lab on Thursday and Friday, so that those of us who were free would have no choice but to prototype something. Then we improvised. We got together around a spare whiteboard in the corner of the office to decide what to prototype, and broke into two prototyping teams, with team members working at their desks. If people had other work on, that was fine, as long as our prototypes were ready by the deadline. Sure enough, we got it done, and ended the week with the whole team in the UX lab, watching their creations being tested and analysing the results. Prototypes don't need to be perfect, and you can make them in all sorts of ways During a design sprint, the team creates prototypes designed to answer key questions with users at the end of the week. The prototypes need to do a good enough job of bringing the idea to life that you get useful feedback--but because it's a sprint, you only have a day or two to get them done. This means you need to get creative. Our whole team has been involved in prototyping, and because we're not all designers, everyone has just had to use whatever method they're most comfortable with for mocking up ideas quickly. So we've gone beyond the usual design and prototyping tools like Sketch, Marvel and Invision. We've had an editor create prototypes using the Guardian's content management system, and a QA bring an idea to life via Keynote. Engineers have mocked up screens from scratch in HTML and CSS, and tweaked existing templates to hack together something almost working. A product manager has used Balsamiq, a wireframing tool. Rather than prototyping a complicated user flow every time, we've also worked to cut down our prototypes to the minimum needed to bring the idea to life and answer our key questions. Sometimes our prototypes have consisted of a single screen showing an ad for a new feature. In our most recent design sprint, rather than prototype a whole user flow for a new app idea, we mocked up how it would look in the app store. Our prototypes haven't all been perfectly polished. They've rarely contained pixel-perfect design, or followed the Guardian's brand and style guidelines, for example. But that's okay for a design sprint. As long as each prototype communicates an idea clearly, you'll learn a lot from it, and if users don't respond well to it, it's much easier to throw it away than a prototype you've spent ages on. Most of all, it's been valuable to have the whole team be able to gain experience of prototyping--I'd take this over perfectly-polished prototypes any day. It's okay to make a bunch of prototypes Google's design sprint method sees the team create one or two prototypes over the course of a week. But it was always going to be difficult for our team to limit ourselves to one or two. When we ran our first design sprint, we were at the 'go wide' stage, with lots of big ideas for solving the problem. So rather than honing in on one or two ideas, we were interested in getting feedback on lots of big ideas quickly to find the ones worth pursuing. Plus, with so many great ideas floating around, and so many members of the team excited to be involved in prototyping, it seemed a shame to limit our prototype output to just one or two. We ended up with four prototypes to show users at the end of our first design sprint; in subsequent sprints, we've shown as many as six. At first, we were worried about overwhelming users by showing them too many prototypes in one session. But it's worked out fine. Our prototypes have generally been simple enough that they've been easy to show people--for the most part, users haven't seemed overwhelmed, and we've gotten genuine reactions. Best of all, we've learned way more than we would have otherwise. After each of our design sprints, we've had a better sense of which ideas to take forward into live tests on the Guardian site or app--and sometimes the best thing to take forward hasn't been one single prototype, but the best bits of a few different prototypes.

A German plan to introduce a motorway tax for foreign cars has earned the wrath of other European Union members who have said they plan to challenge it in court. The road charging system was approved by the Bundestag last year, but faced stiff opposition from the European commission which has called it discriminatory. Following an adjustment to the plans agreed in Brussels on Friday the toll is now set to be introduced for foreign-registered cars. Cars registered in Germany will also pay but receive refunds in the form of tax deductions. Neighbouring countries have said the compromise deal continues to discriminate against non-German citizens. The governments of Austria and the Netherlands have said they are ready to take legal action against Germany, and Belgium and Denmark have said they are considering doing the same. "We will look very closely at this," said Anton Heinzl, a spokesman for Austria's Social Democrats (SPÖ). "If it turns out that Austrians are discriminated against, then we will fight this toll by all means and certainly with legal means." The Dutch transport minister, Melanie Schultz van Haegen, said her government planned to take its case to the European court of justice, calling the plans "alarming". "The only way to deal with these concerns is to prevent the introduction of the toll," she said. Following the European commission's disapproval, the scheme, which German policymakers have been working on for years, was revised to link the charge to environmental standards – so that fuel-efficient cars will pay less than those that are more polluting. The toll is due to be a minimum of €2.50 (£2.10) for a 10-day pass, and a maximum of €20. The annual cost will not exceed €130. Stickers on cars will indicate a driver has paid the tax, which some experts estimate will raise around €500m a year, though others have warned it may cost more to implement than it will bring in. Alexander Dobrindt, the German transport minister, said the toll was "fair and just" and would ensure that "all drivers contribute sufficiently to the financing of our motorways". The German autobahn network is one of the biggest in the world at just under 8,000 miles (13,000km). It is a magnet for car enthusiasts, thousands of whom visit Germany every year just to drive on the motorways and enjoy the many stretches with no speed limit. The scheme – which comes on top of a lorry or heavy goods vehicle toll introduced in 2005 – has been a pet project of Dobrindt's Christian Social Union (CSU) since the 2013 general election. It did not have the approval of the chancellor, Angela Merkel, who insisted it would not happen on her watch. Members of Merkel's Christian Democrats, sister party to the CSU, along with the Social Democrats, partners in the grand coalition, have been highly critical of the plan. Austria's transport minister, Jörg Leichtfried, said the compromise was nothing more than trickery. "It's just that they have managed to blur a little bit the discrimination against foreign drivers," he said. Anton Hofreiter, head of the opposition Greens parliamentary group, said that if his party entered government after the next federal elections the toll would be scrapped. "If the Greens get into government the motorway tax would be way up there with the things we would seek to revoke," he said. Violeta Bulc, the EU commissioner for transport, said the infringement procedure launched against Germany for being in contravention of key EU treaties would now be dropped, after what she described as "intensive negotiations" that had been going on for months. "These changes mean there can no more be any doubt about possible disadvantage to foreigners," she said after a meeting with Dobrindt. The changes will have to be voted on in the Bundestag and the toll is not expected to be implemented until after next year's general election.

Stoke are now much closer to where they had expected to be and, although the injury list remains long, Mark Hughes has some welcome posers. Will he stick with the back three he selected against Watford, who were so successful last week? Will Joe Allen, in such fine form before suspension, come back into a side who dominated at Vicarage Road with a big contribution from the midfielder's replacement, Giannelli Imbula? Sean Dyche will hope Hughes is blinded by his options: Burnley could do with something here after two consecutive defeats. Nick Ames Kick-off Saturday 3pm Venue Bet365 Stadium Last season n/a Referee Mark Clattenburg This season G9, Y35, R1, 4.11 cards per game Odds H 4-6 A 9-2 D 3-1 Stoke City Subs from Given, Haugaard, Shawcross, Allen, Krkic, Sobhi, Crouch, Bony, Verlinden, Ngoy, Whelan Doubtful Shawcross (calf), Whelan (calf) Injured Butland (ankle), Cameron (knee, both 10 Dec), Bardsley (knee, 27 Dec), Afellay (knee), Ireland (leg, both Jan) Suspended None Form WWWDLW Discipline Y26 R0 Leading scorer Allen 4 Burnley Subs from Robinson, Pope, Flanagan, Lafferty, Tarkowski, Darikwa, K Long, Kightly, C Long, Bamford, Barnes, Gray Doubtful Heaton (calf), Marney (hamstring) Injured Gudmundsson (hamstring, 17 Dec) Suspended None Form LWDWLL Discipline Y19 R0 Leading scorer Vokes 4

The track I'll be opening my next DJ set with Street Corner Symphony: Street Corner Symphony It really depends on the DJ who's playing before me, but if I could just start new and play whatever I wanted, it would be this. It just makes you want to move and dance. The track I always play to rescue a dancefloor Audion: Mouth To Mouth This was a hit when minimal was big, but I'm now playing it 10 years later in a different context. Everyone freaks out whenever I play it – it always works. The track that currently gets the most rewinds Sharif Laffrey: Key Jam (ACID) It's groovy and sexy – all of a sudden everyone is dancing rather than just marching on the dancefloor. The track I wish I'd signed to my label Georgio: Bedrock (Dub A Dub A Doo Mix) Who would have thought that a track like this would come out on Motown? My ex-boyfriend found it ages ago in a €2 bin and it became an instant staple in my sets. I never get tired of it, so it would have been perfect for Love On The Rocks. The track that should have been a crossover hit Fantastic Man: A Fountain Gate A Love On The Rocks track. Sorry for the shameless self-love, but this is such a good jam. The track I'd play at my auntie's wedding Jalal Hemati: Mahvash, Parivash Since I have a Persian background. I love the rhythm of this. The track I'd play at sunset in Ibiza Begin: Optical Holiday Pt 2 This one for sure. It's dreamy and bittersweet, and sets the vibe for a magical night where anything could happen. The track I'd play at my funeral Notorious BIG: Hypnotize I didn't understand many of the words when I was younger, but it has such a strong groove and reminds me of my childhood. This pick probably explains the absurdity of my life. Paramida plays New Business at the Pickle Factory, E2, Sat

If a teenager from London in 2006 came to survey youth culture in 2016, they would be confused, perhaps appalled. While their adolescence would have been populated by cocksure indie bands in drainpipe jeans playing packed all-ages concerts in warehouses and squats, the past decade has seen London lose many of its semi-legit venues as rampant gentrification and tighter regulation have spread through the city. That has meant it's become harder to put on an impromptu show with no money. At the same time, there's been a reaction against the masculinity of guitar bands. Young music types are more likely to be producers or weird arty savants like FKA twigs, who exist primarily online and are as likely to work with brands as their mates. Anarchic DIY groups such as Fat White Family do occasionally emerge, but tend to be older and more grizzled. The era of young fun bands seems to have stopped. But quietly, the movement is resurfacing. In the pubs and community spaces of Peckham and Brixton there are a group of young bands who just want to hang out. They're all chronicled in the scene's zine, So Young Magazine, and include glam revivalists Happy Meal Ltd and grunge guys Fish. The best of the bunch are Goat Girl, a female four-piece who have just been signed to Rough Trade and – despite releasing just one single – are currently on the cover of trendy music magazine BEAT (whose past cover stars include Beyoncé). "People help each other out. There are no promoters, we put shows on for free," says vocalist Lottie of the burgeoning scene. They recognise that, as the capital is increasingly controlled by the rich, there's a need for DIY scenes that are open to all. "There's a lot of hostility in London – it's nice to be able to just show up at a place and feel safe and know you'll quickly make a friend." This scene feels as if it will outlast what happened in 2006. Firstly, the music is so much more important: bands haven't just cribbed some Television chords so they can sing about girls they fancy. On Country Sleaze, Goat Girl demand "Touch my body, touch my soul/ Touch that deep and disused hole", a guttural cry that would feel as true in the deep south as it does in Dulwich. More importantly, the toxic arrogance that characterised much blokeish indie of the era has gone. Goat Girl are realists. I ask Ellie why there has been a dearth of young bands in the capital. "Being in a band, it's like... well old, it's been done for fucking ages. I think it's not cool now." That would probably be the biggest shocker to the 2006 teen, but by not trying to be cool, groups like Goat Girl might have just made being in a band fun again. Goat Girl are touring to Saturday 28 January

I'm not big on nostalgia, but I do quite miss the dress code that served through much of my youth, which went: "jeans and a going-out top". This was as close to a formal dress code as evening engagements – as we never, ever called them – got. It worked a treat. You had a favourite pair of jeans, and then just swapped the top in and out as if you were dressing up one of those paper dolls with tabs on them. No heart-searching over whether you should wear tights, no need for complex underwear "solutions", and no colour clashes to think about, because denim goes with everything. Jeans-and-a-going-out-top hasn't worked as a dress code for ages. Instead, we've been expected to either lean in to the party spirit with frocks that add to our to-do lists (fake tan application Friday morning, dry cleaner dropoff Saturday) or create dashing androgynous lines set off by impossible-to-source obscure Japanese trainers. And sometimes you think, "I'm not styling a look book here – I'm going to the pub. Can I not just keep my jeans on, step into high heels, put on a snazzier top and be done with it?" Well, dear reader, you can. A happy side-effect of 2016's renewed obsession with jeans – the weirder the better, with stepped "mullet" hems and asymmetric Frankenstein patches of dark and light denim – has been that jeans have climbed back up the food chain, from being clothes for a Monday off to clothes for a Saturday night out. You don't need to go that far, but you do need a modern jean, by which I mean a loose shape on the leg, a high waist and a hemline that ends at the ankle or above. Leg-lengthening hipster skinnies are for losers. Harsh but true. Now all you need is a going-out top. Anything in velvet works, as does anything that gets your shoulders out. Lace is excellent, but only with a high neckline. A bodysuit, under belted high-waist jeans, slays all-comers. That's it. No fuss needed. Time to go out. Jess wears velvet top, £45, finerylondon.com. Jeans, £49.95, gap.co.uk. Heels, £230, kurtgeiger.com. Styling: Melanie Wilkinson. Hair and makeup: Laurence Close at Carol Hayes Management.

I was scared of the dark as a child, so my bedroom door was always left open. I could not only hear my dad getting ready at 5am each day, I could smell him and his Old Spice aftershave. I would get a glimpse of him through the door, and he would look immaculate: ironed trousers, pristine ironed shirt, shiny shoes – and he was going to drive the buses. He was a bus driver for nearly 40 years. He took so much pride in his work and did so much overtime. He had a real dedication and respect for the job. His work discipline rubbed off on me, I think. My elder brother, Muneeb, set the standard as I was growing up – I realised there was nothing I could do that was ever going to supersede what he could do, academically. That is what taught me to be more creative. I thought, OK, I'll do something completely different. So on my 10th birthday, I announced that I wanted to be a radio presenter. My dad was from a traditional rural background in Pakistan and, by his own admission, didn't have a great education. He always told me I was lucky to have a chance to have an education. My mum would, too. She always said she didn't care what I ended up doing as long as I got myself a university degree. So the day I graduated, I gave her my certificate and said, "There you go, that's your degree. Now I'm going off to do my radio." And she said, "Fine, go for it." Every New Year, we'd go to a party at my uncle's. From the age of 11, I would stand up and do silly little magic tricks with my brother, and then comedic impressions of Prince Charles and other characters, including my relatives. It became a tradition. Mostly, it went down quite well – except with my aunt. She had this catchphrase in Punjabi, which translates as something like: "Oooh, that's another problem we've got." I'd just stand there, saying her catchphrase, and everyone would recognise it and laugh. I'd also do my uncle – he had this weird throat-noise, which I now use as Mr Khan – but I would do it from the other side of the room, in case he threw something at me. I remember being called Paki for the first time as a kid at school. The next morning, my mum was putting Brylcreem in my brother's hair and mine, which she did every morning, God knows why – and I was really quiet. She asked me what was wrong, and I told her and said, I don't want to go to school. She said, "You can't let somebody like that stop you going to school. Paki is just short for Pakistani and that's who you are. It's just a name; it only offends you if you allow it to. Next time he calls you that, you call him an Engli." So I did – and the whole class started laughing. It was a brilliant moment. And no one ever called me a Paki again. Every Saturday night, we would watch Dallas as a family. My grandmother would sit sewing, and occasionally have a go at us for watching it. She wanted us to talk to each other instead. But we would watch it anyway. At the end of the series, we realised that she had sewn cushions that were identical to those on the sofa in the Southfork ranch. My parents split up when I was 11. I couldn't get my head around why they would do that. It made me very independent, suddenly. I realised I couldn't rely on my parents ... and that if they were not always going to be together, maybe I would be on my own one day. They lived in the same house for six years after they separated. Dad lived in the front and Mum lived in the back. It was awkward. I was always being caught between the two of them, trying to work out who to sit with that day, because they had separate living rooms. And we'd all eat separately. One of the reasons I haven't committed myself to marriage is because I somehow think I've got to make it perfect. I've got to prove that you can have a perfect family. I have to constantly remind myself that that is ludicrous. Citizen Khan is on BBC1, 8.30pm, Fridays

Exhibition of the week Australia's Impressionists This is, if nothing else, an unexpected angle on the birth of modern art, following such painters as Tom Roberts and John Russell in their quest to emulate Monet and bring the light of impressionism to Australia. Hey, it worked with French wine – why not French art? National Gallery, London, 7 December-26 March. Also showing Making Nature This survey, of how human beings look at animals, explores what it says about us and them and the future of the natural world. Wellcome Collection, London, until 21 May. Gavin Turk Ego and wit in spades at this welcome retrospective for one of the best of the Young British Artist generation. Newport Street Gallery, London, until 19 March. Franz and Ferdinand Bauer Beautiful scientific art from the Romantic age by two Austrian brothers who worked in Georgian Britain. Natural History Museum, London, until 26 February. Wynford Dewhurst As if Australian impressionists were not enough, here is Manchester's very own impressionist painter, who helped make the movement better known in Britain, at about the time French art was moving on to fauvism. Manchester Art Gallery, Manchester, 9 December-23 April. Masterpiece of the week Vincent van Gogh – Sunflowers (1888) When the Dutch-born Van Gogh made his move from impressionist Paris to the Provençal town of Arles, he was transfixed and besotted by the intense colours of the south. His sunflowers are his ecstatic response to a yellow so strong you can practically taste it. Van Gogh painted this in a rapture of sun worship. He hung it in the home he created, the Yellow House, to infuse it with redemptive light. This is art as soul medicine. National Gallery, London. Image of the week A still from 100% Other Fibres by Heather Phillipson, who won the Jarman prize for video art this week. Her work features installations and films, often with her own poetry laid over them, and is, she told Adrian Searle, about "anxieties of the present moment ... I think my work has got more and more angry and overtly political. Looking back at my old work, there was a lovely innocent time when I could make a video about french kissing. Not that it was really that, but I didn't have to think about fascism, that it was on my doorstep." What we learned this week We heard the story behind the most talked-about artwork of the year – the 'bum door' at the Turner prize – from the man who inspired it Julia Gunther told us about her best shot – of the church brigade leader giving Cape Town kids hope Art world figures such as Grayson Perry and Hans Ulrich Obrist are protesting against the potential closure of New Art Gallery Walsall Oliver Wainwright looks at what we can expect from Donald Trump, architecturally speaking John Singer Sargent's watercolours are going on show at Dulwich Picture Gallery next year An Eduardo Paolozzi sculpture outside Euston station in London is deteriorating because no one wants to claim it Madonna is flogging a few of her artworks for her own charity – including pieces by Ai Weiwei, Tracey Emin and Cindy Sherman Painting is the art comeback of the century – not that you'd know from the Turner prize Stuart Jeffries visited the White House, the project turning Dagenham into an art destination The Cy Twombly retrospective at the Centre Pompidou in Paris opened – and it's predictably astounding ... ... as is Tate Modern's epic Robert Rauschenberg retrospective Olivia Laing, meanwhile, unpacks Rauschenberg's life, work, and mastery of the "language of junk" Guardian readers weren't massive fans of the new Design Museum A resurrected public art project from the 1970s reminds us of how triumphal – and Brexit-flavoured – our public art is today Photographer Danny Lyon discusses his images of ecological devastation The second-tallest building in western Europe is to be built in the City of London Rowan Moore looks at the blinging design projects cropping up along the banks of the Thames A magnificent gold torc from the bronze age has been found in a Cambridgeshire field Get involved Book now for two Guardian members' events: Rodin and Dance: The Essence of Movement, at London's Courtauld Gallery on 18 January; and Insider's View of Intrigue: James Ensor by Luc Tuymans, at London's Royal Academy on 20 January. Our A-Z of readers' art series continues – share your art with the theme N for North Sea And check out the entries we selected for the theme M for majesty Don't forget To follow us on Twitter: @GdnArtandDesign

The thoughts of a British foreign secretary on world affairs are like those of a sommelier on wine – they don't alter the taste. Boris Johnson, so often off message, was back on it today at that home of the bland, Chatham House. He gazed at the horizon and declared himself in favour of "a rules-based international order", and against "reverting to an older and more brutal system, where the strong are free to devour the weak". He was worried at the emergence of "non-state actors" with contempt for global liberalism. In that favourite Foreign Office phrase, he said, "We cannot allow this to happen." Big deal, feel my muscles. The only question just now that matters is: how is Johnson to deal with Donald Trump, insofar as he (rather than Ukip's Nigel Farage) has influence in the new Washington DC? Here, he is all over the shop. He wants Britain to go on spending absurdly on old-fashioned defence equipment. He is in favour of Nato countries doing likewise. He is against Russia's resumed occupation of Crimea and against it winning in Syria, except against Isis. He wants to talk with Russia, but wants to get tough with it on the Baltics. In other words Johnson wants the old Foreign Office ragbag of the unachievable in pursuit of the unacceptable, in defiance of the inevitable. As yet, the one glimmer of hope in a Trump presidency is the indication that some of these cold war attitudes might thaw. The smart thing for Britain – and Johnson – would be to help them on their way. Why not agree with Trump's (apparent) view that there is no "existential threat" to the west from Russia or China, and the threat from militant Islamism is criminal not cultural? Why not acknowledge that there will always be civil wars, but outside interventionists should acknowledge that they usually make them worse? The conflicts of the current century are likely to emerge from movement of populations, not from any zest for imperial conquest. The weaponry of the cold war has become useless, trapped in a military-industrial morass. Wars of the future will be won by the machine gun and computer hackers. Such clout as Britain might have in these matters is intellectual rather than strategic. There is no point in wailing the old nostrums about world orders. If any lesson can be drawn from the new populism, it is that they are defunct. The best Britain can do is encourage Washington to tear up the old route map and seek a new one.

A few days before I was due to return to university for my first-year exams, I decided not to. At the time, I felt like I was living in a solitary hell. I've always struggled with my mental health, and this only worsened once I went to university. I lost my support network of family and friends and failed to find a new one. I went from being an extroverted, happy person with a love for my subjects to being completely withdrawn, spending days at a time in my room without leaving. I wasn't the only one: nearly one in 10 students fail to complete their degree, according to the Complete University Guide. It may be the course, the costs, the city, or the pressure – and leaving can be the best choice. But it's worth considering your other options first. Speaking up Despite realising that things weren't right at university, I tried to ignore it. I ended up festering in my own head-space. I wish I had told someone as soon as I felt low, but the pressure I felt at the time made it seem impossible. Acknowledging that you aren't enjoying yourself can be hard, but sometimes it's necessary. There will usually be a variety of support services on offer – as there were at Warwick, where I was studying – but they can't help unless you say something. You can find support at your university's mental health and wellbeing services, advice services, or the university chaplaincy. Your campus might also have its own Nightline branch. There's no shame in using them, even if your problems don't seem "serious". Societies and clubs Make sure you focus on the aspects of university life that you do enjoy, such as a sports club or a society. My experience with my university newspaper, for example, was a brilliant one. The other student journalists were welcoming and supportive, and I soon found a love for writing. But during my second term, I found that I wasn't writing as much, or attending any meetings. The insidious nature of my depression made me withdraw from my favourite activity, which turned into a vicious cycle. If you decide not to drop out, my advice would be to focus on your favourite pastime – it really can help. A change of scene If you do choose to leave, it's worth considering a different university before quitting higher education altogether. You can use this opportunity to make sure you're certain that it's the right choice for you – right down to the details. Would you prefer to live in a bustling city, for instance, or a secluded campus? Loren, who left her campus-based university, says: "I left because I didn't like the course, the area I lived in wasn't particularly nice, and there was no nightlife. I didn't make very many friends because my campus wasn't the uni's main campus, so there weren't many people around." She is now in her first year at Southampton where she is living more centrally and is much happier. Time out Another option is to take medical leave, as one student, who prefers to remain anonymous, is currently doing: "I was too ill and unsafe to stay at university. It was really difficult to leave because I had such a strong friendship group. The university had good support and helped sort everything out for my suspension. "I've now got a full-time job to earn some money before I go back in February. The medical leave has definitely given me the time and space to work on getting better." And if you find yourself having doubts while applying for university, you can always have a gap year through deferred entry, which would let you have a year off without worrying about obtaining a university place. In the UK, the Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Hotline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is on 13 11 14. Hotlines in other countries can be found here Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at @GdnStudents – and become a member to receive exclusive benefits and our weekly newsletter.

Harper Lee's hometown of Monroeville plans to create a major tourist attraction for fans of the To Kill a Mockingbird author. The attraction, which is backed by a coalition of local business people led by the late author's lawyer Tonja Carter, is expected to open in March, according to reports in the Alabama press. The creation of the Harper Lee Trail is expected to attract hundreds of thousands of fans of the reclusive novelist who died earlier this year. At the centre of the scheme is the 1909 bank building where Lee's father – the model for Atticus Finch – kept a law office. This is due to be refurbished and turned into a dedicated museum in the Alabama town that was the model for Maycomb in the book. There are also plans to build replicas of three houses that feature in the novel, including the homes of the heroine Scout and Boo Radley. Peter Black, a board member of the Mockingbird Company, a not-for-profit company set up shortly before the author's death, told AL.com: "There's a bigger vision that we're working on in Monroeville," he said. "With Ms Lee's passing in February we've been working with leaders in Monroeville on how do we honour Ms Lee, and our vision is, with some time, how do we create a Harper Lee Trail?" According to the critic Sarah Churchwell, the plans risk something "far more pernicious than the commercialisation of Lee's legacy". "The so-called 'alt-right' is white nationalism repackaged as retro-chic," Churchwell said, "and its discourse constantly invokes nostalgia for a golden age in the Confederate South when racism when reigned supreme. The leaders of this project will need to be very careful that they don't end up just creating a Disneyland for racists." To Kill a Mockingbird is a novel that "responds, angrily, to America's history of violence against its own citizens", Churchwell continued. "Let's hope the leaders of Monroeville bear in mind that there is nothing entertaining about that." Whether Harper Lee herself would approve of the plans is open to question. In a letter to a friend, from 1993, she strongly objected to the evolution of "a new holiday sport in Monroeville ... That of people bringing their visiting relatives to look at me." "There is so little in the way of entertainment, looking at Harper Lee is something to do. Thanksgiving weekend was such hell that it got on [her sister] Alice's nerves as well – they came in VANS," wrote the novelist. The letter was one of 29 that were auctioned in March this year, a month after she died at the age of 89. In the same month an Alabama judge signed an order to seal Lee's will from public view after lawyers for Lee's personal representative and attorney, Tonja Carter, had asked for it to remain private. "As the Court is no doubt aware, Ms Lee highly valued her privacy," wrote the lawyers. Publication of the Go Set A Watchman, the prequel to To Kill a Mockingbird, last year brought the world's press to Monroeville amid fears that Lee might have been subject to elder abuse – a claim later declared unfounded by the authorities. That novel, written before Mockingbird but kept under lock and key for more than 50 years, was seen by many to destroy the heroic image of the lawyer Atticus Finch. Seen through the eyes of the adult Scout, he was revealed as just another small-town racist. However, publication did nothing to dent Lee's standing in the US literary pantheon. Following her death in February, Barack Obama declared that her work had "changed America for the better." "When Harper Lee sat down to write To Kill a Mockingbird, she wasn't seeking awards or fame. She was a country girl who just wanted to tell an honest story about life as she saw it," the Obama family said in a statement. Oprah Winfrey tweeted: "Harper Lee my 1st favorite author! I always wanted to interview her. She said 'honey I already said everything I had to say'." The launch of the new attraction will coincide with the annual staging by the Mockingbird Company of a play based on Lee's novel. The company was established last year to continue the ritual performance of the dramatisation, which has been performed in the town every year since 1993. In July, Carter visited Stratford-upon-Avon with Black and Judge Greg Norris, all part of a consortium of local businesspeople behind the trail, in search of ideas on how to continue Lee's legacy. They plan to register as a foundation in the new year, which Black said would: "honour the literary legacy of Ms Lee and at the same time get more people to visit Ms Lee's Maycomb." The Harper Lee Trail also plans to renovate the last house where the famously reclusive writer lived with her sister Alice. Black told the Guardian: "The project is in the early conceptual stage. No details right now."

Zac Goldsmith may have wanted the Richmond Park byelection to be a referendum on Heathrow expansion, but local voters had other ideas. The Lib Dems' Sarah Olney won after a marathon local campaigning effort focusing on Brexit, with the party's remaining big guns spending significant time in the borough. When we asked local readers to tell us why they backed the Lib Dem candidate, we heard from tactical voters alongside longstanding party supporters. Brexit came up more than any other issue, followed by anger and revulsion at Zac Goldsmith's divisive campaign to succeed Boris Johnson as mayor of London. Here is a selection of our readers' views. 'When will progressives start boxing as clever as our enemies? Labour couldn't win in Richmond Park. Only Sarah Olney had a chance to overturn Zac Goldsmith's majority. Labour's blinkered decision to field a candidate in the face of these political realities – unlike the Greens, to their lasting credit – speaks volumes about the party leadership's inability to recognise the enormity of the crisis Britain faces today – the gravest since the Second World War. Our foes, by contrast, are under no illusions about the stakes hence the Tories and UKIP allowing Goldsmith a free run. When will progressives start boxing as clever as our enemies? Barry Langford, Richmond 'The fact Ukip supported him said it all' I used to respect Zac as a good constituency MP, despite never voting for him. However, after his racially divisive mayoral campaign and his support for Brexit I feel he cannot represent me. The fact that Ukip supported him said it all. I'm a Labour party member but feel the Labour candidate had no chance here. Labour's response to Brexit has been disappointing. I'm looking for a strongly pro-EU party to support, and the Lib Dems seem like the best option. Tim Young, 40, Richmond 'It's never been more important for liberal voices to be heard' I joined the Lib Dems in 2015 because of their unapologetic pro-EU stance. It may be a flawed institution, but to me the European Union represents everything that is good about co-operation for mutual benefit and has acted as a bulwark for decades against the politics of nationalism and division. I believe that it has never been more important in my lifetime for liberal and internationalist voices to be heard, and winning this by-election sends a powerful message to the Government to temper its hard Brexit plans. Ewan Maddock, 29, Richmond 'Goldsmith showed his true colours' Goldsmith's disgraceful mayoral campaign, support for Brexit, choice of cronies (Johnson, Rees-Mogg et al) and recent voting record on issues such as disability benefit cuts (which saw him dropped as patron of a local charity), showed his true colours, and they're hideous. This year he's proved himself to be so self-serving, posturing and petulant that I now think he only cares about about Heathrow because the flight path goes over his house. I cast my vote as a protest against everything Goldsmith has revealed himself to represent. Susan Ward, 33, Richmond 'I don't understand why Labour didn't go in with the Lib Dems' I'm a Labour member and can't understand why they didn't go in with the Lib Dems against Zac Goldsmith. Labour doesn't have a chance in this area sadly. Zac has been a great MP. I respect that he stuck to his promise of resigning because of Heathrow but to make that issue the thing he campaigns on just after Brexit ... I also cannot forgive him for the way he managed his London mayor campaign, aggressive and a real 'nasty party' tone. I emailed him a few times asking him to support a debate in parliament about rent control and he refused, despite this being a massive issue in his constituency and London as a whole. Rebecca Patterson, 29, Richmond 'Brexit is national suicide' I am a Labour Party member and have supported the party since I leafleted with my father for the 1945 election. This time I'm voting Lib Dem because I voted to Remain. I've been on pro-EU marches and am very against Brexit, which to me is tantamount to national suicide. Not all older people are Brexiters who want to return to a mythical 1950s. Lynne Hall, 79, Richmond 'Goldsmith's mayoral campaign was squalid' I voted Lib Dem – very reluctantly. A party canvasser told me that "honesty is overrated" when I challenged him about his party's support for 'austerity', student fees and the bedroom tax. But Zac is far worse. He has the temerity to claim about being a local but refused as a non-dom to contribute of his fair share to public services – especially invidious when he campaigns outside local schools such as the one my son goes to. His mayoral campaign was squalid. Sanjiv Sachdev, Richmond 'I voted for Goldsmith at the last election but not this time' I voted for Zack Goldsmith at the last election but not this time, principally because of his support for the Leave campaign. He claims to be a constituency MP who listens to his constituents - the reason we are having this byelection in the first place. However, whilst 72% of his constituents voted Remain (a far more significant issue for the country at large), he persisted in advocating the Leave campaign. John Gaylor, 46, Richmond 'His stance on Brexit is completely at odds with the borough' Other than the Heathrow expansion, there's nothing Zac Goldsmith represents that I don't disagree with. His mayoral campaign was a disgrace, he voted for the disabled benefit cuts while a patron of a disabled charity, and his stance on Brexit is completely at odds with both myself, and also the borough as a whole. As someone from an absurdly privileged background, who's never had a job that wasn't created for him, I don't feel he's qualified to represent ordinary people I understand the criticism of the Lib Dems for their capitulation in the Cameron government, but what's important is we saw off Goldsmith. Jason Regan, Richmond 'Labour fielding a candidate showed a lack of strategic understanding' I have voted Labour since 1971; except for prior tactical voting (against Tories), and am a member of the Labour Party. However, I am intending to cancel and join the Lib Dems , because I loathe what Corbyn and McDonnell have done to the Labour Party. The fact that they fielded a candidate in this byelection shows they have no strategic understanding, no big vision and no belief or plan for how to counter the Tories. Wendy Knight, 63, Richmond Some names have been changed

Guardian Australia writers Ben Doherty and Greg Jericho won awards for feature writing and commentary at the 61st Walkley awards for excellence in journalism in Brisbane on Friday night. Doherty was recognised for best short feature writing for his moving story about the Kurdish refugee Fazel Chegeni, who died on Christmas Island last year. Chegeni escaped torture in Iran, only to suffer mental torment and ultimately death in Australia's detention system. Economics columnist Jericho won for his collection of columns "Politics, the planet and the personal", which touched on the big-picture issues of Australian politics and climate change, as well as his relationship with his daughter Emma. Jericho was described by the judges as a brilliant myth buster for his forensic examinations of political and economic issues. A former public servant who wrote the celebrated blog Grogs Gamut, he has been writing for Guardian Australia since 2013. The Gold Walkley was won by photojournalist Andrew Quilty, who has based himself in Afghanistan's capital, Kabul, since 2013. In his speech he said when he worked for Fairfax before going freelance he always felt like a second-class citizen, and subordinate to the journalists, a role he realised was self-imposed. He said he found it "deeply humbling" to be recognised not just for his photography but also his journalism. Quilty is the first photojournalist to win the award. He paid tribute in his speech to the Guardian contributor Sune Engel Rasmussen, whose work on Afghanistan he illustrated this year. The former Guardian columnist Stan Grant won the book award for Talking to My Country. Giving part of his winning speech in the Wiradjuri language, Grant said: "I was raised on the stories of my mother, a bush poet who told tales of living on the margins" The Australian's crime reporter Dan Box won two awards for his acclaimed podcast series Bowraville: best documentary feature or podcast and best coverage of Indigenous affairs. Box shared the award with colleagues from the Australian, Stephen Fitzpatrick and Eric George. The scoop of the year was won by Nick Tabakoff from the Daily Telegraph for his coverage of the Parramatta Eels NRL salary cap scandal. The award for long feature writing went to Jess Hill for Suffer the Children: Trouble in the Family Court, which was published in the Monthly. Guardian Australia was nominated in three other categories: international journalism and multimedia storytelling for the Nauru Files; and coverage of a major news event for reporting on Cardinal George Pell before the child sex abuse royal commission.

Of all the enduring images from England's 20-point thrashing by Australia at last year's World Cup – and there were a fair few – perhaps Joe Launchbury's misery when collecting a thoroughly undeserved man-of-the-match award best sums up the stark humiliation of it all. There were numerous better performers that night, all wearing green and gold, and none more so than Bernard Foley, scorer of two tries – the first of which left Launchbury with a face full of grass - and 28 points in one of the most beguiling fly-half performances Twickenham has witnessed. And after he had been earmarked as the Wallabies' weak link, no less. Fourteen months, a 3-0 whitewash in England's favour and an awful lot of talk have passed under the bridge since then. Indeed England, unrecognisable under Eddie Jones, seek a 14th win in a row but, as they have not tasted defeat since, Foley's masterclass is relevant to Saturday's match. Not least because 11 of England's starting XV were on the receiving end, but also because, after a poor June series against England and an indifferent Rugby Championship, Foley is back in form. "He probably wouldn't have been that happy with the way that he performed against England, some of the matches against New Zealand, but he seems to have taken a step forward on this tour," says Nick Farr-Jones, Australia's World Cup-winning captain in 1991 and a member of the 1984 grand slam side. "He didn't go quite as well during the England series in Australia. Through their tactics they were able to shut him down a lot. We really struggled, despite having a lot of possession. But now his vision is great, his confidence is high, his speed and individual attacking skills are terrific but I think more importantly, he's calling the shots out there, he's calling the plays." Eddie Jones seems to agree. He has showed his disdain for the Wallabies' scrum but has acknowledged Foley, who has shredded Wales and scored the crucial points against Scotland and France on this tour, ranks among the best three fly-halves in the world, the inference being Beauden Barrett and George Ford are the others. The 27-24 loss to Ireland last Saturday means a first grand slam for Australia since Farr-Jones and co is not on the line but having been 17-0 down in Dublin, the Wallabies demonstrated the kind of attacking potency that blew Wales away and that England are yet to encounter this autumn. Perhaps Foley has taken time to readjust his backline in the absence of Matt Giteau and he made five appearances at No12 in the Rugby Championship, which, all told, were mixed. But Reece Hodge's fast start to his international career and Tevita Kuridrani's form at outside-centre – he has scored in all four of Australia's autumn Tests – have empowered the fly-half again and Farr-Jones believes Stephen Larkham, Australia's backs coach and 1999 World Cup-winning No10, must take credit. "For once I've seen Larkham's hand on that backline," he adds. "And Bernard Foley is really instrumental in creating those structures. If you look at some of the great Australian teams over the decades, one of the common denominators is that the No10 has been a terrific player that has been able to call the shots. We all know what Larkham's qualities were when he wore the gold jersey and I can see a lot of that in the way that Foley is thinking about the game, structuring the game, mixing the game up." While he may not be as quick as Barrett, Foley's sevens background makes him an obvious threat with ball in hand and his ability to play flat, to put his runners through gaps, is delightful to watch. His kicking is often questioned but when the stakes are highest he has a habit of delivering. Scotland can attest to that, while anyone who saw him kick the last-gasp winning penalty for Michael Cheika's Waratahs in the 2014 Super Rugby final would have known better than to question "the Ice Man" at Twickenham last October. Alofa Alofa, the Harlequins wing who was part of the Waratahs side in 2014, says: "I never thought he'd miss. He's great under pressure. He was great for us throughout the season. He's played sevens, he could attack the line as well as a passing game. "It's great to have a 10 who can attack like that. He was great all over the field. I rate him as one of the best. I hope he continues to play the way he is and becomes one of the all-time greats." If Larkham's influence on Foley is clear, then Cheika's is similarly apparent, having coached him at the Waratahs and given him the platform to shine on the international stage. But Farr-Jones does not believe the Australia coach is winning all his battles, not least with his counterpart Jones. "Cheika has to become more mature when it comes to overreacting to little jibes," he says. "I suspect there was a little bit of truth in what Steve Hansen said about Eddie getting the better of him. The incidents in Auckland, where Cheika focused on being portrayed as a clown, I think that was a silly overreaction by Michael. "I'm sure Michael will mature as a coach, just as Eddie has matured significantly. I think [Eddie] was a dud coach when he was in Australia and now he's become a very good coach. He was too prescriptive, he didn't get the best out of his players. He sent them on with a robotic message and we played a very bland type of rugby that wasn't creative and wasn't typical Wallaby rugby. He's acknowledged that he has become a far better coach than when he was down here coaching the Wallabies."

Four of the world's biggest cities are to ban diesel vehicles from their centres within the next decade, as a means of tackling air pollution, with campaigners urging other city leaders to follow suit. The mayors of Paris, Madrid, Athens and Mexico City announced plans on Friday to take diesel cars and vans off their roads by 2025. Anne Hidalgo, mayor of Paris, led the initiative at the C40 conference of mayors on climate change, taking place in Mexico this week. She said: "Mayors have already stood up to say that climate change is one of the greatest challenges we face. Today, we also stand up to say we no longer tolerate air pollution and the health problems and deaths it causes, particularly for our most vulnerable citizens." "Soot from diesel vehicles is among the big contributors to ill health and global warming," added Helena Molin Valdés, head of the United Nations' climate and clean air coalition, noting that more than nine out of 10 people around the globe live where air pollution exceeds World Health Organisation safety limits. Miguel Ángel Mancera, mayor of Mexico City, said increasing investments in public transport would also help clean the city's air, and reduce greenhouse gas emissions. Giorgos Kaminis, mayor of Athens, said his goal was to remove all cars from the city centre. The city authorities will also work with national governments and manufacturers, and promote electric vehicles and cleaner transport. Recent research has uncovered the scale of the problem, with 3 million premature deaths a year attributed to dirty air, as well as millions of other illnesses, particularly in children. Green campaigners welcomed the announcement, saying it showed that it was possible to clean up big cities. Alan Andrews, lawyer at the NGO ClientEarth, whose legal victory has forced a UK government re-think of air pollution plans, said: "This shows political leaders across the world are waking up to the damage diesel is doing to our health. But 2025 is a long time away when you consider the 467,000 premature deaths caused by air pollution in Europe [alone] every year." He called on other leaders to "go further and faster [with] bold new measures". Jenny Bates, of Friends of the Earth, added: "This bold move to get rid of diesels, the most polluting vehicles, is exactly what is needed. We need cleaner vehicles and fewer of them. Getting rid of diesel is essential and we must also give people genuine alternatives to driving." She also called on London's mayor, Sadiq Khan, to phase out diesel vehicles from the city by 2025, and for new clean air zones in all of the UK's cities and major towns, with funding taken away from roads to promote sustainable alternative transport. Diesel fuel use is a key cause of air pollution in cities, as the engines produce nitrogen dioxide, a harmful gas, and tiny particulates that can lodge in the lungs. These forms of pollution can also interact with other substances to create, in some conditions, a toxic soup. Yet diesel use has been rising in many countries, partly for economic reasons and partly as a consequence of measures to combat climate change – diesel vehicles burn fuel more efficiently than conventional petrol engines, reducing carbon dioxide emissions. It is not clear whether diesel vehicles in the four cities will be subject to a total ban, or what areas of the cities will be covered. Some cities already have measures in place intended to reduce congestion and clean up the air, such as low-emission zones that involve traffic restrictions. Last year, the Volkswagen Group was engulfed by scandal when it was discovered that some of its diesel cars contained technology to disguise the true level of their harmful emissions.

John Cleese: 'He left me weak with laughter' The first time I set eyes on Andy Sachs was at the Lyric Theatre, London, in the autumn of 1973. Andy was appearing with Alec Guinness in Alan Bennett's Habeas Corpus, an exquisitely crafted sex-farce about a respectable family in Brighton in the 1960s. Andy was playing a piano tuner, but the magnificent Margaret Courtenay mistook him for the man who was coming to measure her for a custom-made bra. When Andy started on the standard pianist's hand-and-finger stretching routine, she began to register anticipation of nameless carnal delights, producing one of the funniest farcical moments I have ever seen. Weak with laughter, I managed to open my programme and underline his name. A few weeks later, I was casting a short film called Romance with a Double Bass, and I asked Andy to join us for a few days' shooting. It turned out to be a very happy collaboration, and I observed what a wonderfully inventive comic actor I was working with. Luckily, Connie Booth and I were already writing the pilot episode of Fawlty Towers, so I had the inspired idea of casting Andy as Manuel. Inspired? Let me explain something. If you met Andy socially it would never have occurred to you for one moment that he was an actor. You would have guessed a senior civil servant, or a physician, or an academic, or perhaps a research scientist. He was quiet, thoughtful, beautifully mannered, well informed, observant and extremely kind. But once you put that moustache on him ... Ole! Manuel appeared, as if from nowhere. I salute you, Andy. You created one of the great comic characters. Connie Booth: 'Andrew had wit that could sting' It's been 50 years since the cast of Fawlty Towers met at the BBC to begin work. Andrew Sachs was unknown to me, but not to John. He had watched him play one of the funniest pieces of farce business he'd ever seen in Alan Bennett's Habeas Corpus. Looking back, the choice of Andrew was a stroke of enormous good luck. Like Abbott and Costello or Laurel and Hardy, he and John at first glance were a droll study in comic contrast. Basil was tall and dogmatic, Manuel small and confused. People say that nobody but John could have played Basil; it's just as true that nobody but Andrew could have played Manuel, even though there was a time when Andrew, who was German by birth, wanted to play the character in German. The character became iconic. In person, Andrew had none of the manic bravado associated with comedians. He wasn't showy or noisy; he was a good listener; he had wit that could sting. There was a certain detachment about him, magnified in the last years by the onset of Alzheimer's. That same detachment was apparent on stage when some of the great comic set-pieces backfired. For instance, during a fire drill at the hotel, Basil assembles everyone in the lobby, but Manuel is in the kitchen with a frying pan and his sleeve catches fire. Manuel runs out yelling: "Fire! Fire!" But Basil, insisting that there is no fire, pushes him back in, which sets the whole kitchen ablaze. In the playing, although Andrew had on a protective jacket, he was badly burned. In that moment of panic and pain, Andrew remained calm. (He later sued the BBC). And again, in another scene when John whacked him on the head with a frying pan, he ended up slightly concussed but showed no pain. It reminds me of my first question to Andrew about what makes something funny. He used the example of slipping on a banana peel. If an actual person slips on a banana peel, he said, we're concerned for him. To be comic, the audience must instinctively know he's hasn't been hurt, that he's OK. Off-stage or on, I never saw pain in Andrew. John Cleese's words are from his foreword to I Know Nothing!, Andrew Sachs's autobiography.

Yesterday, I raged against students at Plymouth university who are banning the sale in their campus shop of the Sun, Daily Mail and Daily Express (plus their Sunday equivalents). Jonathan Heawood, founder of the press regulator, Impress, responded by asking me, in a tweet: "how should students pursue truth" with the publishers of those newspapers? It was retweeted by Brian Cathcart, one of the founders of Hacked Off, the group that represents the victims of press misbehaviour. I think, well I hope, that both men are against the banning of newspapers. But the question they ask of me is fair. Although, as they surely know, there is no easy, one-sentence answer. First off, students are no different from all citizens. They have a right to air their views, to shout, to protest, to complain. They can pass motions condemning the editorial content of newspapers. The National Union of Students (NUS) could launch a nationwide campaign across UK universities in order to highlight the anti-immigrant, anti-EU, racist, sexist, xenophobic, homophobic agendas of newspapers. Aside from campus meetings, they are at liberty to use all the available social media tools to further their cause. This is the great advantage of the digital age: unmediated platforms in which to argue against the mainstream press agenda. Given the size and reach of the NUS it is in a perfect position to publicise a case against the newspapers carrying hateful editorial messages. And students are quite within their rights to urge people not to buy such papers. It would still allow people to exercise their free will. They can also, again like other citizens, lobby their MPs - at surgeries, by email, whatever - to point up editorial content that strikes them as egregiously unfair and likely to incite hatred. Politicians require ammunition to attack papers. And then, of course, there is the editors' code of practice to consult, especially the clauses on accuracy and discrimination. Admittedly, there are twin problems in complaining to the Independent Press Standards Organisation (Ipso): first, the difficulty of mounting a third-party case; and secondly, acting on behalf of groups of people. But, in the right circumstances, the effort may not be wasted. Pressure applied on the regulator to deal more equably with complaints on behalf of marginalised groups could prove valuable. In addition, it might be productive for students who are outraged by the treatment of minorities to make a constructive response to yesterday's announcement of a code consultation. All of this may sound limp when compared to the grand (and misguided) gesture of banning papers. It is long term rather than short term. It demands effort, not ranting from a microphone and staging a quick vote. Once upon a time, in those pre-digital days of hot metal, the national press reigned supreme. It made propaganda without any comeback. Now it doesn't have a monopoly. If students, anyone, wants to combat what the Mail, Express and Sun say they should regard counter publicity as the best antidote to the poison they believe the newspapers are guilty of spreading. As someone who has spent the best part of 24 years as a commentator on the press, during which I have criticised countless examples of distortion, deceit and disgraceful conduct, I know there is no silver bullet. What I also know is that the circulations of all three newspapers have declined dramatically over that period, as has their influence. The Express is now irrelevant. I accept that the Mail and Sun are not. But they will not be defeated by actions that smack of censorship. They will not be brought to heel by overly restrictive regulation. Beat them instead at their own game. Take every opportunity to publicise the falsity of their messages.

This week's biggest stories It's a controversial idea, but a new paper this week describes for first time how scientists can test the controversial idea that the speed of light is not a constant. If the theory is proven, it would overturn Einstein's century-old claim that the speed of light is a constant. It could change the way we view the cosmos, but until it's proven (or not) we can content ourselves with what we do know - and for some of that we have the Saturn-orbiting Cassini spacecraft to thank. After nearly two decades, more than 300,000 incredible images and the discovery of no fewer than seven moons, Cassini is about to begin its swansong, which will end when the craft finally dives into Saturn itself on 15 September. If the noble end of this plucky little orbiter brings you down, why not cheer up with a little festive "neural karaoke"? An AI project from the University of Toronto can take any digital photo and transform it into a computer-generated singalong - and we have their Christmas effort for you to enjoy. Other cheering news is that a single dose of psilocybin, the active ingredient of magic mushrooms, can lift anxiety and depression experienced by people with advanced cancer for six months or even longer, according to two new studies. An even happier note sounded this week for women who are in danger of passing on devastating and often fatal mitochondiral disorders to their children - UK doctors are poised to seek permission this month to create Britain's first baby from the DNA of three people if the government's fertility regulator approves the treatment. More news from Guardian Science | Sign up to Lab notes ___ Friday feature From an Arctic Circle expedition to working with the school of biology and environmental science at University College Dublin and having her work sent into space by the European Space Agency, artist Siobhan McDonald explains how she collaborates with researchers to broach subjects at the edges of current scientific knowledge. There's also a great gallery of some of the work that will be included in her forthcoming exhibition, Crystalline. ___ Straight from the lab – top picks from our experts on the blog network Drink and be merry: why alcohol makes us feel good, then doesn't | Brain flapping The mechanisms of alcohol intoxication are quite confusing. We're talking about a relatively small molecule (ethanol) that ends up present throughout the whole brain. Ethanol disrupts the cell membranes of neurons, mildly and temporarily, but neurons are complex and delicate, so this still affects their functioning. Given that all the brain's functions depend on neurons, alcohol potentially affects the entire brain, all at once. You can see why it would be tricky to pin down the exact causes of drunken antics. How did the whale get its 'moustache'? | Lost Worlds Revisited This moustache is properly called baleen, and is found in the mystecetes: the group of whales that include the famous giants such as humpbacks, bowheads and blue whales. It is neither hair nor tooth, but a stack of keratinous plates that hang, closely packed and bristling, from the upper jaw inside a whale's mouth, forming a brush-like sieve for feeding. Recent research suggests it evolved from the gums, but exactly when and how it first appeared in ancient whales is difficult to figure out. Baleen may have been around for up to 30 million years, but it almost never preserves in the fossil record. The case of the desperately ill spy and the untraceable poison | Notes &amp; Theories There were puzzling discrepancies in his lab results. Someone suffering from a bacterial infection would be expected to have a high white blood cell count, as the body produces more of these cells to fight off the infection. In this case the white blood cell count was very low and decreasing. Perhaps this was a reaction to the antibiotics. Perhaps not. Four days later, when her husband was still not making the expected recovery, Mrs Carter suggested poisoning. Visit the Science blog network _____ Alex Bellos's Monday puzzle An unexpected extra puzzle treat from Alex this week, with Newcomb's problem, which for almost half a century has been one of the most contentious conundrums in philosophy, with ramifications in economics, politics and computer science. As part of his original post, Alex asked readers which answer they'd choose - read the results of the poll and decide for yourself! Visit Alex Bellos's Adventures in Numberland blog for more marvellous maths ___ Science Weekly podcast Helping Nicola Davis delve into the problem of ageing in the latest Science Weekly podcast we have biomedical gerontologist Dr Aubrey De Grey, who reveals his unique, seven-step approach to the problem of ageing. Harvard University's Dr Justin Werfel discusses why programmed death might be a good thing, and the University of Kent's Dr Jenny Tullet explains how she's using roundworms to reveal clues about the genetics of ageing. ___ Eye on science – this week's top pictures More than 50 spectacular specimens of monkeys, apes, lemurs, lorises and bushbabies will go on show at the National Museum of Scotland from 9 December. The taxidermy was specially commissioned for the exhibition and is the first to show primates behaving as if they were in the wild - get a sneak peek at some of the specimens in this fab gallery.

Geographically speaking, Fair Isle is the most remote inhabited island in the UK. It's about 25 miles from the Shetland mainland, and there are many days when no land is visible on the horizon at all. This sense of isolation is amplified when the weather is bad and transport links are cancelled. The little seven-seater plane is vulnerable to both wind and fog, and the island can be cut off for days, sometimes even weeks, particularly in winter. It is the sense of community that is most affecting about the place. Certainly it was for me in 2003, when I first arrived. It was that sense of a group of about 60 individuals who cared about each other – and about the wellbeing of the place they shared – that helped convince me to move there, which I did two years later. And it's that sense of inclusiveness and welcome that I miss most now that I don't live there any longer. The island is small, really small. Just three miles long by one-and-a-half miles wide – and, from the highest point, at Ward Hill, you can see right across it and beyond, to a horizon of 360 degrees. The north is mostly moorland, blanketed in heather, with shared grazing for native Shetland sheep. Further south, the croft land is greener, more fertile, and the islands' two dozen houses are spread out there. The cliffs are truly spectacular – if you're feeling energetic, you can walk the entire coastline in a day. Life goes on in winter. Some visitors think that Fair Isle closes down entirely outside the summer months. In fact, most people do the same things – many things – all year round. When I lived there my roles included: road worker, magazine editor, classroom assistant, and even relief deckhand on the ferry. Every job must be done by someone and, with a limited supply of labour, that someone could be you. The best night out has to be New Year's Eve. The local tradition of "guising" is still going strong, and nearly everyone gets involved. About half the islanders put on masks and fancy dress, disguising themselves as other islanders or celebrities, then visit every house to perform an "act" or sketch. The job of those watching is to guess who is behind each mask. It makes for a fun, and sometimes exhausting, night. Fair Isle's best culinary experience is one that, unfortunately, many visitors will miss. The local lamb is wonderful but strict rules prohibit the selling and sharing of home-killed meat, so the chance to eat it doesn't come along often. Instead, try Shetland speciality reestit mutton. It's an acquired taste, salt-cured and very strong, but it makes an excellent winter soup. In summer, you might be lucky enough to get local lobster or crab for dinner. You don't have to be interested in birds to stay at the Fair Isle Bird Observatory and Guesthouse – though it helps. It's the largest guesthouse on the island and it's a social hub in summer. The observatory was founded by George Waterston back in the 1940s, and it's become a hugely important part of community life, as well as a centre for ornithological research. And it has a very well-stocked bar, open to guests and visitors, and you'll sometimes find informative talks or local music here. The key to a holiday here is: take your time. Because it's such a small island, it's easy to think you can see everything in a day or two. But to do so would be to miss the point of the place. There are things every visitor should see: the lighthouses, Sheep Rock, the North Haven, and perhaps a local knitter. But beyond that, just slow down. Don't stride from one end of the island to the other. Wander, and you'll be amazed how much there is to experience. Take a dip in the local swimming pool, Gunglesund. It's essentially a very deep rock pool, complete with weed and other marine life. While it's certainly warmer than the sea, it's not exactly cosy. Still, on sunny days you'll find islanders of all ages drying themselves on its barnacle-encrusted banks. And, with the waves of the Atlantic crashing a few metres away, there can't be many more spectacular places for a swim in the British Isles. Malachy Tallack is the author of The Un-Discovered Islands (published by Birlinn). To buy a copy for £12.29 including UK p&amp;p visit the guardian bookshop or call on 0330 333 6846

The volcanic eruption in Richmond explodes with meaning: with hope for some, anger for others. Brexit is now Britain's only political issue. It has ripped the country in two, rubbing out all other political lines, worn by both sides as a badge of identity beyond the reach of fact or balance. This byelection is a taste of how it threatens to overturn all old political certainties. There is a potentially dangerous whiff of civil war cordite in the air when large numbers of people are as angry as they get in Question Time audiences. Why aren't we out already? Never mind the details, out now! The fury of Brexiters at anyone suggesting out doesn't mean out of everything European is full of fingers-in-the-ears absolutism. That's why overturning a 23,000 majority is seismic. The Brexiters and Ukippers will try to foment maximum class rage at the arrogance of this soft, wealthy London seat gesturing two fingers of defiance at a referendum result they claim belongs to white working-class northerners. Never mind that it was the overwhelmingly Tory shire votes of Jacob Rees-Mogg's ilk that swung the referendum, while two thirds of Labour voters were remainers. The great lesson for the left and centre-left was taught by Caroline Lucas, who deserves most praise for this result. The wisdom and foresight of her elegant decision not to run a Green candidate sent out exactly the right message to the voters of Richmond: Brexit and how we survive it is bigger than any one party. The votes she swung behind the Lib Dem Sarah Olney were vital, but less important than the message that anti-tribal alliances will be essential from now on. Only a progressive alliance can overcome the dark forces being stirred on the other side. Richmond Park will be a useful red rag to Paul Nuttall's bullish Ukippers, who will milk the class grudge element from those relatively few places with a genuine grievance about sudden large-scale migration into their towns. Labour were humiliated, and deserved to be. Despite an excellent candidate in Christian Wolmar, the Labour voters of Richmond Park were wiser than their party in going with the tactical alliance and voting Lib Dem. Will Labour learn their lesson? Not a chance. They wasted an opportunity to show the same grace as Caroline Lucas, by joining an alliance in a seat they would never win. Losing their deposit was a well-earned embarrassment. Will it make Jeremy's Corbyn team think again about their priorities? No. Will it make them take up the question of proportional representation so people never again have to vote tactically for parties they hate? Ed Miliband was for PR, along with Chuka Umunna and growing numbers of Labour MPs, but the Corbynites won't touch it, for bad old tribal reasons. Labour's severe problem is not reflected in Richmond, but in some erstwhile heartland seats where the Brexit vote was strong, leaving many Remain MPs afraid to champion a soft Brexit loudly enough. Though safe as houses in Islington, Corbyn's deep disinterest in Europe loses Labour's chance to be the unequivocal champion of soft Brexit. Who and what is Labour for? It is rendering itself increasingly irrelevent – except in those many cities where it runs excellent local authorities, whose autonomous leaders detach themselves from the central party. The soft Brexit mantle falls to the Lib Dems, whose heartfelt pro-Europeanism is about the only policy on which they never ratted in their shameful coalition years. After Richmond, many seats they used to hold look winnable again, as May's split and directionless cabinet tumbles towards the EU exit gate with no ticket, no destination, no flight-plan and a pilot who dare not decide where to fly. This result should strengthen the arm of the majority on the Tory benches who want a sane Brexit. It should stiffen May's backbone to resist the 70 Brextremist MPs trying to hijack the plane and crash it anywhere, so long as it's not in Europe. As for the despicable Zac Goldsmith, what a satisfactory comeuppance for this entitled, insignificant, Brexit trustafarian. How fitting he should not just inherit his father's fortune but reap the whirlwind of the original referendum campaign launched by Sir James Goldsmith, an unsavoury tycoon who tried to bankrupt Private Eye. Labour's Wolmar was quite right to use his post-vote speech to say many Richmond Park voters had swung against Goldsmith junior after his "ghastly, disgusting" mayoral campaign with its failed racial assaults on Sadiq Khan. Some byelections move mountains, some are flashes in the pan. Yesterday's looks set to give new heart to all who hope for the least damaging, softest landing possible from the Brexit vote. But it will leave many enraged Brexiters even more ferocious in their view that any discussion of the country's future destination is some kind of betrayal of a referendum so badly designed that it had no X to mark the spot where we should land.

Poor Brazilians have long counted on a thin welfare state for basic human rights, such as healthcare, education and social security; but this reality may soon drastically change. Brazil's unelected president, Michel Temer, is seeking to amend the constitution to impose unprecedented austerity measures for the next two decades, effectively disenfranchising ordinary Brazilians, and especially the country's most vulnerable citizens. Temer, formerly Dilma Rousseff's ally and vice president, came to power in August as Rousseff was ousted from office in a highly controversial impeachment procedure many have called a parliamentary coup. The country he has taken charge of is facing a serious economic crisis similar to that confronting many of Brazil's neighbours; his answer for a stagnant economy is to freeze the federal budget for decades through a constitutional amendment. PEC 55, as the amendment is known in Brazil, establishes that for the next 20 years, growth in annual public spending will be limited to the previous year's inflation rate, thereby freezing, in real terms, federal expenditures until 2037 at 2016 levels. While some countries, such as Germany and the UK, have in the past resorted to expenditure rules as a mechanism to curb fiscal deficit, none of them did so through a constitutional amendment or for such an extended duration. In all other cases, fiscal rules were enshrined in law or in a coalition agreement, leaving enough flexibility for future changes that will be nearly impossible in the Brazilian case; here, it will take a drastic modification of the constitutional framework for the amendment to be overturned. PEC 55 not only means that public spending on education, healthcare and social assistance will remain constant for years as the population grows and ages, but also that various interest groups will be fighting over the meagre money left over. Quite predictably, during this arm-wrestling match, the more powerful actors, such as the judiciary and military, will be able to secure funding at the expense of public universities and the health system. What is more, this amendment is fundamentally antidemocratic. The scandal-ridden Temer was not elected to office, and the austere economic agenda he seeks to implement never received a mandate from the people. As it is structured, PEC 55 is an open attack on the voting rights of the poor: no matter who they elect in the next two decades, they will have to endure under an unalterable austerity policy. It's a case of deja vu: the new regime is making the poor pay, again, for a bill they neither participated in creating, nor will benefit from. It's an emblematic issue in one of the most unequal countries in the world, where 25% of the country's total income goes to the top 1%. Moreover, even IMF economists agree that austerity policies do more harm than good. According to the UN economic commission for Latin America and the Caribbean, reduction of external demand for primary products coupled with deceleration of the local economies that consequently received reduced investment and consumption, are the major factors underlying the South American crisis. Temer's economic team justifies the proposed new fiscal regime by claiming that the growth of primary public spending is at the heart of the country's current economic crisis. This is a false argument. The real root of our fiscal problems lies in a highly unequal tax system, one that does not tax the rich proportionally and gives exemptions to the business sector, particularly on dividends for shareholders. As the amendment process moves ahead, the authoritarian political agenda behind the proposed rolling-back of public spending is ever more apparent. PEC 55 has already made its way through the chamber of deputies without any opposition and was approved on Tuesday in the first round, by the senate. At least 50,000 protesters – among them students, teachers, indigenous people, landless and homeless movements, retired people and union leaders, from all around the country – congregated at the ministry-lined central esplanade of Brasília in an attempt to bar the voting. They were met with teargas, pepper spray and rubber bullets, leaving at least 40 people injured and many more detained. While the legislative process has thus far been alarmingly expedient and without much substantial deliberation, the warlike scene outside parliament last night provided a glimpse of the tremendous impact of this counter-reform on Brazil's already weakened democracy. With this move, Temer is fulfilling the promise he made after replacing Rousseff – namely, to implement severe cuts on social programmes and propel an extensive privatisation plan. If there was no coup against Rousseff, as some still insist, it is now hard to deny the ongoing coup against the poor, and, indeed, against democracy itself.

If reading is one of the pleasures – and necessities – of youth, rereading is one of the pleasures – and necessities – of age. You know more, you understand both life and literature better, and you have the additional interest of checking your younger self against your older self. Occasionally I will reread a book in exactly the same copy as I first did decades previously: and there, in, say, a student text of a Flaubert novel, I will find all those annotations which now, initially, embarrass. Key passages underlined, exclamations in the margin of "Irony!" or "Metaphor!" or "Repeated image!" and so on. And yet often, naive and excited as they seem, these comments are pretty much ones I might be making – if not so explicitly – several decades on. That younger reader wasn't wrong: it was ironic, it was metaphorical, it was a repeated image. I don't think you are a more intelligent reader at 65 than at 25; just a more subtle one, and better able to make comparisons with other books and other writers. Sometimes you change your mind about a writer. Perhaps, when you first read them you were only pretending to admire what you'd been told to admire. But also your tastes change. For instance, at 25 I was more open to writers telling me how to live and how to think; by 65 I had come to dislike didacticism. I don't want to be told how to think and how to live by, say, Bernard Shaw, or D H Lawrence or the later Tolstoy. I don't like art – especially theatrical art – whose function seems to be to reassure us that we are on the right side. Sitting there complacently agreeing with a playwright that war is bad, that capitalism is bad, that bad people are bad. "You don't make art out of good intentions," is one of Flaubert's wiser pronouncements. Sometimes, when our tastes become more defined, they become narrower. But this doesn't have to be the case. I want to address a rarer changing of the mind, which is altogether more enriching: when a writer you had previously been indifferent to, indeed actively despised, suddenly makes sense to you, and you realise – with, yes, a kind of joy – that at last you see the point of them. I first read EM Forster when an English master handed out a list of Great Books to be read one summer holiday. A Passage to India was on that list. I still have the Penguin edition – a reprint of 1960, costing three shillings and sixpence – in which I read the novel. There are no notes in the margin, not a single cry of "Irony!" It clearly made little impression on me. Later, of my own volition, when I was about 20, I read A Room With a View, and actively began to take against Forster. It seemed to me a fusty, musty, dusty read, with rather antique prose and a storyline and characters which failed to engage me. The English novelists of the next generation – Huxley, Waugh, Greene – spoke to me with much more clarity. What often happens, when you decide against a writer, is that everything thereafter tends to confirm that prejudice. I read parts of Forster's Aspects of the Novel and discovered his famous dictum that "Yes – oh dear yes – the novel tells a story ... and I wish that it was not so." This struck as me as exceedingly ... feeble. Of course the novel tells a story, I thought, and if you aren't up to telling a story, why write a novel? And indeed Forster had stopped writing fiction at 45, then lived on for another 46 years, in the process becoming a grander and grander old man. Nowadays, I would admire a writer who falls silent because he or she has nothing more to say; in my youth, I was less forgiving. And then there was that other Forsterian dictum: "If I had to choose between betraying my country and betraying my friend, I hope I should have the guts to betray my country." This may sound fine in theoretical, high-minded Bloomsburyite discussions, in which the personal life is held of greater value than the public life. But try telling that to, for instance, the families of those betrayed by Kim Philby. How many deaths was he responsible for? Forty or 50, perhaps. Rather more consequential than just doing the dirty on a chum. But there was a final, and barely sensible – but to me very powerful – reason for cold-shouldering Forster. I was and remain a great admirer of Ford Madox Ford. He was a rare English fictional modernist, with two masterpieces – The Good Soldier and Parade's End – to his credit, and at least a dozen more very interesting books; underappreciated when he was writing, and only a little less so nowadays. Forster and Ford met at a country-house weekend in the summer of 1914, at which Ford seems to have been the only person present to see clearly that war was inevitable. Afterwards Forster snootily noted in his diary that Ford was "rather a fly-blown man of letters". That was a bad call. And then there was the fact that, every time I went into a bookshop, new or secondhand, and looked to see what they had by Ford Madox Ford, he would be crowded out by the alphabetical proximity of shelf-yards of EM Bloody Forster. And, just to show that I wasn't merely mad, I had another go at A Room With a View in my 40s. No, it still didn't cut the mustard. And that, seemingly, was that. So what made me change my mind? It began from a quite unexpected source, an anthology of food writing. There I came across Forster's description of the breakfast he was served on an early-morning boat train to London in the 1930s: "Porridge or prunes, sir?" That cry still rings in my memory. It is an epitome – not, indeed, of English food, but of the forces that drag it into the dirt. It voices the true spirit of gastronomic joylessness. Porridge fills the Englishman up, prunes clear him out, so their functions are opposed. But their spirit is the same: they eschew pleasure and consider delicacy immoral ... Everything was grey. The porridge was in grey lumps, the prunes swam in grey sauce ... Then I had a haddock. It was covered in a sort of hard, yellow oilskin, as if it had been in a lifeboat, and its inside gushed salt water when pricked. Sausages and bacon followed this disgusting fish. They, too, had been up all night. Toast like steel: marmalade a scented jelly. I paid the bill dumbly, wondering again why some things have to be. They have to be because this is England, and we are English. This wasn't at all like my long-formed picture of the novelist: it was funny, subversive, delightfully unpatriotic, and all too true by the sound of it. But this might just have been a moment of aberration, I assumed. What finally did the trick was just as left-field: a conversation I had a few years later with a friend about opera. In my 60s I belatedly fell in love with opera, and we were discussing its representation in fiction. "Oh," she said, "and there's that scene in a provincial Italian opera house in Where Angels Fear to Tread." It was Forster's first novel, published in 1905. Not one I'd tried and failed with before. It looked agreeably short. And then it surprised me from the very first chapter: it was swift, witty and satirical, with a fine eye for English manners and English snobbery. Here are a couple of lines conveying the essence of the starchy, stuck-up Harriet: "Harriet, though she did not care for music, knew how to listen to it;" and "'Everyone to his taste!' said Harriet, who always delivered a platitude as if it was an epigram." The opera-house scene, when I got to it, was brilliant. The work being performed is Lucia di Lammermoor, a knowing nod to the same opera's famous appearance in Madame Bovary. This in itself showed spirit, if not recklessness: a first novelist, five years into the 20th century, taking on one of the great scenes of the greatest 19th-century novel. And yet Forster emerges unharmed by the comparison. His opera scene is his own. The production of Lucia is camply bad; the local audience riotously over-relaxed; the English visitors embarrassed and stuffily disapproving. It could have been just coarsely satirical and humanly disparaging; instead, the tone - of ironical amusement at the cheerful follies of the world – is perfectly pitched. And the scene also contains the following lines, which had me reaching for my annotating pencil: There is something majestic in the bad taste of Italy; it is not the bad taste of a country which knows no better; it has not the nervous vulgarity of England, or the blinded vulgarity of Germany. It observes beauty, and chooses to pass it by. But it attains to beauty's confidence. Where was that fusty, musty, dusty writer I had imagined Forster to be? Nowhere at all in this first novel of his. Next I read Howards End, and finally realised what a grown-up novelist Forster is; how serious his concerns; how good he is on marriage, friendship, love and hopeless desire; how well he writes about women; on the choice between art and life, art and money, taste and vulgarity; how well he understands the power of convention and the unheroic but necessary journeys a life entails; how wry and sly he can be, and yet how powerfully reflective. Perhaps I had mistaken his manner, or been expecting something he wasn't offering; or maybe, previously, I hadn't known enough about life to appreciate him. I read on, with The Longest Journey – publicly, his least successful novel, and yet his own favourite. There I discovered a writer who was also formally audacious in a way I would never have anticipated: in his handling of time; in the way he gives us a protagonist's backstory late in the day; and in his killing-off of characters just as we assume they are about to become important. One reviewer calculated that – infants excepted – more than 44% of the adult population of the novel fall beneath the author's capricious sword. I don't regret my decades of failing to appreciate Forster. Rereading would be a dull and complacent business if it always resulted in a simple confirmation of what you had previously thought. And the pleasure of being proved wrong can be a genuine pleasure. But as you may imagine, this experience has made me reconsider some other speedy judgments of my youth. Who else might I have to change my mind about? Hmm. Anthony Powell? Saul Bellow? Iris Murdoch? Actually, despite what I said earlier, I've recently been reading some of DH Lawrence's short fiction, and I'm beginning to think I might – just possibly – be wrong about him too. Julian Barnes's series The Essay: Changing My Mind, can be heard on Radio 3 at 10.45pm, from 5 to 9 December.

Jeremy Hunt's attempt to distract attention from the growing problems across the health and care system betray a poor understanding of NHS management. In his speech to the NHS Providers' conference this week, Hunt asked whether the NHS "made a historic mistake in the 1980s by deliberately creating a manager class who were not clinicians". To encourage more clinicians into management, Hunt promised to review whether doctors and nurses are put off by the fear of sanctions from their professional regulators if things go wrong, and to look at whether doctors should be able to choose clinical leadership as a specialism. These would be welcome changes, but they would do nothing to address the fundamental reasons why so few clinicians go into management. At its worst, NHS management is a reputational meat grinder. A combination of extreme financial stress, dysfunctional local systems and a tough inspection regime that can come to simplistic judgments means that a doctor or nurse who had been secure in their clinical role and spent perhaps three decades building their good name can see it pulled down in a matter of months. No ministerial warm words will overcome the impression made when senior clinicians see respected peers such as Mark Newbold at Heart of England foundation trust or Keith McNeil at Addenbrooke's quitting as chief executives. Managers, like clinicians, accept accountability as integral to their role. But when an institution is perceived to be in difficulty, treatment of the leadership often amounts to public humiliation. Moving into management almost inevitably means clinical skills and knowledge will atrophy. While a handful of people have managed to combine the two roles, the likelihood is that you quickly lose track of the latest developments in your specialism and your technical expertise declines. Within months, the benefit of years of experience and practice slip away. Hunt said he will look at this issue, but no policy sleight of hand can change the fact that going into management means slipping down the pecking order of the profession that you love. Clinicians are problem solvers. Applying judgment built on foundations of evidence and experience, the job satisfaction comes from taking an action that benefits the patient. That inherent reward of making a difference is enough to trump all the stresses and difficulties and brings staff back day after day. Managers have the stresses and difficulties, but too often the job satisfaction is elusive. The sales pitch to clinicians is that you can go from benefiting an individual patient, ward or department to improving an entire organisation. But with unstable finances, growing demand and intense central scrutiny, management often seems characterised by a lot of responsibility and too little power. For many clinicians, it is difficult to see how a management role would provide more job satisfaction. There is still work to do in ridding the NHS of the "us and them" attitude to managers of too many clinicians. Around the country there are a growing number of imaginative schemes to help junior clinicians and managers understand each other's worlds and develop mutual respect for the contribution that each makes to patient care. The massive expansion of leadership training for clinicians in recent years is similarly important in clearing out antiquated perceptions of management. But nothing will encourage clinicians to take up management roles more than a belief that the job is doable, and that they will not be scapegoated for failing to solve problems over which they have little control. The gradual shift towards managing local health services as systems rather than organisations is a crucial step in achieving this. If government and the central bodies want to see more clinicians in management, they need a determined effort to clear the obstacles out of the way so managers can spend more time leading improvement built around the needs of patients, and less time managing bureaucracy and crises. Join the Healthcare Professionals Network to read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare) to keep up with the latest healthcare news and views.

Bournemouth face the unenviable task of a visit from high-flying Liverpool. Jürgen Klopp's side are in dominant form, manifested in a 15-match unbeaten run in all competitions that the German will expect to be extended. However, without Philippe Coutinho to terrorise his defenders, Eddie Howe can find some solace. The focus for Bournemouth will be finding attacking flair of their own after scoring just three goals in five matches, since putting six past Hull in October. Graham Searles Kick-off Sunday 1.30pm Venue Vitality Stadium Last season Bournemouth 1 Liverpool 2 Live Sky Sports 1 Referee Robert Madley This season G9, Y45, R0, 5.00 cards per game Odds H 4-1 A 4-5 D 3-1 Bournemouth Subs from Allsop, Boruc, Jordan, Afobe, Hyndman, Gradel, Grabban, Mings, Mousset, M Wilson, Fraser, Gosling, S Cook, Daniels, Ibe Doubtful Boruc (back), Daniels (hip), Stanislas (match fitness) Injured L Cook (ankle, Jan), Surman (hamstring, unknown) Suspended None Form WDLLWL Discipline Y25 R1 Leading scorer C Wilson 4 Liverpool Subs from Mignolet, Manninger, Can, Klavan, Moreno, Lucas, Stewart, Randall, Grujic, Brannagan, Ejaria, Gomez, Alexander-Arnold, Woodburn Doubtful Firmino (calf), Lallana (groin) Injured Coutinho (ankle, 31 Dec), Ojo (back, Jan), Ings (knee, May), Sturridge (calf, unknown) Suspended None Form DWWWDW Discipline Y19 R0 Leading scorer Mané 6

José Mourinho always did take the League Cup – typically the lowest priority for managers at elite clubs – more seriously than most of his peers. Yet whether he regards Manchester United's flourishes of finery as West Ham were swatted aside as a genuine turning point remains tantalisingly difficult to assess. Of course, he watched the game from his secret hiding place, so cameras were not privy to the expressions that might have given some clues as to whether he is convinced his plans for a more balanced, more effective team are belatedly coming together. Encouraging though it was to see some of the stranger conundrums of the season beginning to stylishly resolve themselves – Henrikh Mkhitaryan and Anthony Martial in particular – the key for Mourinho is to translate some of the positive vibes United are capable of summoning from cup games into the league. United's form has fluctuated joltingly between competitions. At Old Trafford that contrast has been keenly felt. On the one hand, the Europa League and EFL Cup have been the platform for upbeat performances – helping themselves to goals aplenty against Fenerbahce, Feyenoord and West Ham, and the sweet taste of a narrow derby victory over Manchester City. But league successes remain a source of the kind of frustration to make a manager kick out at a poor, unsuspecting water bottle. The recent sequence of draws is part of a broader picture that goes deeper than this stodgy spell of league travails for Mourinho. Strong, consistent runs of Premier League wins, his staple when he first arrived in England and again during Chelsea's 2014-15 title, have become painfully elusive. For a man whose career has been built on a powerful obsession with winning, it is bizarre to see that his Premier League win percentage could not be more average. There have been 34 full-time managers employed in English football's top division since the start of last season, and Mourinho is currently ranked at No17, exactly halfway down, in terms of regularity of victories. Middle of the road has never been his thing but here he is, slap bang in the land of the nothing special. The man himself is not shy to remind anyone that he was the champion as recently as 18 months ago. But ever since reclaiming the Premier League title, his win percentage has dropped radically. The fact this takes in spells at two major clubs, with his Chelsea and Manchester United squads embellished with high-calibre talent, makes for a puzzling period in his managerial life. He has overseen only nine wins out of the 29 league games he has presided over during this and the last campaign. His win percentage of 31.03% falls comfortably below the two highest ranked managers at the moment. Antonio Conte is leading the way at Chelsea with a whopping 76.92%, closely followed by Pep Guardiola. Arsène Wenger, Jürgen Klopp, Claudio Ranieri, Manuel Pellegrini and Louis van Gaal all come in at a win rate of between 50-55% – considerably higher than Mourinho. Then there are a whole bunch of managers that would not normally be held in the kind of esteem Mourinho is used to, including a few who were turfed out of lesser-profile clubs like Francesco Guidolin and Quique Sánchez Flores. It is instructive to look at the teams Mourinho has beaten in the league during this time: Aston Villa and Norwich City (both relegated last season), West Bromwich Albion, Southampton, Bournemouth and this season's struggling Leicester City (all around mid-table), Hull City and Swansea City (gasping for air at the bottom of the league) and Arsenal (invariably a fixture he could regard as pretty close to a banker). It has been too long since he has emerged triumphant from one of the higher-octane Premier League challenges. If the crumbling of his Chelsea standing was a shock to the system, it cannot help that he has not immediately been able to bounce back and reclaim some of the winning mentality associated with the bulk of his trophy-laden CV. It allows the critics to begin to wonder if the dip is not necessarily temporary, and for the manager's own dark mood to simmer. He needs the fix that only a string of wins can bring. What makes it all the more frustrating is the sense that his United team are not a million miles away from finding a clearer rhythm. A trip to an out-of-sorts Everton on Sunday is next on United's agenda and it will be fascinating to see the kind of team Mourinho selects. His sparse use of Martial and Mkhitaryan in the attacking department has been bewildering. On their game, as they relished demonstrating with panache in midweek, they possess qualities United have missed badly at times this season. Was the brio against West Ham, as they combined their quick-thinking artistry to dovetail with Zlatan Ibrahimovic and Wayne Rooney, the start of something new? Are the shackles falling away? Is the balance and clinical edge the team has been missing sharpening at last? Flashes of encouragement are one thing. What Mourinho dearly needs is something more substantial and more consistent. Not much less than a needed win at Goodison Park will do.



Anders Lustgarten's big, bold new play juxtaposes Caravaggio's Naples and modern-day Bootle. The link is the artist's famous altarpiece, which gives the play its title. While Caravaggio paints it, Mickey, a Bootle boy, seeks to prove to his dying grandfather that the biblical precepts it embodies can still be enacted in the modern world. It's an ingenious idea that sometimes works, but leads to contrived plotting. Much the best scene, worthy of I, Daniel Blake, shows Mickey and his grandad being threatened with expulsion from their home because of the council's mandate to sell off higher-value properties: this both shows the cruelty of current housing policy and prompts Mickey to circumvent the order by following the New Testament principle of: "I was a stranger and ye took me in." At other times, as when Mickey's absentee dad turns out to be part of the property development programme, you feel even Dickens might have blushed at the use of coincidence. Similarly, scenes showing Caravaggio at work in 17th-century Naples oscillate between those that capture his reverence for people – such as ones in which he uses a prostitute as a model – and others that overplay his intemperate rage. But, whatever the play's flaws, it boasts a large heart. Erica Whyman's production, aided by Tom Piper's design, has a sweeping momentum, even if it could afford to turn down the volume. Patrick O'Kane as Caravaggio rages incessantly and it was something of a relief to encounter Allison McKenzie as his independent-minded model and Edmund Kingsley as his quietly dignified patron. The modern scenes are held together by the impressively assured TJ Jones as Mickey, Tom Georgeson as his principled grandad and Gyuri Sarossy as his suddenly returning father: the scene where the three of them compare leading football teams to political parties is hilariously funny and shows Lustgarten even putting the boot into his beloved Arsenal. It's a far from perfect play, but one that actively embraces the compassion within Caravaggio's masterpiece. At Swan theatre, Stratford-upon-Avon, until 10 February. Box office: 01789 403493.

We've seen the road-straddling bus that glides over lanes of traffic, the high-speed transport pods of the Hyperloop, and bike paths in abandoned tube tunnels. Now here's the latest radical transport idea to transform our cities: putting cars in tunnels – but with a twist. Dreamt up by Lars Hesselgren and his research team at London-based architecture practice PLP, and announced today at the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, the CarTube proposal reflects the company's motto: "Streets are for people, not cars." The solution to achieve this? Move a city's cars underground on to a network of tracks in small-bore tunnels, creating more safe space at ground level for bicycles and pedestrians. Sounds rosy, but there are a few technical issues to surmount before this vision can be realised, especially in London, its case study city. First, as a fully automated system, it would rely on only electric, internet-enabled vehicles using it. As it stands, fully electric cars only make up a tiny proportion of the cars on the road – although at last year's UN climate change meeting in Paris, the UK – along with Germany, the Netherlands, Norway and others – agreed to ensure that all new cars will be zero-emissions by 2050. Which, admittedly, is 34 years from now. Second, building an entire network of new underground tunnels takes time, space and money. We know from London's Crossrail just how expensive creating even a relatively simple underground tunnel route can be – though PLP insists the CarTube tunnels are far cheaper because they're smaller, don't require large stations, and have no need for ventilation because there will be no vehicular emissions. Still, in a city like London, with tube tunnels, train tunnels and sewerage systems, it's anyone's guess where the subterranean space for the CarTube network would even be found. The specifics of how the system works remain a little hazy, but here's the general idea: the CarTube grid of subterranean tunnels would link to a city's existing road infrastructure, with entrances feeding in from periphery motorways as well as simple ramps throughout the city. Once in the tunnels, the cars would automatically move at a steady, continuous rate, evenly spaced from one another. Users decide exactly where they want to start and end their journey, book a time slot, and the system does the rest – whether you're using your own car or a taxi. Vehicles are spaced at two-metre gaps and locked into position on constantly moving tracks, so accidents and delays are also prevented. Furthermore, if you arrive at your destination by private car, you could take a pedestrian lift to the surface while your car is kept in a "car stack" – like an underground car park with an automated valet service. Later, your car would be returned to you on demand. In the London case study, PLP claims travel times on the CarTube would be roughly a quarter of what is achieved on existing roads, with a typical journey from Heathrow to the City of London taking only 14 minutes (the same journey on Crossrail is due to take 34 minutes). As with all elements of the "smart city", the objective here is to eliminate disruptions and inefficiencies from urban life. The CarTube envisages replacing the current "stop-start model" of urban transport – be that traffic lights or train stops – with a "fluid, integrated network". It's this idea of an interruption-free journey that leads to PLP calling the CarTube "the next best thing to teleportation". They claim it will reduce urban travel time by 75%. "The real issue is control," Hesselgren explains. "Trains and tubes have controls; cars don't. Autonomous cars do, but they don't work well with pedestrians, cyclists and other unexpected elements. The only way you can have a high-capacity car network in a city is to have a dedicated track." He insists the idea is not repeating the "awful" underground motorways of the latter part of the 20th century. But shouldn't we be thinking about moving away from car-based city transport altogether, rather than simply building expensive alternative infrastructure for it? What about promoting cycling and public transport? "This is public transport," insists Hesselgren, adding that because cars on the CarTube can be continuous and closely spaced, moving at a speed of 50 miles per hour (80kmh), capacity for transporting people is higher than packed trains that come every five minutes. If the project's goal is to reduce street-level congestion, then is a city like London (which already has an extensive public transport system and congestion charge) its prime target? "London is our case study, but chances are it will get built somewhere else where people are desperate for a solution," Hesselgren says, listing Mexico City, Delhi, Jakarta and Mumbai as the sorts of gridlock-heavy cities that could benefit from the CarTube. "This kind of approach in those places could really make a difference," he adds. That difference, however, would rest on the replacement of all cars in those cities with fully automated, emission-free vehicles – which seems a long, long way off. It is easy to come to the conclusion that this would never work, let alone happen, so why dedicate attention to it? Putting aside the key lesson from this year that you should never underestimate the potential of something that seems so wholeheartedly preposterous, proposals like the CarTube reveal how we are responding to the mounting crisis of urban transport and what we want out of the future city. Now might be the time to mention that the CarTube team is meeting with potential collaborators, including Google, in the new year to move the idea forward. As we reported earlier this week, some cities are tackling street-level car congestion with approaches far simpler, and cheaper, than an entirely new automated underground transport system: building safe segregated bike lanes, controlling car access to urban cores, and increasing the capacity on public transport. Taking cars off the road is a noble idea indeed, but putting them underground may not solve the transport challenges our cities currently face. What do you think about the CarTube? Share your thoughts in the comments below and follow Guardian Cities on Twitter and Facebook and join the discussion

As falls from political grace go, it has been one of the fastest. At the last general election, Zac Goldsmith was re-elected in Richmond Park with a massive 23,000 majority; since then the Old Etonian has lost the London mayoral election and his seat in south-west London after forcing a byelection in the wake of the government's decision to build a third runway at Heathrow. He had hoped that the contest – in which he stood as an independent – would be a referendum on runway expansion; it ended up being a rerun of the referendum on EU membership in an affluent constituency in which 72% had voted for remain. But if the hazards of a byelection could have been foreseen, Goldsmith himself thought he had little choice because he had promised to force a byelection if Heathrow expansion was announced. At the beginning of the campaign, Goldsmith struck a principled tone: "I promised you if my party won the [2015 general] election, the third runway would be scrapped. And I wasn't making it up." "There was no small print, no expiry date, no ambiguity. It was a simple promise. And it mattered. I know it mattered, because the thought of Heathrow expansion fills most of my constituents with dread." But while Goldsmith could dictate the terms of his resignation, it proved harder to control the issues on which the battle for Richmond Park was fought. Before the government's decision had even been made, teams of primed Lib Dem activists were ready to spring out of the blocks. From the tiny converted shed that served as the party's constituency HQ, reams of the party's literature urged Richmond Park's well-heeled voters not to accept the contest on Goldsmith's premise. What the Lib Dems succeeded in doing was chip away at Goldsmith's long-cultivated, and much-cherished, image as an independent Conservative who could not be controlled by the party machine. Goldsmith may have been anti-Heathrow but he was also anti-EU – a scion of a billionaire family well known for its anti-Brussels politics. Back in July 2015, a ConservativeHome article touting Goldsmith for London mayor declared "Zac Goldsmith is an outsider", adding that the general election victory that saw him take 58% of the vote had "dispelled any remaining suspicions that he was a mere dilettante: a rich man attracted to self-indulgent green fads who thought it would be amusing to belong to the House of Commons". Born Frank Zacharias Robin Goldsmith, the former MP is the middle child of billionaire industrialist Sir James Goldsmith and Lady Annabel Vane-Tempest-Stewart. That start in life saw him inherit a vast fortune estimated to be in the region of £200m. It was that wealth, argued his supporters, that enabled Goldsmith to become the environmental conscience of the party. With his good looks, easy charm and unshakable confidence, Goldsmith became the best-known face of the campaign against Heathrow's expansion. But his reputation as a principled politician whose wealth let him rise above the dirty game of politics took a battering during the London mayoral contest. After becoming the Conservative candidate with 70% of the vote last year, Goldsmith ran a controversial campaign against Labour's Sadiq Khan. Goldsmith attacked Khan, a British Muslim, attempting to link him with alleged Islamist extremists with whom he had shared a platform while working as a human rights lawyer. Outraged critics accused Goldsmith of dog-whistle politics aimed at suggesting London was not safe in the hands of a Muslim mayor. Senior Tory figures, including the leader of Muslim Conservatives and former Foreign Office minister Sayeeda Warsi, condemned the campaign. Even Goldsmith's sister Jemima Khan reflected that it was "sad that Zac's campaign did not reflect who I know him to be – an eco-friendly, independent-minded politician with integrity". It was a mistake the Lib Dems used to beat Goldsmith with throughout their well-organised, full-throttle campaign. The Lib Dem leader, Tim Farron, took the gloves off, calling Goldsmith's campaign "unspeakable" and "appallingly racist". The battle – which Goldsmith ultimately lost, seeing Khan become London's first Muslim mayor – had, as one Lib Dem activist put it, "knocked a bit of the gilt off the gingerbread". Looking to shake off the hangover of the mayoral battle, Goldsmith came back again and again to his record on Heathrow throughout the Richmond Park byelection campaign. "This byelection is happening for one reason only: it is our chance to speak as one – to send a message via the ballot box both to Heathrow and the government," he argued. It was not enough, as his 1,872 vote defeat to Sarah Olney showed. But the loss of his parliamentary seat is unlikely to be the end of the political road. In the early hours of Friday morning following his defeat, he told friends that the battle was not over and he would continue to campaign for issues close to his heart. He has also not ruled out rejoining the Conservative party, which showed its loyalty to the millionaire by not contesting the seat. But Olney, the former accountant who only went into politics a year ago because she was sick of shouting at the television, convinced voters to think beyond the borders of their constituency. "The people of Richmond Park and North Kingston have Britain's future in their hands," she said. "A victory for the Liberal Democrats here could kill off hard Brexit." Unfortunately for the Euro-sceptic Goldsmith, voters found that a more compelling aspiration.

I tell almost everyone I know the same story about sprinting. After school, we would race to the local shop for sweets before running back and sitting on the track eating them out of paper bags. As the PE teacher walked into our line of vision, we'd wipe our sticky hands on our shorts and start legging it around the track. This was what sprinting was to me when I was young. A laugh, and something that came relatively easily. I was by no means a champion, but I was on the girl's relay team and competed in inter-school competitions, which we always looked forward to as a day out. Fast forward 16 years and I'm stood on the side of Wimbledon Park track, floodlights beaming down on groups of determined-looking runners practising drills and starts and discussing times. Naively, I had thought that, on my first practice session, I would rock up, get in my lane and start sprinting. That was the first important lesson. Sprinters take warm-up very seriously. Drills make up a massive part of our one-hour training sessions – almost half the session can be dominated by the warm-up. Fast feet, arm drives, high knees are all regulars, but there's also a mixture of other exercises depending on the session, such as skipping, plyometrics and tyre-dragging. The sprinting part of the session can really vary. You may do a few 150m efforts, or a mixture of sprint distances with varying rest in between. In the winter, the distances get longer and the whole session gets tougher. You're encouraged to push yourself, but to be smart and not risk injury. It's important to know you can work your way up to it and it's useful to remind yourself that some of the people taking part have been doing this for years. Sprinting as an adult is a different ball game. Persuading your (heavier) body to move as fast as possible – and then some – takes a lot of power, skill and energy. But it's also fun. So much fun. The sprinting group I train with at Hercules Wimbledon are the loveliest bunch of people. From those who have been coming to the running club since they were kids, to those wanting to gain a competitive edge in other sports, to those simply hoping to burn away the stress of the daily grind, they all come to push themselves and to have a good time doing it. As the sessions are on Tuesday and Thursday evenings, it can be difficult to fit in with work and social lives, but the vibe is relaxed. Some go to every single session, others come and go as they can. We are all in agreement on one thing, though: no matter how much you don't fancy doing a sprinting session at the end of a long work day, you never regret it. Even when you're doubled up on the floor, out of breath, lactic acid shooting up your calves. "I felt like I was going to be sick" gets the response: "That's great. Shows you were pushing yourself!" Sprinting often seems to be associated with youth or lightning speed. When I tell friends or colleagues that I go sprinting, I can see a faint look of puzzlement. Running a 5K, 10K or a marathon is widely accepted as normal now, yet talk about sprinting is usually relegated to discussions about HITT, sports day or Usain Bolt. Often, when you talk about it, people assume you must be very fast. But you really shouldn't let this put you off giving sprinting a go. As one of the coaches, helpfully but rather depressingly, tells me: "You can't transform a cart horse into a racehorse – but you can make it go faster." At a recent bootcamp I attended, a few people were intrigued to know more about what we get up to on the track. One lady, in her 40s, was very keen on joining but admitted that she had thought sprinting was just for "fast twentysomethings". Yet part of this same bootcamp had featured races and drills not dissimilar to our sprinting sessions. And with an annual fee of £20 (plus a £2 track fee for each session), it's far cheaper than a lot of group classes. So, what about the kit? Normal running gear will do you just fine. If you get more into sprinting, spikes are worth investing in. It's a credit to the friendliness of my group that, when I started thinking of buying a pair of spikes, a member of the team gave me a pair she had spare. They fitted well and I still use them. From 20s to 40+, the groups are very mixed. The fast youngsters are often coached separately, and it's worth going along to a club and checking out their training schedules to find a group that suits you and your ability. For those interested in something a bit more serious, then there is ample opportunity to get involved in competitions. From casual club fixtures to national and international competition, there is a space for anyone to don their running club colours and represent. Competing is not just for the youngsters either – one of the guys in my group recently won the over-45 400m at a major track and field championships. Sprinting can benefit so many other sporting interests, too, from cycling to rugby and swimming. Mentally, it can be a revelation. In such a short space of time, your thoughts are limited to pumping your arms, pulling those knees higher, relaxing your shoulders and driving forward. There's just no space – or time – to think of anything else.

"I don't know if you have children," Pedro Obiang says, with an amused look that suggests he already knows the answer. Not yet, I reply. Obiang smiles. He laughs. "I know," he says. He is not being patronising. He worked it out as soon as it was put to him that becoming a father during the summer must have complicated his preparations for the new season. "Having children gives you extra energy," the West Ham United midfielder says. "Every day I want to achieve things I can show my son later on and instil that same drive in him." Obiang is inquisitive, perceptive and generous with his time and there is a reason why people at West Ham often forget he is 24. He seems older, transmitting a sense of calm after each question and displaying intelligence and maturity by making it clear he does not always have the right answer. He grapples with his sense of identity and belonging, admitting he is still trying to work out where he is from. He has an Italian wife, a Spanish passport and parents who left Equatorial Guinea in search of a better life 40 years ago. "I like the sound of being a citizen of the world," he says. Obiang wants to learn more about himself and the world outside football, which is why he is doing a degree in political science. Seeing as much of England as possible has been high on his list of priorities since West Ham signed him for £4.5m from Sampdoria in the summer of 2015 and, although he speaks three languages, it frustrates him that he is not confident enough to conduct this interview in English yet. Midway through we have to take a break. Obiang has to join his team-mate Ashley Fletcher in the dressing room at the London Stadium, where they are about to surprise a group of unsuspecting young supporters. One boy looks up in disbelief before turning to his father to ask: "Is that a real player?" Obiang makes all of them feel at ease. It is a freezing afternoon and Obiang has forgotten to bring his coat but he is soon asking the people in charge whether he can take his young fans on to the pitch. When he returns, the discussion turns to the degree he started in Italy. He has two years left on his five-year course and, although he wants to resume it, he needs to improve his English first. "Like anything in life it takes some dedication," Obiang says. "As footballers we have a good amount of time. But it also took help from the teachers, particularly having evening classes because attending lectures in the morning was difficult." Obiang knows patience is a virtue. He frequently found himself on West Ham's bench last season, leading to talk that a return to Italy was on the cards in the summer. He had to wait until 1 October for his first league start of this campaign. "I was frustrated last year because I would have liked to have played more games. In terms of going back to Italy there was only a 1% chance of that happening. I wouldn't say going back to Italy would be a step backwards but I am here to give everything and am not looking to move. "You can't get exactly what you hope for all the time. What I did in training was I showed my best and tried to convince the coach he had to find room for me." West Ham's dreadful start forced Slaven Bilic to alter his team and the introduction of Obiang has improved the midfield's balance, giving the defence more protection. Yet West Ham's form remains wobbly. They lost 4-1 in the League Cup quarter-final at Manchester United on Wednesday and are 16th going into Saturday's Premier League game at home to Arsenal. "We need to show our character, which has been lacking at times this season," Obiang says. His Italian and Spanish influences can help to pull West Ham out of the mire. He grew up in Alcalá de Henares, a community in Madrid, and was part of Atlético Madrid's youth system before being offered a chance to join Sampdoria when he was 16. The thought of moving to another country, leaving his friends and family behind, made him queasy. "I was crying quite a lot. So my mother shut me in my bedroom for 15 or 20 minutes and had a very good chat with me. She said if God has given you an opportunity you should grasp it and never close doors to any possible openings. It took me a while to understand exactly what she meant. "She explained all the positives that could come from the move, although at the same time I think a part of her didn't want me to go because of the pain for a mother of a child moving away. I packed my suitcase the following day and I left. Now I am a father I can really step back and appreciate it. It was a really tough choice." In Spain there was a focus on technical ability. He had to adapt to a different culture in Italy, where there was a bigger emphasis on tactical awareness. "It was horrible in Italy at the start, almost traumatic at times, but when you do work very hard on something you take positives from it and it helped me improve as a player. "Now I am getting to know the intensity of the English game. Here you have to give everything in every game. Sometimes it can feel like it's about who gives more rather than who is better prepared on the day." It took Obiang four years to feel comfortable with the Italian style but moving to Italy was pivotal on a personal level too. When his friends asked him why he disappeared so often, the answer was he was travelling from Genoa to Udine to visit his future wife. "I feel like I'm from wherever they will take me," Obiang says. "I have family in Italy. I was born in Spain, grew up there and have a Spanish passport. But in terms of my roots, my parents were African so I feel African, also in terms of my colour. That's something I feel every day." Obiang has not decided whom to represent at international level. "I can play for Equatorial Guinea or Gabon. The area where my father was born borders with Gabon and they tried to call me up recently, which was a surprise. I asked my father why that happened and if we had family there. He said no." He is not in a rush. "It's a very big decision, relating to politics, feeling, sporting benefits," he says. That brief mention of politics leads us down another path. He is reading an Italian book about court cases involving children and reveals he is not the only political scientist at West Ham. Angelo Ogbonna is doing the same degree. West Ham's Italian centre-back is his political sparring partner. Wary of causing any controversy, Obiang keeps his cards close to his chest when he is asked about his beliefs. But he does not expect to stay in football when he retires. "I definitely want to help others," he says. Could he be a politician? Obiang smiles again. "Given what I'm studying, of course. But I need another 25 or 30 years."

My 21-year-old son has been depressed since October, but refuses to get therapy. I saw his GP, but was told that, as he is 21, he should seek self-referral. At that time, he had just had a breakdown and was crying uncontrollably. He has since been a shadow of himself, has no appetite and in the evenings feels restless and tired. He is not on any medication. He has cut out his friends and feels uneasy when we go to any function other than church. He has lost interest in most things in life. There are just the two of us and it is beginning to take its toll on me. I have tried to talk him into therapy or counselling, but he insists he is fine. He is due back at university in January and I do not want him to lose his place. When leaving a message on this page, please be sensitive to the fact that you are responding to a real person in the grip of a real-life dilemma, who wrote to Private Lives asking for help, and may well view your comments here. Please consider especially how your words or the tone of your message could be perceived by someone in this situation, and be aware that comments that appear to be disruptive or disrespectful to the individual concerned will be removed. If you would like fellow readers to respond to a dilemma of yours, send us an outline of the situation of about 150 words. For advice from Pamela Stephenson Connolly on sexual matters, send us a brief description of your concerns. All correspondence should reach us by Wednesday morning. Email: private.lives@theguardian.com (please don't send attachments).

Watching the child you once cradled in your arms walk out the door and into their own life always fills a parent with a sense of terror and loss. You raise them as best you can and hope that the adult you created will succeed. When that child, however, will never truly be an adult in the typical sense of the word, it's more complicated. Over 21 years ago, I gave birth to a beautiful, blue-eyed baby boy. At first, all went well. Evan, my son, initially met all his developmental milestones. But then, at 18 months, I realized something was horribly wrong. While other children babbled, Evan was strangely silent. While other children played with each other, Evan played by himself, endlessly rolling toy cars back and forth. We started making the rounds to doctors, and, after many evaluations and tests, got the diagnosis. Evan was on the autistic spectrum. Initially we were told that it was doubtful he would speak, or be self-sufficient. Despite the dire prognosis, I threw myself into "curing" my son. After years of therapists, and hard work, Evan had limited, basic speech, could dress and take care of his toileting needs. Even with those gains, Evan never progressed mentally beyond toddlerhood. Physically, however, he continued to grow into an adult, eventually reaching 5ft10in. He weighs over 200 pounds. I began worrying about his future early on. I couldn't expect him to grow up and support himself. I also couldn't expect him to live without someone caring for him. I initially thought that relatives who loved him would be able to care for him should my husband and I become sick or die. After my husband and I returned from trip to Ireland when Evan was 15, however, we knew that was not the case. We had left Evan with my mother. Within a day she realized she was not up to the task of caring for the very large, 15-year-old toddler my son had become. Both of my sisters lived nearby, so every day they "passed" Evan between them, no one capable of caring for him for more than several hours at a time. After we learned what happened, I knew other arrangements were needed for Evan's future. I could not expect family members to take care of him – he needed professionals. To be honest, I was not sure either my husband or I could do it on our own either. I became increasingly nervous about Evan's future, and often found myself lying awake at night wondering what would become of him. I threw myself into researching what the potential arrangements could be for an adult with autism and eventually realized that it would be best for him to go to a residential school out of state. We live in Connecticut, and if a child lives with his or her parents when they "graduate" from school at 21, then that child will not be eligible for an adult residential placement until there is an "emergency" (like both parents dying). If a child like Evan was in an out-of-state residential school, however, they automatically qualify for residential funding from the state when they turn 21. I knew I had to send my child, who was still effectively a toddler, away for his own good. It was the hardest decision I ever made, and I had to convince my husband that it was the right one as well. Even after we decided what to do, making it happen was not easy. For him to go to an out-of-state residential school meant I had to get our local school district to agree, since they would be the ones actually paying for it. At over $200,000 a year, it was not something the district wanted to do. We could not pay any of the cost, because that would disqualify Evan from receiving state funding when he turned 21. We commenced on a two-year legal battle with the school district. In the course of all that, I was diagnosed with breast cancer and could not meet all of Evan's needs when I myself was sick. My cancer was caught early, and my treatment was not overwhelmingly invasive, but it was enough to make me realize that I would not always be in perfect health. Evan needed the care of someone who was. I redoubled my efforts to place him in a residential out-of-state school, eventually gaining him a placement in New York when he was 17. Evan, now 21, lives in a state-run group home 40 minutes away from our home. He has friends – a social life with peers that are like him, something he did not have at home. Most importantly, Evan is now somewhere that, should I die or become ill again, he will always be cared for. Giving up a child is the hardest thing for a mother to do, but it was the only way to ensure his future.

In a now famous tweet revealing, yet again, his tenuous grasp on the US constitution, Donald Trump suggested that anyone daring to burn a US flag should be stripped of their citizenship. Never mind that the US supreme court ruled on that very act in 1989, deeming it protected free expression under the first amendment (see Dread Scott, below); retro-fitting Old Glory as a symbolic vehicle for the full breadth of interpretation of American identity has been a strategy of artists and activists alike for decades. What follows are some of the best known and most relevant displays for this badly strained moment for the American psyche. Dread Scott, What Is the Proper Way to Display a US Flag?, 1988 When Scott showed this piece at the Art Institute of Chicago in 1989, it became a predictable flashpoint for conservative scorn. Its timing was impeccable: Congress, then in the grip of a Republican presidency and majority, had just passed ambiguous-seeming legislation protecting the flag, and Senator Bob Dole invoked it as a way to remove Scott's work from public view. (President George HW Bush, for his part, called it "disgraceful".) The law led to Scott, along with three other protesters, burning the flag on the steps of Congress that same year, followed by a landmark in freedom of expression: the supreme court ruled that the first amendment protected the right of anyone to reinterpret the flag as they chose. So what was all the fuss about? Scott, an African American then in his early 20s, installed an array of photos culled from media – Korean students burning US flags; flag-draped coffins of American soldiers – with a suggestion book, of sorts, asking his titular question. While offering their views, the audience would have to use the flag, laid on the floor, as a kind of doormat. At the tail end of the jingoistic Reagan years, Scott's simple, if provocative, question touched a raw nerve in the American psyche – one that President-elect Trump seems determined to tear open again. David Hammons, African American Flag, 1990 Made partly to mark the election of David Dinkins, New York City's first – and only – black mayor, in 1990, Hammons' reimagination of Old Glory can be seen as cheeky celebration of an undeniable moment of American progress. Its red, black and green stand for the blood and skin of African Americans, and a nod to the verdant roots of black civilization in Africa. Folded into Hammons' career-spanning interest in civil rights and black power movements, you can draw a straight line from then to an increasingly unstable now: Black Lives Matter has prompted the president-elect to muse openly about investigating the movement as a domestic terror organization, and shifts Hammons' guardedly hopeful work into a symbol of deepening division – of two Americas at the very least, and probably more. Barbara Kruger, Who is bought and sold? Who is beyond the law? Who is free to choose? Who follows orders? Who salutes longest? Who prays loudest? Who dies first? Who laughs last?, 1991 Kruger, whose wryly blunt text-based work pioneered media appropriation in the 70s and 80s – it borrowed, while gleefully satirizing, the language of popular advertising – has always been a firebrand of politically engaged art-making, most often with an acid, feminism-inclined wit. This work takes a foundational symbol of jingoistic Americana and deeply complicates it with questions of power and powerlessness in a polarized nation. Coming out of the Reagan/Bush years, where many believed power given to a cadre of elites was gleefully abused with the blessing of a willfully ignorant public, the questions were apt; as President-elect Trump assembles his cabinet along similar lines, Kruger's exploration could hardly be more relevant. Faith Ringgold, Black Light Series #10: Flag For the Moon: Die Nigger, 1969 Made after many fractious years of the civil rights movement, Ringgold's piece leaves little to the imagination. "It would be impossible for me to picture the American flag just as a flag, as if that is the whole story," she said at the time. "I need to communicate my relationship with this flag based on my experience as a black woman in America." The word "DIE" is clear enough behind the stars, but turn the image to the vertical to clarify: the stripes, emblems of the country's original 13 colonies, spell out "NIGGER" in blocky type. After years of water cannons, church burnings, unprosecuted murders and widespread, often unchecked violence against black people, race relations in America were as raw as they had ever been. Ringgold has revisited the flag as a symbol of oppression; in her 1997 work The Flag Is Bleeding, she recreated the flag with traditional African American quiltwork, sewing an image of a bloodied mother and children into the folksy motif. Jasper Johns, various (starting in 1954) Johns, a painter whose work was foundational in the evolution of conceptualism, painted his first flag in 1954 while he was a 24-year-old army veteran (he was discharged two years earlier). It's faithful, but notable for its obvious materiality, the crisp lines of the fabric rendered rough and homespun by the artist's hand. Johns himself never suggested specific intentions for his flag paintings, beyond the evolving conceptual priority on remaking everyday objects in unfamiliar ways. That said, it has often been suggested that the artist's return to symbol at important junctures in American political life (the Joseph McCarthy-led inquiry into "anti-American", or communist, activity; the Vietnam war) reflect a nation's foundational ideal beaten down by wrongheaded political action. Looking at another flag, made in 1955, it's not hard to read that much: it's rough and textural, and a grimy white. Robert Longo, Untitled (the Pequod), 2014 Longo rose to prominence during the "pictures generation" of the 1980s with a series of photographs called Men in the Cities, which showed men (and women) snappily clad in business attire and tangled in violent-looking contortions, as though having just been shot. Longo's engagement with the darkness that lies just beneath the slick surface of American idealism projects right up to the present day: a 2014 show at New York's Metro Pictures coupled Longo's hand-drawn black and white facsimiles of abstract expressionist masterpieces with an imposing sculptural treatment of the American flag: an enormous, rough presence in glistening black, the piece cantilevered awkwardly in the gallery space, listing badly, as though it were a ship going down. It makes for an elegantly powerful read: a cultural totem for the so-called "American century", Longo's treatment of those masters deflates ambitions of ever achieving such heights again, while the flag work – called Untitled (The Pequod), after Captain Ahab's mercilessly violent, famously doomed whaling ship in Moby-Dick – evokes Jasper Johns, minus the ambiguity. Longo suggests an America going in one direction: down.

Tyra Patterson, the Ohio woman who has been fighting for 22 years to clear herself of a life sentence for murder, has received a major boost to her hopes of freedom after the key witness and surviving victim in the case told the Guardian that she is now convinced of the prisoner's innocence. Patterson has always insisted that she was an innocent bystander in the murder of Michelle Lai, a 15-year-old girl who was shot in the head in 1994 in Dayton, Ohio. Earlier this year, the Guardian profiled Patterson's struggle for justice in a three-part investigation that explored the profound inconsistencies in the prosecution case against her, her claim that she was forced to make a false confession, and the mounting campaign to have her released. Now, Holly Lai Holbrook, Michelle's sister who was sitting in the car just feet from her when the teenager was shot at point-blank range, has come forward to say that on the night of the murder she told police officers at the crime scene that Patterson was not involved in the attack and had nothing to do with her sister's killing. "I remember pointing someone out that night and saying to the police: 'She didn't do it, she didn't have anything to do with it'; that kept going around my head over and over again," Lai Holbrook told the Guardian. Though she did not know at the time the identity of the bystander that she pointed out to police in the early hours of 20 September 1994, Lai Holbrook clearly recalled how she looked, describing an individual who closely resembles the then 19-year-old Patterson. "She was biracial, dark, long hair. I recall she had a coat on, a fluffy coat." She added: "I remember the fact that there was somebody there who I didn't think did anything. I remember pointing her out to the police." The new evidence comes at a crucial point in Patterson's long struggle to clear her name. The prisoner, now 41, has petitioned the governor of Ohio, John Kasich, pleading that he use his powers of clemency and set her free. A decision from the governor could come any day. Patterson's story embodies many of the flaws and pitfalls within the US criminal justice system that have seen the prison population rise to its current 2.2 million, almost a quarter of the total number of incarcerated people on the globe. Of those, more than 100,000 are women. A Guardian investigation uncovered several glaring problems with Patterson's prosecution. She was put under pressure by detectives on the day of the murder to say that she had grabbed a necklace from the neck of one of Patterson's friends, Candice Brogan – a false admission, she insists, that made her vulnerable to a murder charge as an accomplice in Michelle's killing. Patterson was inadequately represented at trial, with her defense attorney at the time telling the Guardian that his handling of the case was in his view the lowest point of his career as a lawyer. The defense team dissuaded Patterson from going into the witness box because she "spoke too hood" – the prisoner is African American. The trial defense team also decided to withhold from the jury a tape recording of a 911 call Patterson made to emergency workers soon after the murder happened. Six of the 12 members of the jury have given affidavits saying that if they had known about the 911 call they would have found her not guilty. One juror told the Guardian that she had felt strongly that Patterson was innocent during the jury deliberation process but had caved in and gone along with the guilty verdict after it was pointed out to her that it was late and that a fellow juror was pregnant and needed to go home. Lai Holbrook was 18 at the time of her sister's death. She said she has spent many years wrestling with profound doubts about Patterson's conviction but had buried those thoughts in part because she didn't want to cause a row within her own family. "I buried this stuff years ago. I knew I was wrong. But I didn't want to be the black sheep of the family, the odd one out, and I didn't want to have to relive that night, I just wanted it buried." She said that she had been encouraged by police officers and prosecutors to provide testimony against Patterson that would prove vital to her conviction and ensuing sentencing to life in prison. "When the police offered us little hints and pieces of information, it made it easier for me to overlook what really happened that night. The prosecutors were intimidating. Not just to me, to all of us. They were just scary. It seemed like they pushed the fact that all these girls did what they did, and that there was a confession." The prosecution never accused Patterson of direct involvement in the murder. Instead, it accused her of being an accomplice by arguing before the jury that she was part of a gang that attacked Michelle, her sister and two other girls in their car, robbed them of jewelry, physically assaulted them and then were complicit when the shooter, LaShawna Keeney, who is also serving a life sentence, pulled the trigger. Central to the state's case that Patterson was an active participant in the attack was that she snatched a necklace from one of the girls during the assault. But Patterson has always contested that her confession to doing so was forced out of her by detectives, and that in truth she only picked up the necklace from the ground as she was walking away from the scene of the assault in which she played no part. The question of that necklace became a vital part of Lai Holbrook's testimony, which was the core of the prosecution argument at Patterson's trial. The state told the jury that the defendant, along with a 14-year-old girl called Kellie Johnson, had both been grabbing at a necklace worn by Brogan, who was sitting in the back of the car behind the Lai sisters. But Lai Holbrook's testimony was inconsistent. In the earlier trial of Kellie, she told that jury that it had been Kellie exclusively who had grabbed at the jewelry, implying that Patterson had nothing to do with it. Lai Holbrook – as she is now called, using her married name – told the Guardian that the idea that Patterson grabbed the necklace had been fed to her by detectives who said that Patterson had confessed to doing so, a confession that she insists was forced out of her. "Hearing about the confession made it easier on me," said Lai Holbrook, 40. "I just wanted everyone that were involved to go to jail and stay there for the rest of their lives. Everyone who was there needs to pay. [The police] told us she had stolen the necklace, and when I heard that I was very, very angry – that made it easier to put her in jail too." Lai Holbrook said that the attack on her, her sister, her cousin and a friend that night "was the scariest, most evilest thing I've ever had to deal with in my entire life. It was so scary, so horrifying, the way they treated us, the rocking of the car, the noises, the yelling, the nasty things they said to us. Them shooting my sister in front of me was just sickening. It was horrifying." She said the trauma of the events lived with her still, and over the years she has wrestled with mental stress and depression, and she remains on medication to this day. Part of the decision to come forward and talk about her true recollections of that night, and Patterson's innocence, was that she had realized that she could not fully heal herself without doing so. "Setting her free [means] I'm not tied down by all these chains of regret. I don't have to hide any more. I don't have to lie. She doesn't deserve to be in jail, and I put her there. Her getting released would release me. I could finally say I did something right with my life." The first person Lai Holbrook approached after she decided to speak out was David Singleton, executive director of the Ohio Justice &amp; Policy Center, who has acted as Patterson's attorney for the past four years. She asked to see the lawyer, whom she had never met before, at her sister's grave on 16 March – Michelle's birthday. Singleton said that he was greatly moved by that graveside conversation. "I have never had a moment like that in the 25 years of my legal practice, where I am sitting with a victim who has had the courage to come forward as Holly Lai Holbrook did, knowing that she could be the key to setting free my client. And this was the victim whose sister was murdered right next to her – that makes this a very special case." The next step Lai Holbrook took was to write a letter to Kasich, the governor, setting out her clear recollections of what happened on the night of her sister's murder. In the letter she described herself as a mother of four children and a "Christian woman who believes deeply in God and what Jesus teaches about forgiveness". She went on: "I feel bad that Tyra has been in prison so long for crimes I now believe she did not commit. I want to focus on what I can do to help obtain Tyra's freedom and right the wrong she has suffered. That's why I'm writing this letter." Kasich, who ran in this year's presidential primaries as a moderate Republican alternative to Donald Trump, has not yet replied to the letter. A few months ago, Patterson was transferred from the women's prison in Dayton to an institution in Cleveland that prepares custodial inmates for possible life back in society following release. However, criminal justice experts in Ohio point out that residence in that prison is no guarantee of actual release. Patterson's mother, Jeannie Patterson, praised the courage of Lai Holbrook in making her statement. "I never thought this would happen. What this young woman is doing is giving my daughter's life back to her, and that is a great gift."

James Brown, the Godfather of Soul, died from heart failure 10 years ago this Christmas Day, aged 73, long past his prime and latterly notorious for problems with drugs, wives and the police. He was a contradictory figure who fined his musicians for unshined shoes and missed cues but insisted that his statue on Main Street in Augusta, Georgia, should not be on a plinth but have its feet on the ground. Born dirt poor in South Carolina and brought up by an aunt in a house that appears to have functioned as a brothel, Brown spent his early years hustling on the streets. Aged 20 he joined a vocal group called the Famous Flames and over the next three decades he became a pivotal figure in the development of pop music, his intuition encouraging the schooled musicians in his band to develop a stripped-back, highly syncopated style that became known as funk. In concert, he was mesmerising: Mick Jagger, Michael Jackson and Prince owed much to his stagecraft. Several biographers have traced the outlines of this picaresque story, and two years ago Jagger produced a feature film, Get on Up, based on Brown's life. In Kill 'em and Leave (Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson), subtitled "Searching for the Real James Brown", James McBride tries to get in closer. A former professional musician and now a journalism professor, the author grew up close to where Brown lived during a spell in New York in the 1960s; he and his friends regularly congregated outside the singer's house, hoping for a glimpse. Now the glimpses are provided by encounters with some of Brown's associates: the last surviving Famous Flame (since deceased), various key musicians, managers, accountants, former wives and travelling companions. Unlike most biographers of such heroes of black music, McBride writes from inside the culture, loosely entwining his own story with that of his subject. There is bitterness here as well as celebration, and he becomes righteously angry when he discovers that not a penny of Brown's $100m-or-so fortune, willed to educate poor children in South Carolina and Georgia by the man who sang "Don't Be a Drop-out" in 1966, has reached its intended target, instead leaking away into the pockets of lawyers. This is not the smoothest or most comprehensive of biographies. But it has soul, and in this case that counts for more. The death of David Bowie at the beginning of 2016 set off a small avalanche of biographies and memoirs. He is also the central figure of Simon Reynolds's Shock and Awe: Glam Rock and Its Legacy (Faber), a useful and entertaining survey of a period of social and cultural experimentation in the 1970s that takes in Marc Bolan, Alice Cooper, Slade, Lou Reed, Roxy Music, the New York Dolls, Wayne/Jayne County, David Essex, The Rocky Horror Picture Show, Cockney Rebel, Ultravox, Iggy Pop and Kraftwerk. Reynolds is a perceptive historian of this strange period, capable of making sense of a "movement" that could encompass the cheerful Top of the Pops inanity of the Sweet and the theories of the rock boffin Brian Eno. He also copes well with the necessity of writing about Gary Glitter. Like most rock writers, Reynolds tends to idealise and exalt the period immediately before he became professionally involved: in other words, when he was still a fan. This is the animating trait of David Hepworth's 1971: Never a Dull Moment (Bantam), a trawl through the year in which albums – including Tapestry, What's Going On, Sticky Fingers, Imagine, Blue, Hunky Dory and Every Picture Tells a Story – took over from the pop single as the primary unit of consumption, and of Barney Hoskyns' Small Town Talk (Faber), a portrait of the musical life of Woodstock, an idyllic artists' community that turned into a rock'n'roll soap opera. The Beach Boys were a Peyton Place unto themselves, and two sides of the story are aired in I Am Brian Wilson (Coronet), the latest and probably more reliable of the two ghosted autobiographies of their gifted but troubled leader, and Mike Love's Good Vibrations (Faber), in which the group's front man unburdens himself of the resentments he felt when Wilson steered the music away from songs about cars, girls and surfing into deeper waters where their fellow swimmers ranged from the Maharishi to Charles Manson. Like his book about running, the Japanese novelist Haruki Murakami's conversations with the conductor Seiji Ozawa, collected in Absolutely on Music (Harvill Secker), are not for the specialist. Meeting while Ozawa was recovering from oesophageal cancer, they ramble in a gossipy way around topics such as the contrast between the styles of Karajan and Bernstein and the way Louis Armstrong embodied the ancient Japanese concept of shibumi: "a mature artist attaining a level of austere simplicity and mastery", in Ozawa's definition. Murakami, a noted jazz fan, has some harsh words for free improvisation, whose early history is explored in David Toop's Into the Maelstrom (Bloomsbury). The first volume of a projected series, this discursive and consistently stimulating account takes the story up to 1970, surveying the work of Musica Elettronica Viva, the Spontaneous Music Ensemble, AMM and other members of "a stoic, stubborn bunch" who "build enduring if precarious communities" which, like the music they play, disdain hierarchies. Murakami should read it. Save at least 30% on this year's critics' choices when you buy at the Guardian Bookshop. Visit bookshop.theguardian.com or call 0330 333 6846. Support the Guardian and its journalism with every book you buy this Christmas. *Free UK p&amp;p for online orders over £10. Minimum £1.99 p&amp;p applies to telephone orders. Best book lists of 2016 Best fiction Best crime and thrillers Best science fiction and fantasy Best biography and autobiography

Many in the US are emerging from their initial shock at the outcome of the presidential election to confront its likely impacts: a legitimation of right-wing identity politics, worsening climate change and militarism, assaults on women's rights and LGBT rights, and the gutting of basic public services. A litany like this can feel overwhelming, but none of these threats are actually new. Just ask the indigenous water protectors at Standing Rock, or women in the 89% of US counties without an abortion provider, or people of colour targeted by racist law enforcement policies. What is new is the painful dislocation felt by those in the US who had always believed that, however imperfectly, their government represented them. For many, that belief ended on 9 November, a loss being mourned in the numerous post-election catalogues of the stages of grief. The analogy is an ominous one: the last stage of grief is acceptance. What's needed now, however, is the opposite of acceptance. Fortunately, many in the US recognise that this moment requires them to act in new ways. They are grappling, some for the first time, with what resistance might look like. Americans will need to reclaim and invent their own modes of resistance. For inspiration and role models, they can turn to women's rights activists worldwide, especially women who know all too well what it means to have a government that actively targets their rights and communities. In Nicaragua in the 1980s, villages were under siege from Contra militias sponsored by the Reagan administration, and armed fighters targeted women with rape as a weapon of war (pdf). Women formed committees to bring urgent humanitarian aid to their communities and to denounce that violence before the world. These women shepherded their country back to peace, and pushed for a change in international law to recognise the violations they faced (pdf). In Liberia, peace talks to end the civil war in the 1990s were going nowhere. Women who had survived the worst of the violence decided they'd had enough. They organised peaceful protests, stood up to warlords and powerful politicians, and forced action to negotiate peace. Today, Leymah Gbowee, one of the activists who led that movement, is a Nobel peace laureate. The civil war is over, and Liberia has its first elected female president. War gripped Colombia for decades, forcing millions of women and families to flee their homes and sowing divisions that seemed insurmountable. Through all this, female activists mobilised community peace enclaves, where arms were not allowed and where violence could not trespass. When peace talks finally began, these women demanded a seat at the table. Now, they are determined to enact the best of Colombia's newly renegotiated accord. In each of these cases, and in countless others, women saw the threats arrayed against them and took action together. In doing so, they became the curators of a global library of activist strategies. Here are some borrowings from that library for those seeking to resist the destruction that the next US president promises to unleash. Like the Women in Black or the women of Argentina's Plaza de Mayo, who made it a routine to take to the streets when their government shut out their voices, we must be relentless in our protests. And like the grandmothers of Standing Rock who block the advance of the Dakota access pipeline with their bodies, we must pair protest with grassroots organising to change policies and public opinion. Like women in Haiti and Kenya, or in US cities like Detroit or Flint, Michigan, who have provided clean water to their communities when their government couldn't or wouldn't, we must take stock of people's basic needs and be ready to meet them ourselves. Like womenof colour in the US – who have long mobilised to defend their communities against state violence and mass incarceration, against the denial of civil rights and systematic economic marginalisation – we must act from an understanding of the ways that sexism, racism and other oppressions combine to affect people's lives. Like women in Iraq, who rejected both US-led occupation and the religious fundamentalists who posed as its alternative, we must forge a third way between neoliberalism and nationalism and fight for a feminist, anti-racist politics that prioritises human rights for all. Like women in Nicaragua, who threw parties even as the Contra war raged, we have to know how to embrace the best in our lives when facing the worst. Like women in South Africa's anti-apartheid movement, we have to know when a joyous song is an antidote to despair. Our choice does not have to be between cowed acceptance and protracted despair. The energy we need to resist is a renewable resource, which we produce when we treat each other with respect and kindness, even if those qualities are not forthcoming from our government. We produce this energy when we stretch ourselves to extend a blanket of protection to those most at risk, wherever they are in the world; when we have the courage to act, especially when it's scary or seems impossible. Resistance is sustainable if we create the conditions for it in our lives. And doing that will be its own reward. The writer and organiser Grace Paley once said: "The only recognisable feature of hope is action." We live in keeping with the world we want to build until, eventually, we realise that the last stage of grief is not acceptance. It's transformation.

The funniest standup I've ever seen This isn't technically a standup, but I saw Nick Mohammed as his alter ego Mr Swallow during one of my first visits to Edinburgh and I basically just screamed for an hour. The funniest sketch I've ever seen The Pre-Taped Call In Show or The Audition from [90s US comedy] Mr Show. I wish I'd thought of them. The funniest person I know Adam Hess. He thinks that if you swallow enough chewing gum you go from being left-handed to being right-handed, and vice versa, but he is my best friend anyway. The funniest TV show I've ever seen I still maintain that Looney Tunes is the funniest programme ever made. The funniest meal I've ever eaten When I was about six years old I decided to make a teddy bears' picnic in our dining room, so I set up 10 dolls and teddy bears around the table and made them each an apricot jam sandwich. It was only when I sat down that I realised I'd made 10 apricot jam sandwiches for 10 inanimate objects, and that I'd have to eat them all. It was sort of funny but also quite horrible. The funniest thing that shouldn't be funny When kids try to make YouTube videos, but then a wardrobe or cabinet falls on their head and the video just ends. You know they must be OK, though, or who would have uploaded the video? The funniest hairstyle I've ever had When I was in Year 10 I saw a girl on X Factor with a really great, huge afro, so I went to the hairdresser's to get a weave and achieve the same look. She somehow convinced me to get coloured extensions that were way too short, so I ended up looking like Annie. The funniest joke I've ever heard Q: Why does a giraffe have a long neck? A: So it can't smell its feet! As if that's why! Get real! Lolly Adefope: Lolly 2 is at Soho Theatre, W1, Sat &amp; 16 Jan

Going up French goodbye As in, just leaving a party without the whole goodbye circuit. Harsh, but you'll need this in December. Donald Glover Atlanta is brilliantly lo-fi lolz, and now he's Star War's new Lando Calrissian. So both hipster and big league winning. Raey's pink hoodie Made by an ancient loom, looks like the future. Cropped knits See &amp;Daughter's shrunken crewneck for your model. Buy now and wear for ever. The letter K Standing for Kane, Christopher, obviously. The safety-pin part of his Kane Story collection is punk and precious – worthy of £85. The Empire State as ice lolly As seen on Longchamp Le Pliage designed by Jeremy Scott. A print to make the grumpiest grinch smile. Going down Culottes with tights underneath Sorry, too panto chic for IRL. The Trainspotting 2 trailer No, we won't be choosing Twitter, thanks. The Obamas leaving the White House Barack, Flotus, Malia, Sasha and Bo, we will miss you all. Emoji keyboard overload Do we need an Einstein emoji? Uptown Funk Minneapolis band Collage are suing Mark Ronson and Bruno Mars for copying their 1983 song Young Girls. Whether or not the lawsuit is justified, we're loving the electro-funk jamz. That Britney and Justin double-denim picture The 2001 American Music Awards picture is in danger of being overplayed before the noughties revival properly hits.

Coming from a family of baker-patissiers, I grew up with the smell of baking bread. We lived in a working-class part of Colmar in Alsace, where there were lots of textile factories and market gardens. Our house was above my parents' bakery and workshop, at number 11 avenue d'Alsace. It was a long building from the 1940s or 1950s, with everything arranged in a row: the bakery, the oven, the table for shaping the bread, the kneading machine, the washing-up area and, at the back, the pastry station with big machines for mixing and grinding. It felt a lot like a lab. In front of the building was a courtyard where I spent most of my time playing. I was an only child, and my parents worked all the time, my father in his workshop, my mother in the shop. I'd have liked to have had someone to play with. But I also liked working. The only way I could spend time with my father was to go to the workshop – that is probably why I knew I wanted to be a patissier from the age of nine. I came to Paris when I was 14, and worked as an apprentice under the caterer and patissier Gaston Lenôtre. I remember one day tasting his chestnut and pear ice-cream and thinking that I had absolutely no idea chestnuts or pears could taste like that. I loved my father's baba au rhum, which he made for special occasions, with whipped cream and fruit. It wasn't really a kids' dish, but I was always allowed to have some. The spongy texture of the cake, with the cream ... what a dream. It was – is – heaven. I also loved his tartes aux quetsches – damson tarts. The smell of those baking was my favourite. The Christmas period, in particular, meant lots of work – I didn't enjoy this time of year much. But I did help my parents. They'd give me simple things to do, like decorating the bûches de Noël with little plastic elves or Christmas trees. And I'd help my grandfather make deliveries to clients. We always had an enormous tree in the bakery, which I loved to decorate with garlands and baubles. I still love the way the glass balls reflect the lights. And my father made all the traditional Alsatian Christmas biscuits – bredeles – some of which were sablés, like the recipe below, only much simpler. In my workshop, in terms of the creation and development of ideas, the Christmas period starts on 2 January and lasts until May. We don't make anything traditional other than stollen, which I love, but come December, we do always have a big tree. Sablé infiniment chocolat The quality of the chocolate is most important for the flavour of these biscuits, and the fleur de sel serves to highlight it. The secret to the texture is to make sure the dough is cold before going in the oven, and not to overbake. The centre should be soft. Ideally you want to leave the biscuits for an hour, then coat them in melted chocolate before eating. Push the chocolate flavour to the limit. Makes 40-60 150g 70% cocoa baking chocolate such as Valrhona Guanaja 175g flour 30g cocoa 1 tsp bicarbonate of soda 150g butter, at room temperature 120g light brown sugar 50g caster sugar ¾ tsp fleur de sel ¼ tsp vanilla extract 1 Chop the chocolate with a serrated knife. Sift the flour, cocoa and bicarbonate of soda together. 2 Put the butter in a bowl and soften with a spatula. Add the chocolate, sugars, fleur de sel and vanilla and mix well, then incorporate the flour-cocoa-bicarb mixture. Mix rapidly until combined, without overworking. 3 Divide the dough into three equal parts and roll each piece into a 15- to 20cm-long sausage. 4 Wrap each piece in clingfilm and refrigerate for 2 hours. Heat the oven to 170C/335F/gas mark 3½. 5 Remove the plastic film from the dough and slice into 1cm-thick discs. Place the discs on a baking tray lined with cooking parchment and bake for 11-12 minutes. Remember: it's important that you don't overcook them. Pierre Hermé is a Paris-based chocolatier and winner of the best pastry chef 2016 in the World's 50 Best Restaurants awards. His new recipe book, Chocolate, is published by Flammarion; pierreherme.com

* five solutions (not the six initially indicated), not further defined in their clues, are related to 'bottoms' Across 1 nods off DONS (anag/off) 5 Bottom/bottom double def [Midsummer-Night's Dream] 10 opaquely 0 + EQUAL P(a)AY (anag) 11 fiasco IF(rev)/AS/CO 13 callipygian LILAC(anag)/P(rett)Y/GIAN(t) 16 thong 'song' said with a lisp 18 Lord knows DROL(l) (rev) + nose (hom) 19 paramedic EPIC DRAMA (anag) 20* nates (do)NATES 21 opening time PEN in I GOT MINE (anag) 25 equals SQUEAL (anag) 26* bahookie BOOKIE outside AH 27 rapids A DRIP'S (anag) 28 bedsore succumBED SO REadily (hidden) Down 2 on all fours (l)ON(g)/(r)ALL(y)/(o)F(f)/(c)OURS(e) 3 Saudi S/(car)/AUDI 4 fully fledged F&lt;(j)UL(y)&gt;LY + FLED/(a)G(r)E(e)D 6 onionskin ONIONS/KIN 7* tush TU + SH 8 moon MOON or MO(ment)/0/(o)N or MOO/N(ote) 9 touch-type TYPE after TOUCH 12 microclimate CROC(odile) in MIAMI LET (anag) 14 bootlicker BOO! + T  ICKER 15 isosceles I  CE/L(eaving)/E(dges)/S(harply) 17 gambolled gambled (hom) 22 gross G(l/R)OSS 23* rear RARE (anag) 24* rump kind of steak

A long-lens snapper outside Downing Street this week miraculously decoded one of the great political mysteries of our age: Brexit, we find out, doesn't actually mean Brexit, as stated by countless lugubrious members of the Tory cabinet. What it really means, according to a note clutched in the hand of a top Tory aid is "Canada-plus". The government might not have an actual plan for Brexit but at the very least it has been brainstorming the heck out of what form an actual plan might take. And the plan, so far, is, um ... Canada! It's a good brand, after all. Stable economy, diverse population, fanciable young prime minister. "Yes, yes, YES," you can just imagine the chancellor, Philip Hammond, saying in a closed-door meeting (diary heading: Brexit again WTF???). "We'll just rebrand ourselves as the new Canada. A rainier, older, rattier, more repressed and alcoholic Canada. That'll give them their country back." As the new Canada, Britain's template for the Brexit negotiations, one must assume, will be Ceta – the recently signed Canada-EU Trade Agreement: an agreement no one, apart from a single, depressed French-Canadian bureaucrat living in the bowels of Ottawa's trade ministry, has ever read in its entirety. No matter. Because what a relief that it's finally all settled. Brexit will be exactly like Ceta except with some extra-special bonus stuff thrown in. Like an international trade version of friends with benefits. Or cake with sprinkles. Cake that (according to the aforementioned note) Britain might have, while eating it too – if cake were access to the European single market and the act of eating akin to slamming shut borders. But enough with the pesky details – it wasn't the details that got you Brits Brexit in the first place, was it? No, it was the slogans. And so Brexit, going forward, will be rebranded Project Maple Leaf. It's about the beavers and polar bears now; pure driven snow and freshwater lakes. The Brexit team are on message. David Davis has called the Canadian agreement "a perfect starting point", and Boris Johnson urged Britons during the EU referendum campaign to "ignore the pessimists and merchants of doom" since, after all, "we can be like Canada". C'mon chaps, just think of the skiing. As a Canadian journalist based in the UK I am obviously delighted with this turn of events – I miss my homeland and would love it if my local pub had Moosehead lager on draft. But hey, Britons, before you all rush out and buy a Canada Goose parka, you might pause to ask: what exactly is Ceta? In essence, it's a multilateral trade agreement that reduces tariffs and customs barriers between the EU and Canada. It took 22 tortuous and colossally expensive years, involving "nonstop negotiations" between Brussels and Ottawa, according to its architect, Roy MacLaren – the former minister of trade and Canadian high commissioner to Britain. In a recent piece for Canada's Globe and Mail, MacLaren celebrated the greatest single achievement of his political legacy by stating that Ceta "has yet to run the gauntlet of a complex and, in some respects, hazardous final approval process, but its early provisional implementation will carry the promise that there is, as in other trade agreements, no relish to reverse provisional application". (In case you were wondering, that's the sound of a Canadian politician howling in victory while repeatedly punching the air.) But perhaps the question Britain should really be asking at the moment is this: what is Ceta not? I'll tell you what it isn't, and that's an acrimonious divorce settlement after 40 years of marriage, countless children and deep economic entanglement. That's what Britain needs to negotiate. And if you don't believe me, take it from Jason Langrish, executive director of the Canada Europe Roundtable for Business – the organisation responsible for Ceta. Will the "Canada-plus" model work for the UK? No, says Langrish, who has advised the UK government in what he calls "their efforts to find a silver lining to this nightmare that they have unleashed on Britain. They continue to search for a trade unicorn that will solve all." The reason? "It's complicated," he told me. "And the complexity is not understood by those in the government who have no experience with trade negotiations." So Team Brexit, here is my advice: before you start making vast, sweeping comparisons between Canada and the UK regarding trade deals with the EU, consider the following. The EU likes Canada. We share certain cherished values, like socialised medicine, hot chocolate and ice hockey. Our relationship is a happy, long and stable one. And it still took over 20 agonising years to negotiate a deal. How long do you think it's going to take if the EU is an angry ex-spouse who is still fuming at you for walking out? I can't give you an exact answer, but I speak for all Canadians when I wish Britain luck on its path to "independence". As the late, great Canadian singer Leonard Cohen once sang: "Like a bird on a wire, like a drunk in the midnight choir / I have tried in my way to be free." Good luck with that, chaps.

The Liberal Democrats' victory in the Richmond Park byelection could place the party back on the road to significant gains in the House of Commons, according to one of the country's leading psephologists. Prof John Curtice said Sarah Olney's defeat of Zac Goldsmith was not simply an indirect loss for the Conservative party but also ought to worry Labour, which he described as a "fragile creature" that had taken another blow. He suggested the outcome showed voters were "beginning to forgive the coalition" and warned that Labour, while right to be worried by the Ukip threat, must also appeal to the much larger socially liberal spectrum of potential voters. He said Jeremy Corbyn's party had more socially liberal supporters than socially conservative ones. "This gives the Liberal Democrats the opportunity to get back into the general election game," the academic at Strathclyde University told the Guardian. "It's not going to put them in a position to be the next government but it potentially puts them back on to the road to securing significant representation in the House of Commons once again." He said it could be comparable with the party's 1990 Eastbourne byelection victory, which came off the back of disastrous polling but led to a solid performance in the 1992 general election. "Do we see them go into double figures for Liberal Democrats?" he asked about the national polls. Curtice admitted that the Richmond byelection, in a leafy suburb of south-west London, had come in "propitious" circumstances for the Lib Dems as it was a deeply pro-European seat and Brexit-supporting Goldsmith had stood as an independent, without the backing of a party machine. He also pointed out that from 1979 until 2010 the Liberal Democrats had held more than 40% of the local vote, and that it had only properly collapsed last year in line with the rest of the country. But he argued that the victory underlined the fact that Tim Farron's party had the ability to exploit such circumstances and reverse the post-coalition collapse. That could boost the party in its key south-west target seats, he added, despite heftier support for Brexit in that area. Curtice said the party had tapped into a "niche market" of around half of remain supporters who were still deeply upset about the Brexit decision, but said it was a part of the electorate that the Lib Dems were "ready to exploit". He described the typical potential Lib Dem voter as socially liberal and a university graduate. And that, he argued, should worry Labour, which had been very focused on the Ukip threat but had another concern to contend with. "If I were the Labour party I would be worried if the Lib Dems are back in the game. Labour is worrying about losing the socially conservative end of the coalition, but they forget that it is smaller than the socially liberal end." He suggested Labour's nervousness about respecting the Brexit vote wasn't necessarily in line with its current electorate. "Everyone is going around with an outdated vision of what a typical Labour voter is about. Between two-thirds and three-quarters of Labour supporters [in 2015] voted remain." He said Labour had lost working-class voters, who had once not voted but could now turn to Ukip. He suggested the problem pre-dated Corbyn and Ed Miliband, and the party still had hefty majorities in the northern seats where many of those voters lived. People rightly saw Labour as a "fragile creature", he said. "The nightmare scenario is that while Paul Nuttall [the Ukip leader] mobilises people at the other end of the spectrum, the Lib Dems eat at the socially liberal vote." He said Labour was struggling to persuade people that it could run the economy and had people on its frontbench who were ready for government. "The Labour party is hanging from a tree like a ripe apple – the question is whether it will be knocked down by the number of stones that hit it, and Richmond is another potential stone." The threat has led to a number of Labour MPs, including the shadow business secretary, Clive Lewis, the shadow City minister, Jonathan Reynolds, and Lisa Nandy, to call for the party to work in alliance with other progressive candidates. Neal Lawson, the chair of Compass, the pressure group behind the idea, threw his support behind the Greens and the Women's Equality party stepping aside for Olney in Richmond. "The Tories, Ukip and the candidate they supported lost because progressive parties and people worked together. If can happen in Richmond, it can happen everywhere," he said. However, the idea is unpopular among many Labour MPs who criticised their colleagues and supported their Richmond Park candidate, Christian Wolmar, who did so badly that he lost his deposit.

The first big update for No Man's Sky gives almost everyone a reason to come back. "Foundation" includes features carefully selected to deal with each of the main resolvable complaints from those who were disappointed with the original release. And for those of us who were already happy with the game, the new modes provide a way to start a new, and entirely different, journey through the procedurally generated galaxy without having to give up on your first. My original journey, which must have occupied me for at least 100 hours, is now under "Normal" mode, but two new modes lie empty, beckoning me to start afresh. Survival mode promises "limited resources, increased hazards, and stronger, more aggressive enemies". I load it up and find myself on a beautiful snowy world looking up at the clouds. Many of the Foundation Update patch notes are dedicated to visual improvements: better lighting and anti-aliasing, improved colour selections and distribution of plant life, "increased proportion of vibrant blue skies". Unlike in my first journey, my broken-down spaceship is nowhere to be seen. My radar tells me it's five minutes away. Small white arrows – a new UI feature – tell me my hazard protection against the cold is falling fast and definitely won't hold out for a five-minute hike. There's a shelter nearby, but that doesn't protect my life support. And no longer can you refill hazard protection and life support with abundant iron and carbon respectively, in any mode. Once I've repaired my scanner, it tells me that Survival mode's promise was true: resources are scarce. The new UI does at least label what the scanner finds – Th for thamium, Pt for plutonium, Zn for zinc – but an increased cooldown makes the search slower. It's gone from a habitual button-press to an actual tool. Survival mode will change the way you play. On the journey to my ship I have to duck into caves to let my hazard protection recover. I find myself running past the local wildlife without stopping to add it to my database, because it feels like a waste of precious time. Once I've found my ship and am trying to repair it, I spot some of the heridium I need in a clearing and decide it's too exposed (though eventually I remember that you can carve out a shelter within a resource like that and mine it – carefully – from the inside). And then a sentinel drone catches me mining, and I die. I'm revived, but, unlike when I died in my original journey, there's no grave with my carefully hoarded precious resources. Some of my tools are broken, and my shields and life support are down. I run for the hills in the hope of stumbling across some thamium, but I die again. I start a new Survival game. This time I begin on a hot planet, not nearly as pretty but much more manageable. I soon discover that I can go out at night without my hazard protection going down. In this more relaxed environment I realise, thanks to the little arrows in the new UI, that life support only goes down when you're moving, and more quickly if you run, which is probably why I kept dying before. This time, my ship is 15 minutes' walk away, but with the ability to go out at night I'm able to stock up on resources. I find myself crafting things I never bothered with before: power gels and shielding shards. I set out as evening approaches, and make it two thirds of the way to my ship before the morning, stumbling across a shelter just in time for sunrise. I fix my ship, find just about enough plutonium to fuel it, and take off, which in Survival mode totally empties the tank. I head for a waypoint on another planet, and halfway there am told that pirates are scanning my meagre cargo. They attack. I die. I'm revived in my space station, inventory empty. I try to return to the planet and the pirates find me again. I die. Back in Normal mode, life is easier. Hazard protection and life support decrease more slowly, and your ship's launch thruster will only use up 25% of its fuel at once. But still some things have changed. As the game warns you when you load up the new update for the first time, the universe has been regenerated, and everything looks different. Plutonium, for example, is much rarer even in Normal mode, no longer decorating every horizon with tall red shards. Other resources are now gated; to mine yellow shards of titanium, for example, you require an "advanced mining laser", which you unlock by building a base, recruiting staff, and carrying out quests. This, then, is where the new crafting system comes in: in normal circumstances you can use it to place things like save points and beacons, which help you find your way back to a specific place in a way you couldn't before, but in certain allocated locations you can also create a sprawling base to your own design. If you want to test out the base-building tools without working through the series of quests that unlocks all the options, Creative mode plants you next to a base location with a working spaceship, everything unlocked, and no need to pay for anything. But with no threat, there seems no point to having a roof over your head, and with no need for resources why bother with a hydroponics lab? With no goals, Creative mode seems best suited for those who want to play at being a space photographer, making use of the new ability to hide the UI. In Normal mode, you can find these base-building locations by scanning from space. Once you've found one you like, step inside and claim the planet as your home. You'll be guided through tasks: add a corridor,then a room, install a workstation, hire an alien to operate it, carry out fetch quests for your new employee, some of which require resources only found in specific star systems (thank goodness you can now scan individual planets from space). Particular species seem stuck in certain roles – gek are builders and farmers, korvax are scientists, vy'keen are armourers – so you'll likely have to fly to multiple star systems to recruit a full staff. Luckily, a new teleporter lets you travel back to your base (and from your base to a maximum of four space stations, which seem to be your most recent) without the need for a warp cell. And you'll often find three or four aliens to one space station, which immediately makes the game feel less lonely. You can also house your staff in the now purchasable freighters, and since you can only have one of each kind of employee it might feel like a choice between mobile and immobile home. The freighters cost money – starting at around 7m units – while the bases are free, but they can also travel with you, and add to your storage capacities so that you can save stockpiled resources (a simpler prospect now that you can stack items you couldn't before) for a star system in which they sell for a higher price. While you can teleport back to a planetary base, it feels strange to do so if you're several star systems ahead on that journey to the centre. The freighter might not have the same pretty views, but it's still customisable, and feels like a good – if expensive – alternative. Maybe it's just my millennial mind, but I don't think I'll put down roots just yet. There's too much left to see. As with the original game, different features of this update will appeal to different kinds of players. With such an anticipated and high-concept game, the player base for No Man's Sky was inevitably fractured in their expectations, and different people had vastly different criticisms, but this update goes some way to address many of them (at least of those that are actually addressable). Those who felt the trading system was lacking will appreciate the ability to cart goods from system to system with a freighter, those who felt lost in the vastness of space will be happy to ground themselves with a planetary base. Those who resented the need to top up their life support will enjoy the freedom of Creative mode, and those who wanted more of a challenge can try their luck in Survival. There's still room for improvement – combat is still no fun, for example, which is exacerbated in Survival mode – but this is the Foundation update after all, a solid base on which to build. No Man's Sky is Elite for the 21st century. Pointless? Maybe – but also sublime

The dreaded "tastemakers" who told us what we were going to be listening to in 2016 didn't find room for a band who sound like a vaudeville, baroque amalgam of Todd Rundgren and the Beatles, complete with harpsichord runs and baffling time signatures. Nor was there any suggestion that hearts would be won over by a pair of teenage former child actors from Long Island, one sporting a hairstyle that is part-Bay City Rollers feather cut, part-80s footballer mullet. Nevertheless, these madcap 4AD signings have become one of the year's oddest phenomena, their much-praised debut, Do Hollywood, resulting in sold-out shows like this. The place is so packed that it's initially difficult to see the full glory (or horror) of the Twigs' outfits. Brian D'Addario's striped jacket could be from panto; his brother Michael's shirt collars were last fashionable in 1975. Few would want their wardrobe, but if it helps bring attention to their audacious chord changes and sumptuous harmonies, so be it. Any suspicions that they are too arch or a pastiche are gently demolished by the humbling beauty of songs such as These Words and the sincere care with which Brian – and later Michael – sing them. They are also great showmen, who indulge in stick twirling, a (gulp) drum solo and (double gulp) high kicking. After they've swapped between drum kit and microphone, disaster strikes when Michael's voice suddenly turns into what sounds like the croaking result of 150 gaspers a day. "Do it gonzo!" urges his older brother, howling with laughter at this unfortunate predicament. However, help is at hand as Brian and the cheering audience appropriately turn As Long As We're Together into a giant anthem about unity. Michael's croak subsequently becomes another quirk in this tune-packed hoot. A Great Snake is a synth-squiggling monster, but when Brian introduces a "new song" and is interrupted by a wail of feedback, he says, "That was it! Thank you and goodnight." He's joking, but there's a wonderful few seconds where nobody seems quite sure. At District, Liverpool, on 3 December. Box office: 07817 302677. Then touring until 29 March.

Britain will not seek to obstruct greater European defence and foreign policy cooperation as it prepares to leave the EU, Boris Johnson has pledged. The foreign secretary said the UK was not bent on the destruction of the EU, and would not adopt a "dog in the manger" manager to disrupt member state cooperation if they continued to meet the goal of spending at least 2% of their GDP on defence. Other UK ministers have opposed greater EU defence integration, warning that it could represent a threat to the primacy of Nato. But Johnson said: "It is not part of our agenda to seek to undermine or to be dog in the mangerish about the EU. "There is a conversation going on now about the EU's desire to build a strong common security defence policy. If they want to do that, fine. Obviously it would be important to get 2% spending on defence. But we are not there to block or impede further steps towards further EU integration if that is what they so desire." Some Tory Eurosceptics have openly called for the EU to break up under the pressure of populist revolts in a succession of countries, but the Foreign Office is aware that such an aggressive stance could hamper Brexit negotiations with Brussels. Johnson gave a strong hint that he remained committed to leaving the EU customs union, saying the UK needed the capacity to strike its own trade deals and act as a "protagonist" for free trade. He said Theresa May's previous remarks on the EU had "given a very clear picture of how we are going to proceed if you understand the working of the EU". "We have already said we are going to cease to apply European law in this country – the judgments of the European court – and we will use this moment to do free trade deals, and be an agitator for global free trade," Johnson said. "From those two points you can draw all the necessary conclusions about how we see the future." It is widely accepted that if the UK stays inside the EU customs union, it cannot legally strike its own free trade deals with third parties. In a wide-ranging speech at Chatham House in London, quoting Robert Burns, Harry Potter, Lord Curzon, Talleyrand, Tolstoy and AJP Taylor, Johnson tried to present a picture of the UK as a continuing global player in spite of Brexit. In a central passage of his speech, he urged the rest of the world to interpret the EU referendum vote as a demand for democratic control, and not an as an expression of xenophobia or isolationism. He said too many people had tried to psychoanalyse the British vote to leave the EU, "imputing bad motives, with too many people too quick to draw comparisons with populist movements across the world". He said: "Such glib analogies should not be allowed to replace individual analysis. Discontent can have subtly different wellsprings. There are plenty of people that voted to leave the EU not because they dislike or fear foreigners but because they believed in democracy and, after 43 years, they had not come to endorse the finalité politique of the EU. "It is my passionate belief there is no contradiction whatsoever between a trust in the nation state as the key building block of the global order, and a generous and open mindset to the rest of the world." He said the UK would "refuse to be defined by this decision" and was fated to be outward looking. "The UK was defined a wanderlust of aid workers and journalists, traders diplomats and entrepreneurs. Whatever that feeling is, it is not xenophobia. "We are not some bit part, some spear carrier on the world stage, we are a protagonist running a truly global foreign policy." He solicited the support of ambassadors in the Chatham House audience to refute claims he had told a group of foreign representatives at a breakfast this week that he favoured the free movement of people within the EU. He insisted he had told the group: "Important though that EU migration had been, we had to have control. I am a liberal internationalist. I believe immigration can do great things," adding when he was London mayor he saw the strength and dynamism that immigration gave to the UK economy. With the US president-elect, Donald Trump, and the likely winner in the French presidential election, François Fillon, seeking closer ties with Russia's Vladimir Putin, Johnson gave little ground, saying the new era must not be handed to strongmen opposed to liberal values. In dealing with Putin, he said, "you have got to be strong and you have got to be firm. People push and push and push until they meet a push back. So when it comes to sanctions or whatever, you have got to remain absolutely solid in what you are doing, and not be afraid to be so." He also gave no ground on the longstanding British demand that President Bashar al-Assad stand down as part of a transition to political order in Syria. Trump has suggested he will allow Putin to keep Assad in power, and the near collapse of east Aleppo makes this outcome a near certainty. But Johnson said: "After five years of slaughter, Bashar al-Assad is responsible for the overwhelming majority of the 400,000 deaths. There are millions of people in that country who will not accept rule by him again, and the answer has got to be a political answer. "We have to move away from Assad's rule and find another way that retains a future for Syria that retains a united country. With the best will in the world, I cannot see that happening under Assad."

Jürgen Klopp has said Liverpool have no intention of selling Daniel Sturridge or any member of their first team squad when the transfer window reopens in January. West Ham United and Stoke City have both been linked with a move for the England international, who has been restricted to four Premier League starts this season with Klopp favouring a front three of Philippe Coutinho, Roberto Firmino and summer signing Sadio Mané. Sturridge is also yet to score in the Premier League season while a calf problem will prevent him replacing the injured Coutinho at Bournemouth on Sunday. But, despite losing his regular first team role at Anfield, Sturridge remains part of Klopp's plans for a Premier League challenge. The Liverpool manager confirmed: "There is absolutely no thought or idea to sell any player from the first team squad. I don't think it would make sense. Unfortunately Daniel is not in training now and that is what I am more concerned about than any transfer rumours, but I am prepared for everything you could ask me in January." Coutinho may be out until the new year with ankle ligament damage but Adam Lallana, who has missed the last three games with a groin injury, and Roberto Firmino, who took a kick to the calf against Sunderland last weekend, are in contention for Bournemouth. "I am happy Lallana is back in training," said Klopp. "Adam's first session was on Thursday and it was good but of course we need to see how he reacts to the intensity of the training because it was quite intense for him. Roberto trained yesterday too. He still has a little bit of pain but it is painful but not serious. He's quite a tough guy and came through the session so we will see how he reacts."

Staff working for BuzzFeed in London have requested recognition for the National Union of Journalists (NUJ). According to a report on the BuzzFeed site, the majority of editorial staff (in a total workforce of about 80) have signed union cards. On 25 November, the NUJ sent a letter to BuzzFeed UK's editor-in-chief, Janine Gibson, requesting union recognition for collective bargaining purposes. The NUJ organiser wrote: "We are hopeful you will see this as a positive and productive step in the long-term development of BuzzFeed UK. "Your staff are very keen to emphasise they all enjoy working for BuzzFeed UK, and believe in building a sustainable business with you." BuzzFeed's chief executive, Jonah Peretti, responded in an email. He wrote: "Before any decision is made, it is incredibly important to me that I have a direct line of communication with all of you, that I know about any concerns, complaints, or suggestions for improvement you have, and that we can speak openly and directly with each other." Peretti is due to visit the London office later this month to discuss the issue with staff. In his email, he said: "We'd like an opportunity to talk directly with you before you make any irreversible decisions." The full texts of the statement by the unidentified NUJ spokesperson and Peretti's email response to "UK BuzzFeeders" can be found here.

Today sees the launch of the debut collection for Kent &amp; Curwen under the creative direction of Daniel Kearns and in partnership with David Beckham. It's a heritage brand – and has been for 90 years – but with athleisure dominating menswear, it's nice to have something a little more ... real. Here is our standout piece – a vintage-look sports jersey (which happens to be Beckham's choice piece).

On 1 April, 11 years ago, I looked into my spare room to check that it really was empty. Yes, it was. My partner of 12 years had finally gone, and taken all his belongings with him: the floor-to-ceiling shelves and everything on them; the squillion books; papers; monster collection of photos and other bits and scraps – twigs, stones, "arrangements" and assorted waste material. Not a trace of him was left. The vacuum cleaner stood all by itself in the middle of the room. I was single again, at 62. This was a situation I had feared for decades, for most of my life: being a single woman. Perhaps that's why this separation had been such a long time coming. We'd been mouldering along for years, not really liking each other much, the household simmering with tension or flare-ups of loathing, squabbles, sulking and resentments. Over the years he, my mother and my daughter had grown to dislike each other intensely. My mother was in despair. "Grant me one last wish as a dying woman," she begged one of my closest friends. "Don't let her marry him!" Friends weren't keen on him either. "Get rid of him," they advised. One refused to visit, she was so sick of me moaning and doing nothing about it. I had endless excuses, I was too busy; how could I pack up all his belongings and throw them into the front garden as instructed? There was too much stuff, crammed into his room, the whole basement and the attic. Or perhaps if we had a short holiday, or he got a long-term job, or my friends and family gave him a bit more of a chance, things might improve. But secretly it was terror holding me back. I was scared stiff of being on my own, of being one of those pathetic creatures – a spinster, unlovable, who cannot sustain a relationship, who turns to dogs because no one else would have her. There was nothing rational about this fear. I knew it was rubbish, but still it was lurking, and had a paralysing grip on me until things reached a peak that even I could not tolerate He had to go. It still took a few months of nagging, but eventually that room was empty, and instead of feeling scared, I felt great. Free, free at last, like a rat let out of its trap. I could do what I liked, when I liked. No tensions, no wondering whether this or that person would or wouldn't get on with him, no lectures, no unenthusiastic mother and daughter, no crotchety friends, browned off with listening to my hours of repetitive bitterness-speak, no sullen presence casting a pall over daily life. At teachers' training college, when I was about 20, the principal had given all of the new students an introductory talk. "A pair is a stultifying unit," he warned us. "Do not form a pair. Form a gang." We thought him an idiot at the time, but now I see it, and I have my gang: daughter, friends, dogs. And most wonderful of all has been the discovery that it was very pleasant indeed to be alone. Solitude was not a desolate state. It was heaven, I found, and not scary at all. I don't want another partner, or relationship, physical or otherwise. I do not feel like an isolated capon. I'm fine like this. The only snag is that I bet most people won't believe me. I can imagine those Trump-like voices from the wings saying: "She's saying that because she just can't get anyone. Who'd want to give her one, at her age, and with a face like that?" and suchlike. And the more I insist, the more I'll probably be accused of protesting too much. But I promise that I have found new happiness in being able to choose my own curtains, duvet cover, colour paint for the walls, kitchen surfaces or any bit of household decor without hours of consultation with him, hours of arguing, dithering, compromising. I could choose my own favourite plants for the garden, background music, wattage of light-bulbs, which parties, films, visits to go on, or whether the dog could sleep on the bed. I'd forgotten how lovely it is to make my own mind up about anything and everything. To not being sneered at for watching EastEnders. I wake up, and there is a cheery dog bouncing around rather than a silent, sulking hulk. Any friend can visit at any time, in a mellow atmosphere, with no tension, no rows. A life full of conversations dawned, rather than dronings and lecturettes. No more friends having to sit listening and nodding and trying to be polite. I weedily used to think that there were certain household tasks that only a man could do: unblock the sink, mend this that or the other, prune the roses, put a washer on the tap, or even do the washing up. I would wait and wait for him to do it. Tonight, tomorrow, next week? If I asked, I was nagging; if I didn't ask, it never got done. A lose-lose situation. Now I no longer have to live in this state of tension, waiting, hoping, wondering and fuming. Such a waste of time and energy, over such small things. Now I can just call a friend, a member of my gang – usually Carol yes, a woman – who can build walls, clear out drains, prune trees, and she would come round and just get on with it. And now, under her tuition, I can also do most of these tasks myself, even mix cement and build walls. It might look like selfishness, having everything my own way, but I see it as a new independence. I can trust my own taste. I am not as incompetent as I thought. Of course, it hasn't been all plain sailing. It took me some time to get over this relationship. The rage lingered on. For months – years, really, if I'm honest. I would pointlessly mull and fume over those wretched years, and mainly I was enraged at myself: for my collusion, for letting it go on for so long, for being so wet, at the waste of energy, the guilt for making my mother and daughter endure such unpleasantness. That's gone now, because there is no point to any fury and regret. As a mutual friend advised me when I was still fuming, "Hate is corrosive." Correct. And I feel that I've managed to stop the corrosion. My mind seems to have had a big clear-out, like that lovely, empty room. And there is something tremendously energising about a clear-out. It certainly perked my mother up. She died a happier woman, free of her biggest worry. Then I finished a history degree, moved house, and wrote a book: "all by myself". Which is what I used to say, my mother told me, when I was about three, and she was interfering. Because I could manage quite well on my own. And I still can, thank you very much.

As they prepared for Saturday's FA Cup second round tie at Blackpool, the players and staff of Brackley Town held a quiz in their hotel , just as they had done before their match at Gillingham in the previous round. Here is a question that was not asked on either occasion: which club had to wait until the final minute of last season to avoid relegation from the sixth tier of English football but are now on the verge of joining the elite in the third round of the Cup for the first time in their history? The answer is obvious to everyone at Brackley, the Northamptonshire club who are enjoying a radical upturn in results on all fronts this season. A 1-0 victory against Tamworth in April, coupled with Lowestoft Town's failure to beat Gloucester City, enabled Brackley to survive in the Conference North on the final day of the 2015-16 campaign. That was the second season in succession that they had cut it so fine and this time it was only goal difference that kept them up. But now they are riding high in their league and advancing in two cup competitions as well as flying the non-league flag in the FA Cup, one win away from going into the third round draw with Manchester United, the holders, and all the other top clubs. "We managed to stay up by the skin of our teeth last season and that gave me the opportunity to stay at this level and make the changes that I felt were necessary," says the Brackley manager, Kevin Wilkin, who was appointed in September 2015 in the hope that, with time, he could emulate the success he enjoyed during six years in charge of Nuneaton Borough, whom he guided to the highest level of the non-league pyramid. "We didn't keep very many of last year's squad and the profile of player that we've taken on board is better suited to being competitive at this level," says Wilkin, whose recruits included four players with whom he worked at Nuneaton – James Armson, Adam Walker, Alex Gudger and captain Gareth Dean. "I know what they bring as players but also as characters. And the character and spirit that we've got in the changing room now is a big part of why we've done so well this season." It has already been evident in the club's Cup run, most obviously in the replay against Gillingham, when the non-leaguers, all of whom are part-time players, recovered from the disappointment of losing a two-goal lead against the League One side and ultimately prevailed 4-3 in extra time thanks in part to a hat-trick by Armson. "You might have thought at 2-2 that there was only going to be one winner but all through this season we've shown the resolve you need at crucial moments," says Wilkin. "We might be limited in certain areas but we have great spirit, we all have a go for each other." Brackley's previous best result in the FA Cup had also been against Gillingham, whom they eliminated in the first round three years ago before losing in the second to Macclesfield Town. Some of the money earned from that run went towards the construction of a 3G training pitch not far from St James Park, the club's home ground, where the highest league attendance so far this season was 642 for the visit of Darlington 1883 (they have sold 230 tickets for the trip to Blackpool). "The 3G surface is excellent and having it allows us to schedule things with confidence, since we always know we'll be able to train on Tuesdays and Thursdays," says Wilkin. Except that the schedule goes out the window when the club find themselves competing in several cup competitions at once. They take on Blackpool without having trained at all this week because they had a FA Trophy replay against Mickleover Sports on Tuesday night, winning 3-1 to continue pursuing honours on four fronts. Counting their progress in the Hillier Senior Cup, and the fact that they have had to contest five FA Cup matches to win the right to face Blackpool, and Saturday's match will be their 27th of a season that began four months ago. That is one more than has been played so far by the professionals of Blackpool. "Everyone now works incredibly hard on the fitness and sports science side of things so the difference between non-league and league is not so much in how often you train, it's in how much rest you can get," says Wilkin. "We've got guys who after a night's training are up at 6.30am to do a full day's work as a tarmacker or a bricklayer. That's difficult. The rest element is something they miss out on in non-league. But you can come through that. "The fixtures may be backing up on us a little bit but we're enjoying it. We've got a game plan for Saturday and we're determined to try to apply it. The Cup run has been a lot of fun and we'll do our best to make it continue. This is certainly more fun than last season."

Arsène Wenger has admitted the loss of Santi Cazorla to injury for at least three months is "very bad news", with the Arsenal manager unsure when the Spain midfielder will play again. Cazorla will travel to Sweden next week for surgery on a plantaris tendon after sustaining the injury in his right ankle in the 6-0 Champions League victory against Ludogorets in October. "For me it's very bad news," said Wenger. "You always know the date of the surgery but never the date where the player will play again. I always try to put absolutely everything in place to avoid surgery because it creates anxiety and rehab. When you can avoid it, you have to avoid it. Now they tell me that he will be out for two months at least, but two months can sometimes be three as well. "He has an inflammation at the back of his foot. Nobody really knows where it comes from. The anti-inflammatory injections have not got rid of it. The surgeon decided to have an exploratory surgery, that means open and see what's going on in there. He's desperate to play football. He's only happy on the football pitch. I've spoken to him, of course. He himself wants to get out of that vicious circle of going out and coming in again. He just wants to cure it." Arsenal travel to West Ham on Saturday with doubts over Olivier Giroud and Mohamed Elneny. It is the first time they have visited the London Stadium and Wenger has warned West Ham that it takes years to feel at home after a big move. "It's a bit like when we moved to the Emirates," he said. "You feel a bit like you're playing on neutral ground for a while. It takes a few years, because you have to make memories and build a little history. You move from somewhere full of history, and suddenly you move to a stadium where nothing happened before you came in. You feel a bit lonely there. "You have to rebuild the environment. You can try, but you cannot create something artificially that doesn't exist." Wenger recalled how his players even missed the orientation that they had become used to at Highbury. "When they played at Highbury, they kind of had a picture. When you play up front you know where the goal is, because of the signals coming from the crowd, you know where the adverts are and sometimes you have no time to make your decision, but you have a geographical reference when you stand on the pitch that is linked to the stadium. You have to recreate that." Wenger admits that Upton Park was a favourite place to visit, particularly when he first arrived in England 20 years ago. "I preferred the first version of the West Ham stadium, when he was very tight, one the most intimidating stadiums I knew." West Ham have just two Premier League wins in their first four months at the converted Olympic Stadium, but Wenger is still expecting a challenging evening. "They had a difficult start to the season but recently they've picked up with their quality and they played well against Tottenham and Manchester United," Wenger noted. "They are difficult fixtures so overall it will be a very tight and intense game."

Disappointment first thing this morning for jumps fans in the west country, as Exeter's excellent card on Friday afternoon, which was due to include The New One's debut over fences among other points of interest, has succumbed to overnight frost. The first day of Sandown's Tingle Creek meeting has survived the cold, however, and the Grade Two novice hurdle over two-and-a-half miles promises to be one of the most significant contests of its kind this side of Christmas. Ballyandy, last year's Festival Bumper winner, seems sure to set off as the favourite despite having failed to land either of his two starts over hurdles this season. He was behind Moon Racer, the 2015 Festival Bumper winner, on both occasions, and ran well enough to suggest that he deserves to head the market today. Whether he deserves to be around 5-4, however, is another question entirely, as no fewer than four of his rivals bring impressive recent victories to the table, and even the spendidly named 20-1 outsider Coeur Blimey has Grade One form in bumpers to consider. Messire Des Obeaux (2.25) in particular looks like a serious rival at around 5-2. Alan King's runner has run in handicaps on his last two starts, including a seventh-place finish in the Fred Winter at the Festival, and he made a mockery of his mark of 128 to win a £20,000 Class 2 event by 10 lengths at Bangor on his seasonal debut. The runner-up was a comfortable winner in a handicap chase next time up, and Messire Des Obeaux certainly makes much more appeal than Ballyandy at the prices. Antartica De Thaix (1.50) should also go well in the handicap chase earlier on the card, while Dino Velvet (1.15) is a solid favourite for the juvenile hurdle. Greywell Boy (3.00) has an outstanding chance at the weights if he is fit and well on his first start for Harry Fry, having won a course-and-distance handicap chase in March 2014 from a 12lb higher mark before losing his way last season, while Derintoher Yank (2.50) could extend his winning streak on the card at Sedgefield.



With my new hope that deniers of climate change will take ownership of the consequences, I am sad to report that this week, terrible wildfires have swept through Tennessee, a southeastern state in the USA. This state is beset by a tremendous drought, as seen by a recent US Drought Monitor map. There currently are severe, extreme, and exceptional drought conditions covering a wide swath of southern states. The causes of drought are combinations of lowered precipitation and higher temperatures. The patterns of drought are the result of many weeks of weather (warm and dry) that have led to the current conditions. The recent high-temperature map from NOAA below provides just one example. Why do we care about the crazy drought in the southern USA? Because it leads to bad consequences. As I write this post, we can read about the horrific fires in Tennessee that are destroying both natural habitat as well as towns and economies. A video about Gatlinburg Tennessee fires can be seen here. There, wildfires are threatening the resort town. It is too early to tell what economic damages will result. Was this fire caused by climate change? The answer is yes. We are now in a world where all of our weather is impacted by humans. We know human-caused warming is making drought and heat more severe – that leads to fires like the one we are seeing. We also know that 2016 will be the hottest year ever recorded and the first time temperatures have reached the critical mark of 1C (1.8F) above normal. Of course we feel sorry for the folks who are affected by the wildfire in Tennessee. But, Tennessee has not helped itself. In 2012, Tennessee passed a law encouraging teachers to present alternative reasons for climate change, even though those views are not supported by science. Here are some insightful comments from legislators in Tennessee, as reported by Bill Moyers (found here). Rep. Diane Black (R-TN-06): "The far left-wing elements of this administration foresee a near future with carbon regulated as a pollutant and heavily taxed to discourage consumption and generate revenue. We must resist all of these radical approaches all geared to raise energy prices on American families and businesses." [Project Vote Smart Issue Position] Rep. Marsha Blackburn (R-TN-07): "[T]here is not consensus [on climate change] and you can look at the latest IPCC Report and look at Doctor Lindzen from MIT. His rejection of that or Judith Curry ... from Georgia Tech. There is not consensus there." [The Wire, 2/17/14] Rep. John J. Duncan Jr. (R-TN-02): On his website, Duncan lists five scientists that claim global warming is not real, including how global warming is "the greatest scam in history." [Duncan Website] Rep. Chuck Fleischmann (R-TN-03): When asked his opinion about global warming during a candidate debate, Fleischmann said: "I think we ought to take Al Gore, put him on an iceberg, and put him way out there." [Times Free Press, 7/5/12] Rep. Phil Roe (R-TN-01): "Many believe greenhouse gas emissions are contributing to the gradual warming of our planet and changing of our climate. While there are many questions surrounding the science of the issue, it seems to me like we could develop a solution that will reduce greenhouse gas emissions without inflicting catastrophic damage on our economy." [Project Vote Smart Issue Position, 1/1/11] So, I will just tell my friends in Tennessee, make sure to give a big THANK YOU to Diane, Marsha, John, Chuck, and Phil. Maybe they will come to help your town clean up after these fires. Climate change is something we can prevent, but not with legislators like this.

Once upon a time there was a Greek, an Englishman, a German and a Spaniard. They decided they would each write a story that would do its best to explain the human condition. The Greek said, I'm going to write about a man who's tossed about on the seas after a war and when he finally returns home, no one – not even his wife – recognises him. The Englishman said, I'm going to write about a young, indecisive prince who can't decide whether life is worth it. The Spaniard said, I'm going to write about a prevaricating farmer who believes he's a knight and sets out on his rickety horse for a series of madcap adventures. The German said, I'm going to write about a young man who falls passionately in love with someone else's wife and dies of love in the end. If we look at things schematically, that's more or less how Homer created the epic, Shakespeare the drama and Cervantes the novel of wanderlust, while Goethe cultivated the soil of romanticism. It could be a joke, but it's the history of European literature. And the strange thing is, these characters after whom every modern and postmodern narrative follows are themselves deeply modern: marginalised antiheroes. Today we recognise them and meet them in the light of their popularity, their interpretations and distortions, but who are they really? What do the people around them think of them? And what do they think of themselves? What image does literature give us about the dreams and quests of Europeans and their ancestors? Let's take Odysseus as an example. Before he reaches Ithaca he washes up on the island of the Phaeacians, naked and in despair. He resembles the contemporary refugees who have been arriving on the shores of Greece. In the eyes of Nausicaa and her companions, he seems terrifying. "Like some hill-kept lion, who advances, though he is rained on and blown by the wind, and both eyes kindle; he goes out after cattle or sheep, or it may be deer in the wilderness, and his belly is urgent upon him to get inside of a close steading and go for the sheepflocks. So Odysseus was ready to face young girls." Urgency – what a prophetic word. And how contemporary it sounds today, in light of the refugee crisis. Even mythical Odysseus can only assume his position as hero once he has washed and put on clean clothes. But Hamlet, too, seems bizarre in the eyes of Claudius and Gertrude. And Don Quixote is a madman to the villagers he encounters: when they ask him why he's wandering around in armour during peacetime, he presents himself as a "wandering knight", an ambassador of God on earth. Goethe's Werther is crazy with love, and sends his servant to Lotte's house merely so he can have someone close by who, he says, "has been close to her, too". The characters in these books who encounter those paradigmatic heroes as lovers, rivals, servants, friends or random passersby think the way we have been taught to think when we encounter something unusual, exaggerated or foreign: Odysseus is a filthy shipwrecked sailor, Hamlet sees ghosts, Don Quixote is walking on clouds and Werther is ruled by an unhealthy passion. What literature does is incorporate the other in all its quirks and peculiarities into the social body. It allows for difference, and often even proclaims it to be genius. It considers difference a sign of courage: the hero is who he chooses to be. Or he fights for his freedom, his ideas, or his aesthetic, as does James Joyce's Stephen Dedalus in A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man. Fiction teaches us to think creatively about difference. Anthropological studies, psychoanalysis, sociology – all offer theoretical descriptions for what a novel teaches by example and by identification. "The imitation of an action", is what Aristotle called tragedy. It would be difficult for one to think up a more groundbreaking mode of understanding the mind and the heart. Guilt, jealousy, despair, violence, anxiety, irrationality, the fear of death – nothing that is human is foreign to literature. So the more education falls into decline because of a lack of imagination (not to mention funds), the more literature is called on to serve as another form of education. When we read the emblematic works of the European tradition we begin to trace the outlines of a coded, radical understanding of the other. Unconsciously we begin to accept that the other is always a mystery and that easy characterisations lead nowhere. Imagine if Odysseus were nothing more than a filthy, shipwrecked man. And think just how much we learn from his arrival on the island of the Phaeacians about the people arriving every day on Europe's shores. If we leave the treatment of the refugee crisis to the mass media, if we forget the shipwrecked men of literature – from Odysseus and Robinson Crusoe to Michel Tournier's Friday – we'll remain trapped in the stereotypes of refugees as a homogeneous mass of people who have come to tyrannise the west. Literature transforms amorphous fear and pity into individualities. It tells us: the other is not what it seems. Extracted from the opening speech of the second international literature festival of Odessa and translated from Greek by Karen Emmerich. Amanda Michalopoulou's latest book, Why I Killed My Best Friend, is published by Open Letter.

Bittersweet Rose Wylie's little chocolate brazil nut is round, shiny and appealing. However, it's also a provocation, a rebel watercolour likely to rile any traditionalist critics who might condemn her work as worthy of a four-year-old – as Brian Sewell once did. Life drawing The everyday subject matter is unapologetic, the rough and ready look self-conscious. The octogenarian painter from rural Kent was little known until Sienna Miller and then Germaine Greer championed her a decade ago. She depicts whatever strikes her – supermodels, arthouse cinema, things off the telly. Confectionery is a favourite. Slow food The paintings have lightning immediacy and are big on character. As a film portrait of Wylie by the artist Ben Rivers revealed, however, they are far from quick: formal qualities are carefully debated, colours laboriously built up. Her paintings speak of the particular way we each experience the world and the challenge of communicating. Plain and simple Inspired by a bag of unadorned confectionery purchased in Margate by the artist's daughter, this brazil encased in plain chocolate is rich with ordinary, familiar appeal. Rose Wylie: Horse, Bird, Cat, David Zwirner, W1, to 7 Jan

Lady Gaga has denounced the evils of money and fame as she promoted her new album on the roof of one of Britain's biggest shopping centres. The singer, who has an estimated net worth of more than $250m (£200m), performed for an audience of competition winners at Westfield shopping centre in Shepherd's Bush, west London, on Thursday night. She said: "Money has been put on a pedestal, beauty has been put on a pedestal, celebrity has been put on a pedestal. I have travelled the world and seen the happiest people in the poorest parts of the world. Their values are intact. "In the richest homes I meet the saddest and most depressed people. With this album I wanted to remind the whole world and my fans that the most important things are love and kindness. Kindness is what will create harmony, not celebrity and not fame." Gaga was promoting her album Joanne, which was released in October and entered the UK downloads chart at number one.

2016: a year so bad it's become an adjective. A much-loved celebrity dies; a coup happens somewhere; an unhinged demagogue wins the US presidency: the response, invariably, has been, "Oh, how 2016!" If you are British and of a vaguely progressive bent, there have been two major exceptions this year. The first was Zac Goldsmith being thumped in the London mayoral elections. And now the second. Zac Goldsmith losing a vanity byelection in his own constituency. No mercy for this loser. Goldsmith is a multimillionaire chancer who attempted to seize the London mayoralty with a shameful and shamelessly racist campaign. He knew exactly what he was doing. He attempted to defeat his opponent by smearing him as the pawn of Islamist extremists. "I don't think it was a dog whistle because you can't hear a dog whistle," as senior London Tory Andrew Boff put it. "Everybody could hear this." At a time when prejudice against Muslims is widespread, this was not simply reckless, it was dangerous. It would have legitimised bigotry. If one of the most diverse cities on Earth elected such an individual after such a campaign, a powerful – and alarming – message would have been sent. There is a longstanding tradition in this country of rich white men doing terrible things but then being swiftly rehabilitated. Just months after his unforgivable campaign, you could already see this creep to respectability happening with Goldsmith, a man who repeatedly refused to apologise for what he had done. The government's decision in favour of a third Heathrow runway led him to resign both from the Tories and from his seat. "Ah bravo, man of principle," came the line. It was nonsense. A man of such riches could afford a byelection without the resources of his party. The Conservatives stood aside for him, making a mockery of the idea he was an independent. He claimed to be the anti-Heathrow candidate, but all of his main opponents were too. This was no referendum on Heathrow, as he claimed. In this vanity byelection, it was a referendum on two things: the Tories' Brexit agenda and Goldsmith himself. And the good people of Richmond Park made their opinion on both issues clear, overturning a huge 23,015-vote majority. Goldsmith's defeat has consequences. It inflicts damage on Theresa May, who indulged his vanity. It is a blow to her chaotic approach to Brexit. It may make an early general election – which could only realistically be disastrous for Labour – less likely as nervous Tory MPs in the south-west eye a Lib Dem resurgence that could turf them out. Or it could, counterintuitively, make an early election more likely as the government's majority is whittled away. Labour needs to learn lessons, too. There were fewer votes for the Labour candidate than there are Labour members in the constituency: understandable, given tactical voting. But Labour has to ensure its voice does not disappear in the Brexit debate. But consequences aside, rejoice. Why not? It has been an astonishingly terrible year, one in which xenophobic populism has stomped all over the western world, where much-loved greats have died, where you almost dreaded to check the news. Goldsmith's defeat is testament to human decency. He had a choice about how he ran his mayoral campaign. He chose to wage a dangerous campaign of bigotry. And now he has lost twice, his political career is over, and his reputation is trashed. Good riddance.

The Tories say the Richmond Park byelection doesn't change anything on Europe. But the passion of voters in the south London constituency and the first signs of an emerging anti-Brexit cross-party alliance point to how Theresa May could be defeated nationally. In times to come, Sarah Olney's victory may be seen as the moment the fightback began. There is, admittedly, a vast mountain to climb. Richmond Park was estimated to be the 28th most pro-remain constituency in June's referendum, voting around 72% to stay in the European Union, according to research by Chris Hanretty from the University of East Anglia. Only 231 of Britain's 632 constituencies voted remain, while 401 backed leave (Northern Ireland wasn't included in the analysis). In order to have any chance of changing government policy, popular opinion will have to change. The anti-Brexit vote would have to rise to nearly 55% nationally, from 48% in the referendum, before there was a majority of seats backing remain. But such a change in opinion is possible. Brexit will be the dominant political issue in the next two years. In Richmond Park, it even trumped Heathrow as a matter of local concern. As each month passes, the government's approach to our divorce negotiations seems more and more cack-handed. It is not just threatening to deliver a destructive, hard Brexit; it looks like it is producing a shambolic one. The prime minister says she doesn't want to publish a plan. But does she even have one? She seems like a rabbit frozen in the headlights of a truck driven crazily by hardliners in her party. The Richmond Park byelection has put a spring in the step of pro-Europeans. It comes hard on the heels of the government being told by the high court that it cannot trigger article 50, starting formal separation talks, without getting parliament's approval first. Despite Olney's promise to vote against invoking article 50, there's no chance of blocking the government now. The Liberal Democrats, after all, have just nine MPs, and few Labour and Tory MPs are prepared to stick their heads above the parapet. The best chance of stopping Brexit is not in the next few months, but in two years' time, when May returns from her European negotiations with either a bad deal or no deal at all. That's when more MPs may have the courage to say that the madness must be stopped and the people given a chance – via a second referendum – to say whether they still want to quit the EU. Richmond Park is a triumph for the Lib Dems. But they mustn't kid themselves that they are up to the task of defeating Brexit on their own. The byelection victory was also a triumph for cross-party alliances and tactical voting. Bravo to the Greens for standing aside and backing Olney. Congratulations to the many pro-European Tories who voted against Zac Goldsmith, despite liking him as a person. Hats off, too, to the Labour MPs Clive Lewis, Lisa Nandy and Jonathan Reynolds, who called on their party not to run. Jeremy Corbyn decided to press on regardless. Ordinary Labour voters gave him what he deserved: the party got only 1,515 votes and lost its deposit. What we saw in Richmond Park was not a fully fledged anti-Brexit alliance. In future electoral contests, there should be a primary to choose a single pro-European candidate to go into battle whenever a hard Brexiter is standing. But this byelection shows the beginnings of a new type of politics. Come the next general election, we'll need cross-party alliances and imaginative voting on a grand scale.

British construction firms continued to rebound from their post-referendum soft patch last month but reported the steepest rise in prices for more than five years. In the latest sign that the pound's sharp fall since the Brexit vote is raising import costs for UK businesses, the poll of construction firms (pdf) showed they reported a "steep and accelerated rise" in what they were paying for building materials in November. That put the rate of inflation in the sector at the highest since April 2011, according to the survey's compilers IHS Markit. Overall, construction sector activity expanded for the third month running and at a faster pace than economists had forecast. The main reading on the Markit/CIPS UK construction purchasing managers' index (PMI) edged up to an eight-month high of 52.8 from 52.6 in October. That was above the 50 mark separating expansion from contraction and beat forecasts for 52.2 in the Reuters poll of economists. Order books also improved at the fastest pace for eight months and construction firms hired new workers to match the rising demand. Tim Moore, a senior economist at IHS Markit, said the sector had continued to recover from a slow third quarter. "The brighter picture reflected another solid contribution from residential building and renewed growth in commercial work, which some companies linked to a resumption of projects that had been delayed after the Brexit vote," he said. But optimism among building firms remained relatively subdued, Moore added. "A number of firms cited uncertainty related to supplier price hikes as an emerging threat to the construction sector, with survey respondents commenting on difficulties forecasting project costs against a backdrop of rapidly changing inflationary pressures." The signs of cost pressures in the construction sector echoed Markit's survey of the manufacturing industry published on Thursday. That showed UK factory growth had eased as the weak pound further drove up firms' prices in November. Economists are now looking ahead to news from the much larger services sector on Monday for a steer on how overall economic growth fared last month. The general picture from the PMI reports since the referendum has been of a short sharp shock in July followed by a rebound and reasonably solid growth since August. That largely chimes with other economic indicators suggesting firms and consumers have shrugged off the Brexit vote for now but are worrying about inflation picking up.

After an eight-year-old dog named Mika escaped at Mexico City airport en route to Houston this week, her distraught owner posted a brief video on Twitter, calling on the airline she was traveling with to find her missing pet. The tearful plea touched a nerve: Pamela Álvarez's post was retweeted more than 20,000 times, and the hashtags #Mika and #BuscandoaMika (Looking for Mika) trended on Mexican Twitter. When the dog was found and reunited with its owner, the story trended again, and the airline turned the episode into a public relations win. But the incident has also prompted some to ask why – in a country where the disappearance of thousands of people often goes unremarked – there was such outrage over a missing dog. At least 25,000 Mexicans have disappeared over the past 10 years, many of them caught up in the violence unleashed by the government's militarized crackdown on drug cartels and organized crime. State authorities and the media show little interest in most missing persons cases, and relatives of the disappeared are often obliged to search alone for their loved ones. After the outpouring of concern for the missing dog, Twitter users were quick to highlight the apparent double standard. "I wish the authorities searched for the more than 30,000 disappeared like they did for #Mika, I wish the media gave that coverage," read one tweet. "So much unity to find 'Mika'; but I don't see them joining to find the thousands of disappeared," read another. Some asked the airline Interjet – which found Mika in the Mexico City airport – to started searching for the 43 teacher trainees who vanished without trace after they were attacked by police in 2014 and handed over to criminals. Others called on the carrier to track down Javier Duarte, the ex-governor of Veracruz state who went on the run amid allegations of rampant corruption. Missing persons cases in Mexico often end in limbo: few victims are located, either dead or alive. Families of the disappeared also suffer additional stigma as authorities claim – without offering proof – that victims of violence were somehow complicit in crime. "Families and friends begin to withdraw," said Blanca Martínez, director of the Fray Juan Larios human rights center in the northern city of Saltillo, which provides legal assistance to families of the missing. "[They think that] your loved one was likely involved in something they shouldn't have been involved in so I'll keep my distance."

Manuel the receptionist There are more laughs in these 90 seconds than many sitcoms manage in an entire episode. "Where are your ears, you great big halfwit?" asks Manuel, left in charge. He has clearly learned from his boss – and is now answering the phone with a rudeness to rival Basil's. Then, of course, it turns out to be Basil on the phone. Unable to actually beat Manuel in person as punishment, Basil manages to manoeuvre things so that the builder – "You are a hideous orangutan" – punches Manuel in the face. It's pure slapstick: cruel and hilarious. Basil the rat Manuel's loneliness in the permanently grey Torquay drives him to acquire a pet rat, resulting in perhaps the greatest scenes of farce Fawlty Towers ever conjured up. Andrew Sachs' delighted greeting of his new friend, clapping his hands together and trilling "Ba-seel!", is the trigger for a hotel-wide rat hunt, around a plummy young couple and towards the cheese biscuits. Manuel's sheer terror as the farce climaxes – "you put Basil in the ratatouille!" – is a masterpiece of double meaning. "I know nothing!" While Manuel was subjected to occasional lapses into casual 1970s xenophobia ("you dago dodo!"), the cultural rift between him and the Brits around him was full of comic potential – particularly his terrible language skills, a simple and sublime foil for Basil Fawlty's rising blood pressure. As Basil tries to keep his betting on the down-low from Sybil, it's up to him to explain to Manuel that he must pretend not to know about it. Of course, Manuel's poor English and man-child innocence mean the scheme is doomed to fail. The talking moose This clip really belongs to the Major (Ballard Berkeley), and is all about the terrific double-take he does upon hearing what he believes to be a moose talking, but is actually an English actor playing a Spanish waiter attempting his version of received pronunciation ("I can speak English, I learned it from a booook"). Once again, Manuel's blithe innocence is the bass note around which the entire comic riff is built. "Breakfast kaput!" One of the neatest jokes in Fawlty Towers is how Basil's constant abuse of Manuel always comes back to haunt him. Manuel is quite literally a cowed figure – never walking so much as retreating – and in his desperation to please he becomes hopelessly rigid in following the rules. In this scene, his dogmatic adherence to breakfast hours reduces an upstanding guest to barking "I'm a doctor and I want my sausages!" in a matter of seconds. Basil, of course, is left sweaty and defeated.

Hello, it's Friday!

Donald Trump has selected the retired marine general James Mattis to serve as his first Pentagon chief, the first of his national-security appointments that will reassure the establishment defense circles Trump scorned on the campaign trail. Trump made the announcement at an Ohio rally on the first day for his "thank you tour". "I don't want to tell you to this, I refuse to tell you, don't let it outside of this room. I will not tell you that one of our great great generals, don't let it outside, we are going to appoint Mad Dog Mattis as our secretary of defense and we're not announcing it until Monday so don't tell it to anybody." Mattis, has deep wells of support on Capitol Hill and in the military. Unlike Trump's other announced nominees, Mattis is unlikely to receive a contentious confirmation hearing for the defense secretary job, even though he will need a special waiver from Congress because he has not been out of uniform for the requisite seven years. The nomination comes after Mattis met with Trump at the businessman's golf club in Bedminster, New Jersey, last month. The retired general declined to talk to the media at the time, but Trump praised him. "All I can say is he is the real deal. The real deal," he said. The appointment of Mattis, which had been first reported by the Washington Post on Thursday afternoon, was initially denied by Trump's transition team. In a tweet written three hours before Trump took the stage in Cincinnati, senior communications adviser Jason Miller insisted, "No decision has been made yet with regard to Secretary of Defense. #TrumpTransition." Mattis's appointment comes with much establishment hope attached. Many in Republican national security circles who opposed Trump have faith that the forceful Mattis can moderate Trump and bureaucratically neutralize Mike Flynn, the president-elect's pick for national security adviser. But Mattis has enough points of policy agreement with Trump to make his integration with the Trump hardliners as strong a possibility. "Jim Mattis has a deep respect and affection for the men and women who put their lives on the line for our country, and the allies who help us. He'll be a terrific secretary of defense," said Kori Schake, a former defense adviser to John McCain, a prominent "never Trump" conservative, and Mattis's co-editor on a recent book. Unusually, days before the announcement, McCain released a statement that all but openly campaigned for Mattis's appointment, calling the retired general "impressive" and an "extraordinary leader". As the chairman of the Senate armed services committee, McCain's endorsement will be critical to Mattis' confirmation. Establishment hopes that Mattis could rein in Trump appeared to be bearing fruit even before his appointment. Trump told the New York Times Mattis had made a forceful case against torture in a private conversation, apparently telling Trump: "I've always found, give me a pack of cigarettes and a couple of beers and I do better with that than I do with torture." Trump said he was "was very impressed by that answer", although it had not totally changed his mind. "Mad Dog" Mattis's highly quotable blend of wit and bluntness has earned him esteem within the military – and even a hashtag, #Mattisisms. In uniform, he relished attacking the sacred cows of the Pentagon, the broader military and the marines specifically. Yet Mattis's mouth has gotten him in trouble, as has a hawkishness on Iran that alienated many in Barack Obama's White House. A now-famous quote has Mattis, then the senior marine in the volatile Iraqi province of Anbar, informing a local interlocutor: "I come in peace. I didn't bring artillery. But I'm pleading with you, with tears in my eyes: if you fuck with me, I'll kill you all." A speech he gave in 2005 mused that it was "fun to shoot some people" in Iraq and Afghanistan, a statement called callous by Marla Ruzicka, the head of a civilian-advocacy group that worked with the military in Iraq. Mattis was defended by marine leadership but instructed to watch his tone. Those who know Mattis say his bluster is intentionally over-the-top and leavens his intellectual streak. Despite being a marine, he co-authored the army's counterinsurgency field manual with David Petraeus, which cautioned restraint and discrimination in lethal force. His allies say he took Ruzicka's criticisms to heart, particularly after she was killed in Iraq by a suicide bomber. Mike Rogers, a former Republican congressman who was the national security advisor on the initial Trump transition team, portrayed Mattis as a scholar-general. "He might have a TV in his house, but I'm not convinced of it. His library is about 10,000 books and he's read every one of them, and those are just the ones he kept. "The guy ... understands the big picture. He's an internationalist and he understands engagement. He also understands the judicious use of military power. He's not looking for a fight but he'll always finish the fight," he said. "He's a visionary, and yet he's molded out of the same grit as [legendary world war two marine] Chesty Puller," the former chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Martin Dempsey, once reflected about Mattis. Obama elevated Mattis to the leadership of US Central Command, but the fit proved to be a bad one. Mattis, Obama's Middle East aides said, displayed an eagerness to confront Iran far out of sync with an administration focused on diplomacy with Tehran. In 2012 congressional testimony, Mattis suggested the Syrian civil war provided the US with an opportunity to deal "the biggest strategic setback for Iran in 25 years" through deposing Iranian ally, Syrian president Bashar al-Assad. Obama fired Mattis the following year. As a civilian, Mattis has become a critic of Obama's. In January 2015 congressional testimony, Mattis advocated a "refreshed national strategy" that reversed what he saw as Obama's "reactive crouch". More recently, he has said the US posture in the Middle East suffers from "strategic atrophy". But while he has sought a resolution of the Syrian civil war, Mattis in 2013 warned against Americanizing what would be a "very, very serious war". He has advocated placing regional Muslim-majority countries in a leading role, a posture that has yet to materialize in any coherent manner after six years of conflict. Similarly, Mattis's emphasis on partnerships with Muslim-majority nations in the Middle East places him at odds with the Trump camp's willingness to denounce Islam as synonymous with terrorism. Mattis has instead said terrorists hide behind "false religious garb". Mattis favors arming Syrian rebels fighting Assad, something Trump has signaled he considers a distraction from fighting Isis and which places Mattis at odds with CIA director-nominee Mike Pompeo. While Trump has signaled a warmth to Vladimir Putin, Mattis has criticized "the unfortunate and dangerous mode the Russian leadership has slipped into", warning Nato allies against accommodating "Russian violations of international law". Yet Mattis is firmly in line with the emerging Trump administration's confrontational posture with Iran. He has said Iran is "a special case that must be dealt with as a threat to regional stability", a position shared by Flynn and Pompeo. The retired marine general apparently wasn't Trump's first choice. In an interview with NPR last month, retired four-star general Jack Keane said he had turned down the position. Keane, an architect of the surge in Iraq who is close to McCain, said he instead recommended both Mattis and his army protege, Petraeus, whom Trump is considering for secretary of state. Additional reporting by Julian Borger

As our planet faces increasing urbanisation, public health experts are spearheading innovation for adjusting to this. We know that cities can make us ill: according to figures from the International Diabetes Federation, in 2014 there were 387 million people globally suffering from diabetes and in 2015 there were 415 million people living with the disease. Two-thirds of those people live in cities, experiencing poor diet and sedentary lifestyles. And our mental health suffers in cities, too. Urban living has been found to raise the risk of anxiety and mood disorders by 21% and 39% respectively. While half the world population currently lives in a city, this is predicted to rise to two-thirds by 2050. As they grow, cities will play a crucial role in finding solutions to many of our greatest public health challenges, from obesity and diabetes to communicable diseases like tuberculosis. With public health systems overstretched, and local governments pressed on all sides for resources and money, innovative solutions are needed. Public-private partnerships (PPPs) could be a source of new thinking, getting projects off the ground. So how can cities best build on PPPs to create health systems and fresh thinking so that our urban world will be a healthy one? How can public health bodies capitalise on the skills of the private sector without losing control? How can cities ensure equal access to healthcare for all residents? And what role should city mayors and other local government figures play in establishing innovative partnerships for health? Join an expert panel on Thursday 8 December, from 2pm to 3.30pm GMT, to discuss these questions and more. The panel Niels Lund, vice president, Novo Nordisk and Cities Changing Diabetes spokesperson, Copenhagen, Denmark @lund_niels Cities Changing Diabetes is a programme to address the huge urban diabetes challenge. Niels has had an extensive career in international development with assignments for Unicef and the World Bank. Abdul El-Sayed, executive director and health officer, City of Detroit, United States @AbdulElSayed Abdul is turning around the fortunes of healthcare in one of America's poorest cities, working with a variety of partners from all sectors. Laurence Carmichael, head, WHO Collaborating Centre for Healthy Urban Environments, UWE, Bristol, UK @laurencecarmich Laurence contributes to healthy cities research, consultancy and teaching in collaboration with local, national and international stakeholders including WHO-Europe. Julie Hughes, director, Institute for Market Transformation (IMT), co-director, City Energy Project, Washington DC, US The City Energy Project is a national initiative to create healthier and more prosperous American cities by improving the energy efficiency of buildings. IMT seeks market-based solutions to today's climate and energy challenges. Susan Claris, associate director, transport consulting, Arup, London, UK, @Susan Claris Susan is a transport planner and anthropologist who has worked for Arup for more than twenty years. She has a particular interest in the many benefits that arise from making cities more walkable. Claudia Adirazola, director, Health and Road Safety, WRI Ross Center For Sustainable Cities, Washington DC, US Claudia works on a global strategy for addressing the public health impact of urban transportation and urban development. She has a background in the public sector in her home country of Peru. Tim Grandage, managing trustee, Future Hope, Kolkata, India Tim founded Future Hope, a charity that works with vulnerable children in Kolkata's streets and slums, in 1987. Federico Cartin Arteaga, director, Rutas Naturbanas, San José, Costa Rica, @fedecartin Federico is an economist and urban planner. Rutas Naturbanas aims to revitalise urban rivers – to allow people to bike, walk and run – and eventually restore these water sheds. Alex Ross, director, World Health Organisation (WHO) Centre for Health Development (WHO Kobe Centre), Kobe, Japan, @directorwkc The WHO Kobe Centre has been working on urban health for over a decade, addressing health systems, health inequities and and urban planning-health collaboration. Alex's background is in international development, with roles at USAid and DfID. Billie Giles-Corti, lead of the NHMRC Centre for Research Excellence in Healthy Liveable Communities, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia, @billiegc Billie heads a centre with the mission to provide research that informs healthy urban design and planning. She is the author of a 2016 Lancet series on urban design, transport and health. Jess Beagley, policy research officer, NCD Alliance, London, UK, @JessicaBeagley Jess leads NCD Alliance's work on environment and health, with a particular focus on urbanisation and climate change and the opportunities for co-benefit solutions to promote human and planetary health. The live chat is not video or audio-enabled but will take place in the comments section (below). Want to recommend someone for the panel or ask a question in advance? Get in touch via globaldevpros@theguardian.com or @GuardianGDP on Twitter. Follow the discussion using the hashtag #globaldevlive.

1) XFL In 2000, WWE supremo Vince McMahon announced the launch of a new league to rival the NFL: the XFL. It would take place in the off-season and do away with the traditional American football rulebook for a more extreme interpretation inspired by wrestling's emphasis on outrageous entertainment, all of which boiled down to pre-game fireballs, on-field violence and a disturbing focus on cheerleaders. More than 14 million people tuned into the opening game on 3 February 2001. McMahon took to the field like he would a wrestling ring to stir up the crowd, but unfortunately the game did not live up to the hype. Slackened rules on big hitting caused a raft of injuries, not least in the opening scramble which had replaced the mundane coin toss: two opposing players ran from 20 yards towards a ball waiting in the centre and the one to grab it secured possession for their team. An early scramble left one player, Hassan Shamsid-Deen, with a separated shoulder. Other missteps included allowing players to print anything on the back of their jerseys which led Rod Smart to wear He Hate Me in place of his name (the explanation for which makes little sense). Even the name, XFL, was confused; many assumed the X stood for extreme, but an Extreme Football League already existed so it was clarified that the X officially had no meaning – it was essentially the X Football League. Ultimately the XFL could not attract enough star names and the lack of protection for running backs, wide receivers and quarterbacks made for tediously low-scoring games. Interest quickly faded and the league folded in May after only one season, with the WWE and NBC each reportedly losing $35m on the project. It was roundly mocked by the media: Saturday Night Live poked fun at the names of franchises like New York-New Jersey Hitmen and Las Vegas Outlaws with their fictional team, the Kansas City Shoplifters. McMahon has since claimed he will bring the XFL back, only bigger, better and more X than before. "We are going to make this the WWE of the football world, just like it was supposed to be the first time," he said in 2014. "You want football and you want violence, and that is what the new XFL is going to give you. It's going to be the 'attitude era' of football, if you will. Hell, even the cheerleaders are going to be hotter this time around." LO 2) Stanford Super Series VHS or Betamax. Sony PlayStation or Sega Saturn. Facebook or Myspace. As consumers, sometimes we have to choose between two products – and sometimes we choose unwisely. The ECB, an uneasy presence among cricket's nouveau riche, was given a consumers' dilemma in 2008 as two new tournaments were launched, ingeniously blending the dynamic new Twenty20 format with infinite stacks of cash. One, the Indian Premier League, is now the sixth most-watched sports league in the world. England chose the other one. Allen Stanford was not a natural fit with English cricket. The brash Texan businessman arrived at Lord's by helicopter with a suitcase full of cash (you can almost hear the MCC's indignant gasps) and upset a number of players by flirting outrageously with their wives during the series. Beneath this unseemly exterior, Stanford did harbour a passion for the game; he had initially invested in cricket in his adopted home of Antigua out of personal, rather than business interest. Then the money came rolling into view. England were not Stanford's first port of call. Inspired over lunch with Michael Holding to hold a high-stakes tournament at his own stadium in Antigua, he reached out to India, South Africa and Australia, all of whom had committed to the IPL. The ECB, creators of the Twenty20 format, had kept its best players away from that unpleasant business, then watched in horror as TV rights were sold for a billion dollars. It hastily hitched itself to Stanford's bandwagon, with the final destination a $20m game of cricket. Following two editions of the relatively successful Stanford 20/20, with teams representing Caribbean islands, the first and only Stanford Super Series was essentially one game, pitching England against the best of the West Indies, clumsily rebranded as the Stanford Superstars. After a couple of meaningless warm-up matches, this Frankenstein fixture was won comfortably by the Superstars, sweeping up the prize money as England returned home, unsure exactly what they had just taken part in but certain they had lost. The ECB was tied into a five-year deal, with the Super Series set to hit Lord's, but that all came spectacularly unstuck only three months later as serious allegations over Stanford's wider business dealings began to snowball. He was eventually sentenced to 110 years in prison for defrauding investors to the tune of $7bn. Former West Indies Test cricketer Dinanath Ramnarine, then the head of the West Indies Players' Association, claimed that Stanford had asked the Superstars to reinvest their winnings with his bank. There was never another edition of the Stanford Super Series and Chris Gayle's match-winning six off Andrew Flintoff was the last shot ever played at the Stanford Cricket Ground. If there is a silver lining to this murky cloud, it is the West Indies, the chief beneficiaries of Stanford's dalliance with the game, going on to win two World T20 tournaments. Theirs may be the only angle from which Allen Stanford's involvement in cricket looks anything other than an expensive mistake. NM 3) Anglo-Welsh Cup English rugby had its own knockout cup competition between 1971 and 2005 – and a fine one it was, too. Between 1996 and 2003 Twickenham sold out four times to see Bath win the last of their record 10 titles, Leicester break Sale's hearts and Northampton get stuffed by London Irish and Gloucester in back-to-back finals, both times making a future Guardian rugby writer cry. This was rugby's answer to, if not equivalent of, football's FA Cup. Upsets were far, far rarer, especially once the game went professional at the top level, but it was a storied and beloved competition. Coventry, Bedford and Gosforth were among the early winners and, of the two of those clubs who still exist under those monikers, it is almost certainly the highest honour either will ever win. In 2005 the RFU Club Competition would be ditched and replaced by the Anglo-Welsh Cup, with the four Welsh regions competing alongside the 12 Premiership clubs. As for clubs such as Cornish Pirates, Rotherham, Coventry and Bedford? Bugger 'em, they could play in their own competition with the other minnows. The RFU and WRU had big ideas for the competition and, to give it its due, it was not immediately a disaster. The two semi-finals were held at Cardiff's Millennium Stadium and the showpiece final at Twickenham. Powergen, the sponsors, agreed a deal with the BBC in which club rugby was on free-to-air TV, English clubs had the carrot of Heineken Cup qualification for the winners dangled in front of them and Welsh interest was maintained when the Ospreys and Cardiff Blues won in 2008 and 2009. But back to the format and therein lies the real joke. Rather than a straight knockout competition, the 16 teams are divided into four groups, with the four winners advancing to the semi-finals. Fine, until someone came up with the brilliant idea that the four pools are then paired off, with each team playing others in a different group but accruing points against their group rivals. If you're still with me, it hasn't come to pass yet but this means that should a team lose every match then it is entirely possible that their three group rivals can also lose every match by more, thus sending our hypothetical side through to the semi-finals, despite a record of three defeats from three. In 2009-10 things started to go south. Rather than a spectacle at the home of English rugby, the final was contested in Worcester. Sixways is a fine stadium but its tenants have been perennial relegation scrappers and its capacity of 12,000 is some way down on Twickenham's 75,000. Furthermore, the match was played on the same day as the Six Nations finale. Powergen ended their sponsorship after the inaugural competition in 2005-06 and their successors, EDF, did not extend their initial three-year deal. These days – oh yes it's still going – the Anglo-Welsh Cup is a far cry from that which saw teams willing to defy the Lions and continues to take place largely on international weekends, with second-string players to the fore. That 2010 final at Sixways resulted in Northampton winning a thriller 30-24 against Gloucester to lift their first piece of top-flight domestic silverware. The future Guardian writer, who had cried at the defeats by London Irish and Gloucester in 2002 and 2003 respectively, forgot it was on. DL 4) Coppa Italia Earlier this year Alessandria, founder members of Serie A but now in Italy's regional third tier, reached the semi-finals of the Coppa Italia. Despite losing emphatically to Milan over two legs, I Grigi (the Greys) caused a significant ripple with their return to prominence. They were the first third division team since Bari, in 1984, to reach the final four – and a rare underdog story in a competition that is weighted in favour of Italy's giants. The Coppa Italia has suffered from relentless tinkering throughout its existence, with group stages in place for Bari's breakthrough year, but as it stands, there are seedings, schedule issues and two-legged semi-finals that all favour Serie A's top sides. In its past 10 editions, only three other lower-league teams have reached the last eight, including Spezia, beaten by Alessandria in an outlier of a quarter-final last season. By comparison, the FA Cup has had 19 lower-league quarter-finalists in the last decade and three semi-finalists in 2008. In the same year Portsmouth won the Cup, the Coppa Italia excluded clubs below Serie B entirely. It didn't stick but shows that in a tournament organised by Serie A, the presence of lower-league sides is an afterthought. Last year, Alessandria saw off fourth-tier Altovicentino, Serie B's Pro Vercelli and fellow Lega Pro side Juve Stabia, all in August. They needed the luck of the draw, too – teams progressing to the third round have a 70% chance of an away trip to a top-flight team, parachuted in and given a home advantage that they keep in the fourth round, the end of a bottleneck that cuts 70 teams down to only eight. After winning in Palermo, Alessandria were one of the eight qualifiers for the Ottavi di finale – joining eight teams from the top of Serie A, dropped in three rounds from the final with a home game for starters. It took an extra-time win at nearby Genoa, and Spezia shocking Roma on penalties, to create a path for Alessandria to break Serie A's stranglehold on the latter stages. Their journey was not helped by the tournament's bizarre scheduling: three games in August, two in December and the rest when international, continental and Serie A fixtures allowed. Alessandria's historic semi-final against Milan took place over the course of a month, with their seven-month cup run ending in a 5-0 defeat at San Siro (as the higher-ranked team, Milan had home advantage for the second leg). The only lower-league side to win the cup are Napoli, hardly a minnow, back in 1961-62, with Ancona the last Serie B finalists back in 1994. The big clubs do suffer in one respect from their dominance, as enthusiasm is dampened by a lack of competition. Last year, Milan's quarter-final win over Carpi was watched by just over 12,000 fans; in 2013, less than 9,000 rattled around the San Siro as Inter beat Bologna. Alessandria, you imagine, would still gladly switch places; despite an unbeaten start to their league campaign, they are already out of this year's Coppa, losing to Perugia in the second round. Their campaign lasted two weeks. Milan's will not begin until January, with four games – three at home – on the road to the final. There's not much romance to be found in a tournament hamstrung by its own unfairness. NM 5) IFAF World Championship The problem with starting a world championship for American football, one might think, is that the United States are rather too good at it, but this potential issue was sidestepped in the inaugural 1999 competition when the USA deliberately withheld from entering. Unfortunately for the organising body, the International Federation of American Football (IFAF), the event was not the spectacle it might have hoped for: only six associations sent a team – Mexico, Japan, Sweden, Australia, Finland and the hosts, Italy – and it culminated in an uninspiring final between Japan and Mexico: 60 minutes of scintillating to and fro ended in a 0-0 draw, with Japan registering the only score in overtime to win the first IFAF World Championship. Things did improve four years later when Japan won in Germany in what, in hindsight, can now be officially labelled the competition's heyday. Since then, the US has ruined Japan and everyone else's fun by entering a team each year and, despite putting heavy restrictions on their own player selection, the US swept to 2007 and 2011 triumphs without defeat. Heading into the 2015 edition, however, the USA's brilliance at their own sport was not the biggest problem. The controversial IFAF president, Tommy Wiking, was involved in organising the event due to be held in his home country, Sweden. But eight months before kick-off, the Swedish association revealed that the funds it had raised to hold the event had mysteriously disappeared; it was also announced that supermarket magnate Wiking would be taking a leave of absence from his role, citing unspecific health reasons. Things then took another odd turn when the IFAF website announced that Wiking would be resigning from his post as head of the international body, only for the plucky Swede to take control of the IFAF website himself, unresign, and tweet that he had been the victim of a coup d'état from within the organisation. A deep rift has since developed in IFAF with some recognising Wiking as their leader and many others answering to his rival, Finland's Roope Noronen, following a stormy annual congress when both claimed to have been elected president. Without funds, the 2015 tournament was hastily moved from Stockholm to the far less international Canton, Ohio's eighth-largest city. Germany, Morocco and others dropped out to reduce the total entrants from a championship-high 12 to an awkward seven, rarely the magic number when it comes to organising a tournament. The hosts USA won the underwhelming affair, of course, to serve a reminder to IFAF that if it ever manages to put on a world championship of American football with a truly global reach, it is unlikely to be very competitive. LO 6) BDO World Darts Championship Held every January at the Lakeside country club in Surrey, the BDO world championship is not such a terrible tournament in itself. It's a straight knockout, devoid of fiddly format changes, with enough seeded players to add structure without stifling a strong outsider's path to glory. The problem with it is more fundamental than that; simply put, it is not a real world championship. By definition, a world champion is the best in the world at their chosen pursuit. With all due respect, Scott 'Scotty 2 Hotty' Waites is not the best darts player in the world. He won the 2016 final, regaining the title from Scott Mitchell (Waites can at least claim to be the best darts player in the world called Scott) but with an average of 87.54. That standard would have resulted in Mitchell being obliterated in the early rounds of the PDC world championship, darts' true blue riband event. Plenty of sports have either split into factions or failed to unite under one banner, but to lend each division credibility, there ought to be either discernible differences (rugby union and league, for instance) or a sense of equilibrium, as seen in the distinct leagues that provide well-matched contenders for the World Series and Super Bowl. That's not the case in darts, where members of the original BDO play the same sport as those in the breakaway PDC but do so less well: a symptom of the latter's exponentially increasing profile since forming in 1992. Virtually every BDO player up to snuff, from Phil Taylor to Raymond van Barneveld, inevitably joins the PDC, a rival body set up by players to maximise darts' earning potential. As the BDO world champion, Waites qualified for this year's Grand Slam of Darts, a chance to pit his wits against the best of the PDC. He lost all three group games. In the last two PDC finals the losers racked up triple-figure averages in front of baying crowds at Alexandra Palace but the talent pool at Lakeside grows ever shallower. That can make for open brackets and unpredictable outcomes, such as the Australian 66-1 outsider Tony David winning in 2002, despite haemophilia affecting his throwing arm. It can also lead to scenes that do the sport no credit: David's countryman Anthony Fleet having a memorable horror show in 2010, and this shambles from 2015. The BDO world championship is still undeniably tough to win and its champions can do no more than overcome the best opponents available to them. Sadly, when that amounts to less than 10% of the best players out there, you end up with a man grinning on stage, holding a trophy that says he's the best in the world, when he knows he is not. Flaws don't come much more fundamental. NM

Un De Sceaux, the 2015 Arkle Trophy winner, will represent Willie Mullins in the Tingle Creek Chase at Sandown Park on Saturday after the trainer decided to withdraw Douvan, the brilliant winner of this season's Arkle back in March, at the final declaration stage on Thursday morning. The absence of Douvan from the final list of runners for Saturday's Grade One event was a blow for ante-post punters who had backed him from 5-1 to 4-7 earlier this week. However, Mullins appeared to suggest on Thursday that the six-year-old had never been a likely runner this weekend, despite claims from bookmakers that "faces" had been backing Douvan which had helped to stoke up the gamble earlier in the week. Boylesports, in particular, reported on Tuesday that "all the people we respect are on". "It was an easy enough decision to make," Mullins said on At The Races. "It was probably Un De Sceaux all the time as he's used to travelling to France and the UK, while Douvan is only a novice going into Grade One company, against horses who are well used to running in Grade Ones. "I had him [Douvan] in the race, but unless he was really sparkling I wasn't going to send him and when I worked him he didn't do enough for me for a big test like that, it's early enough in the season. "The ideal race for Un De Sceaux would have been the Hilly Way [Chase at Cork on Sunday week], but Douvan will go there now. I just want to get Douvan back and we'll take it one race at a time." Un De Sceaux is the favourite for Saturday's race at a top price of 15-8, while Ar Mad, the winner of the Henry VIII Novice Chase over the same course and distance 12 months ago, is a 100-30 chance. Sire De Grugy, who returned to Grade One-winning form in last season's Tingle Creek, is a 7-2 chance, while Gods Own, a Grade One winner at last season's Punchestown Festival, is 5-1. Vibrato Valtat (25-1), another former winner of the Henry VIII Novice Chase, and Sir Valentino, a 40-1 outsider, complete the field.

These are high times for house-hunters of a literary bent. The three-bedroom semi in Shepperton, Surrey, where JG Ballard lived for nearly 50 years has just gone on sale for a relatively modest £475,000, while those stuck in the rental market can console themselves with the Bloomsbury house where Ted Hughes and Sylvia Plath first got together. Hughes, who rued the "unlit and unlovely lavatory" in the poem "18 Rugby Street" might be surprised to find a price tag of £5,850 a month on a property which he described as a stage-set for "the love struggle in all its acts and scenes". Ballard lived in Shepperton from 1960 to 2009 and wrote Crash, Empire of the Sun and other 20th-century classics there. Hughes was merely passing through the "Victorian torpor and squalor" of multi-tenanted 18 Rugby Street, which he recalled in Birthday Letters. Looking at the recent asking prices of authors' former homes, it is striking how well many of them lived. In September, George Eliot's sprawling family home Adam Bede House, near Ashbourne, was listed at £950,000. Last year, Enid Blyton's cottage, Old Thatch in Buckinghamshire, was put on the market for £1.85m, and the Devon home of Henry Williamson (he bought the land for it after winning the £100 Hawthornden prize in 1927 for Tarka the Otter) was offered at £900,000. Agatha Christie's double-fronted mews house in Chelsea was expected to make £2,295,000 in 2013, and in the same year Rudyard Kipling's seaside home, The Elms in Rottingdean, Sussex, went on sale for more than £1.5m. Daphne du Maurier's four bedroom cottage near Fowey, with its Cornish sea views, was marketed at close to £2m in 2011. In 2003, the house in Oxford where Ian McEwan wrote Atonement – complete with blue and gold wallpaper up the staircase – was for sale at £1.35m. There are relative bargains to be had, though, for those on a modern author's budget. In 2011, a house in Tutshill with "Joanne Rowling slept here circa 1982" carved into a wooden windowsill was put up for sale for nearly £400,000. In the same year, John Updike's boyhood home in Shillington, Pennsylvania, was sold on eBay for $499,000 (currently about £361,000).

Until this year's Edinburgh fringe, where comedians grappled on stage with personal trauma as never before, scepticism was rife about the so-called "dead dad" show. Meat-and-potatoes comics used the phrase to cat-call standups who made self-consciously emotional shows with cathartic last acts, implying that these were cynical gestures to woo critics and highbrow fringe audiences. That performances with a narrative arc, about death and emotion, were in some way contrary to the spirit of pure standup. Cariad Lloyd acknowledges that tendency in the intro to her new podcast, entitled Griefcast, in which comedians talk about death. "It's not that easy to talk about death," she says, "but it does help if you've chosen a career designed to hide your true feelings about anything emotional." Is that a workable definition of standup comedy? I'm not sure. It's certainly interesting that Lloyd, herself a terrific comic and improviser, has chosen to conduct these chats only with her professional peers – Sara Pascoe and Adam Buxton (so far) among them. Her reasons aren't fully explained, but she does now and then suggest that grief as experienced by comics (her father died when she was in her teens) is a particular thing. Comedians, she suggests, are by inclination avoiders, displacers, even trivialisers, uniquely ill-equipped to stare into the abyss that bereavement opens up. Maybe there's something in that; perhaps that's why the supposed glut of "dead dad" shows (which was always greatly exaggerated) raised hackles among purist comics – who felt that grief was not a clown's business. In fact, few of those shows addressed grief head-on. Considering the phenomenon, I remembered with a jolt that the show that (in my mind) always seems to best represent it, Des Bishop's extraordinary My Dad Was Nearly James Bond, was created while Bishop's dad was still alive. (He even came on stage for the curtain call.) Michael Bishop died between the show's Edinburgh debut and its London transfer. Not only was it not about grief, but the show became a "dead dad" exemplar only by circumstance. Russell Kane was another comic to parlay his dad's demise into comedy – literally, in that the death of Kane Sr was the precondition for his son's standup career. But Kane, too, discussed his dad's (macho, narrow-minded) life on stage rather than his death. I can't speak for two of the other standout examples: I didn't see Mark Thomas's Bravo Figaro or Jason (Hebburn) Cook's Joy. Sean Hughes's 2012 offering Life Becomes Noises was closer to what Lloyd is trying to achieve with Griefcast, in that it broached the death (rather than the life) of Hughes's dad, if not the process of coping afterwards. So, too, to a degree, John-Luke Roberts's absurdist bouffon take on the genre in 2015, which obliquely dramatised but only glancingly articulated Roberts's conflicted feelings after his dad's death. Few comedy shows (or few I've seen) have grappled with grief to the degree that, say, On the Run's beautiful theatre show So It Goes did in 2014. Maybe Lloyd is right about comedians' emotional avoidance. The best counter-argument may be Jayde Adams, best newcomer nominee at Fringe 2016, and one of Lloyd's four Griefcast interviewees so far. Although it isn't revealed until the show's final third, Adams's current set addresses the death, five years ago, of her big sister. It's not a show specifically about that bereavement but that information, and the tears than accompany it, cast a light on what's gone before, as you realise that Adams's extroversion, her voracious, bordering on aggressive, appetite for life, is profoundly informed by the loss of the sibling in whose shadow she spent her first quarter-century. Adams's show, or sections of it, may be the closest I've seen comedy get to what Lloyd is trying to bottle on her podcast: a comic sensibility not flinching before death, and the related damage it leaves behind. I'm agnostic on the question of whether professional jokers experience death and grief differently from anyone else; I suspect the Griefcast series would be just as compelling (and it is compelling) were its interviewees not all comics. But I agree that all those "dead dad" shows, and comedy more widely, have something valuable to bring to the conversation about grief: an absence or rejection of piety; an impulse to be funny, the shock of which can clear the way for something new; and the reassurance that the sadness isn't indomitable, that there's still laughter in the world. Three to see Lolly Adefope A week's Soho run for the impressive multi-character comic, with her sophomore show addressing the double-bind whereby she gets flak both for addressing race in her work, and for not addressing it. Soho theatre, London, until 3 December. Box office: 020-7478 0100. Jewish comedy festival Four-day festival in north London featuring the Jewish comedian of the year award, a celebration of the "Borscht belt" standup of the 1950s, and performances from acts including fast-risers Desiree Burch and Dane Baptiste. JW3, London, until 4 December. Box office: 020-7433 8988. John Kearns The winner of the 2014 Edinburgh comedy award has kept a low profile since, live comedy-wise – although TV-watchers may have seen him in Top Coppers. Now, he pitches up at Battersea Arts Centre with a bespoke festive show, apparently drawing on recordings he's made of his family Christmas dinners. Battersea Arts Centre, London, 6-10 December. Box office: 020-7223 2223.

The lunches, the parties, the hangovers ... Christmas is wonderful, but the cost can add up. If, on the way to a festive drinks party, you've ever ducked into a corner shop and found yourself scouring the shelves for a generous-looking but not too expensive gift (seriously, who buys those dusty £45 bottles of Bollinger?), you'll know that while leaving things to the last minute does contain a not-unenjoyable frisson of risk, you will pay for it. However, gift-giving doesn't have to be so frenzied: there is a slower way of doing things. People are always happy to receive homemade presents. These gifts cost a fraction of their shop-bought equivalents – even more so if you stash away old glass jars throughout the year – but that's not the only reason to make them. The trick is to take pleasure in the pace. Good things come to those who wait. Orangettes Candied peel costs next to nothing to make ... and only takes an evening. Cost (per 150g): £1.90 homemade v £8.50 at Hotel Chocolat Makes about 300g 4 navel oranges 1kg sugar 150g chocolate (minimum 60% cocoa) 1 Quarter the oranges and remove the flesh so you are just left with the peel and some pith. Slice each peel quarter into 5mm strips. Put the strips in a pan and cover them with water. Bring the pan to the boil, then simmer for 10 minutes. 2 Drain away the water, and cover the peel slices again with fresh water – changing the water in this way gets rid of any bitterness. Bring to the boil again and simmer for 30 minutes, keeping an eye on the water level and popping a lid on the pan if it is evaporating too fast. 3 Drain the slices, but this time keep the water. Decant it into a measuring jug, then pour it back into the pan: for every 100ml of liquid, add 100g of sugar. Put the sugary water over a very gentle heat and once the sugar has dissolved (you can give it a helping hand by stirring) add the peel. Simmer for about 45 minutes or so, until the peel has gone translucent. 4 Allow the peel to cool in the pan while you heat the oven to its lowest setting. Lay the peel evenly on a tray lined with baking parchment, and dry in the oven for 30 minutes. 5 Remove the peel from the oven, sprinkle over some more sugar and gently toss to coat. 6 Break the chocolate into chunks and melt in a heatproof bowl over a pan of simmering water. Leave to cool slightly, then dunk half of each orangette into the chocolate. 7 Leave to cool on baking parchment in the fridge. Keeps for a month in a sealed container. Salted caramel florentines Florentines make the perfect stocking filler, ticking all the festive boxes: fruity, nutty and chocolatey. These have the unnecessary but brilliant addition of salted caramel. As a postprandial pick-me-up, they're hard to beat – we can always find room for one or three. Cost (per 8 units): £2.50 homemade v £7.50 at Melrose &amp; Morgan Makes 14-16 For the salted caramel 30g unsalted butter 50g soft light brown sugar 2 heaped tbsp golden syrup 1 tbsp double cream ½ tsp sea salt For the florentines 60g flaked almonds 50g salted pistachios 50g dried or glacé cherries 1 tbsp plain flour 100-150g milk cooking chocolate, broken up into chunks 1 Preheat the oven to 160C/325F/gas mark 3 and line 2 baking trays with greaseproof paper. 2 Mix the nuts, cherries and flour together in a bowl. 3 Put the butter, sugar and syrup in a saucepan over a low heat for 4-5 minutes until everything melts, stirring occasionally. Once the mixture is bubbling gently, remove from the heat and stir in the cream, then return to the heat and cook for another 3 minutes. Add the salt and stir to combine. Mix in the dry ingredients. 4 Put 4 heaped teaspoonfuls of the mixture on each lined baking tray, allowing them as much space as you can – they will spread a lot. Flatten slightly and make sure each teaspoonful has an equalish amount of nuts and caramel to bind it together. 5 Set a timer and bake for around 12 minutes, keeping a close eye on them. They will start to spread out quickly – if this looks like it's happening too much, take them out, allow them to cool for a moment, then gently poke back into a rough circle, before popping back in the oven. Depending on your oven and where it's hottest, you may also need to turn or switch the trays round during cooking. 6 Remove from the oven, leave to cool slightly then poke back into shape. Once they are firm, transfer to a wire rack and leave to cool completely. Repeat until all the mixture is used up. 7 Melt the chocolate in a heatproof bowl set over a pan of barely simmering water, making sure the water doesn't touch the base of the bowl. 8 Brush the undersides of the cooled and hardened florentines with the melted chocolate. Put in the fridge until set, then brush on another layer of chocolate: it's Christmas, after all. They'll keep for up to a week in a sealed container in the fridge. Marrons glacés These take a few days but require minimal exertion. You can use fresh chestnuts, but cooked are easier to find, and at a similar price to fresh ones, so this recipe skips the boiling and peeling stage. Cost (per 200g): £2.50 homemade v £18.00+ at Venchi Makes about 400g 500g sugar 400g peeled, cooked chestnuts 1 Put the sugar in a pan with 500ml water. Bring to the boil very gently, stirring often at the beginning to dissolve the sugar, then simmer for 10 minutes. Add the chestnuts and simmer gently for a further 10 minutes. Leave the chestnuts in the syrup in the pan to cool completely. 2 The next day, or a few hours later, very slowly bring the mixture to a simmer for no more than a minute. Allow the chestnuts to cool completely in the pan. 3 Repeat this process over the next few days until most of the syrup has been absorbed, then put on a wire rack to drain. If you still have a lot of liquid after the chestnuts have been simmered 4 or 5 times, remove them from the syrup with a slotted spoon. 4 Leave to dry overnight or for a few hours in the oven, at its lowest setting and with the door propped open. Store the chestnuts individually wrapped in recycled toffee wrappers or in little parcels of greaseproof paper. Blackberry vinegar If you haven't been bothering the hedgerows, don't worry – forage in the frozen aisle instead. This fruity vinegar is perfect for zhooshing up salads. Cost (per 200ml): £1.29 homemade v £7.85 by Womersley Makes about 700ml 300g frozen blackberries 500ml cider or white wine vinegar 175g caster sugar 1 Put the blackberries in a large bowl or container and leave to defrost. Mash slightly, then pour in the vinegar, mix together, cover and leave to sit in a cool place for 5-7 days. 2 Strain the mixture through a sieve placed over a bowl. Put the infused vinegar in a saucepan, add the sugar and bring to the boil, stirring occasionally to help it dissolve. Leave to cool, then sieve again to get rid of any foamy bits, and decant into a sterilised bottle. Store in a cool, dark place until needed. It should keep for a couple of months. Orange and cranberry curd Winter food can be heavy, but citrus brings welcome freshness. This curd is best consumed within a few days, so it's perfect for making at the last minute, and would make a suitably celebratory breakfast spread on hot toast. Cost (per 200g): £2.20 homemade v £6.45 at Fortnum &amp; Mason Makes about 500g Juice and zest of 2 large or 3 medium oranges (about 150ml) 75ml pure cranberry juice with no added sugar 220g caster sugar 100g cold unsalted butter, chopped into cubes 3 large eggs 1 Put the juices, zest, sugar and butter into a heatproof bowl over a pan filled with a few centimetres of water, over a medium-low heat. Stir together to combine as the sugar and butter melt. In a separate bowl, whisk the eggs together. 2 Remove the first bowl from the heat. When the contents are warm but not piping hot (you don't want to make scrambled eggs), add the whisked eggs by pushing them through a sieve. Mix together, then return the bowl to the pan over the heat and cook until thickened, stirring occasionally – you might want to increase the heat a little. It could take up to 20 minutes to thicken. 3 When the curd is thick enough to coat the back of a spoon, remove the bowl and leave to cool, then transfer to sterilised jars and chill until needed. It will keep for a week in the fridge. Caroline Craig and Sophie Missing are authors of The Little Book of Lunch (Square Peg, £20) This article contains affiliate links to products. Our journalism is independent and is never written to promote these products although we may earn a small commission if a reader makes a purchase.

Spoiler alert: this article may ruin childhood dreams Christmas is just around the corner, and with it comes excitement about the arrival of Santa. But academics Christopher Boyle from the UK and Kathy McKay from Australia warned against going too far when it comes to the Father Christmas myth. They said the Santa story can lead children to distrust their parents. For many, however, 25 December wouldn't be the same without the big man in red. We asked parents whether they worry about perpetuating the Santa Claus story, or if they feel it's a rite of passage for children. Alfred Piers Walter, 69, from Provence, France: We rented Santas every year to come over on Christmas Eve My children were born in quick succession, from 1988 to 1990. So all three boys are close in age. This meant that Christmas was a big deal – and until my youngest was 11, I would rent a Santa to visit them all. It didn't cost too much, but the quality of the Santas really varied. They would come on Christmas Eve. Some would make a huge effort and really look the part, while others had very poor beards and bad costumes. One guy that really stood out was around 60; he was very magical and convincing. He even carried a decorated wooden stick. To this day, I ask myself whether he was the real deal. Santa would visit for around half an hour, and give the children gifts from his sack. The boys were really excited, and each year they'd make a list of what they wanted. We still have the lists today. Eventually we realised that we couldn't keep renting Santas – and that's when we started sending our children a letter from Father Christmas. In it he said that he couldn't come any more, as younger children needed him more. The kids were not upset by this; they understood. Now my boys are adults, we never talk about the Santa myth. Telling them it was a lie would somehow ruin the magic, even though they are all grown-up. One of my sons is now a father himself and I think he will keep up the tradition with his child. Andrew, 58, from Invergordon: My children think it's odd that other parents pretend Santa is real There wasn't an occasion when we had to sit our boys down and explain that Santa was not real. We just never pretended he was – in the same way we don't pretend that Woody from Toy Story or Batman are real. I don't remember anybody actually accusing us of being bad parents because of this. When the subject cropped up, people were usually a bit shocked. The myth of Santa is so ubiquitous that an alternative approach isn't really considered. Some people have definitely suggested, not necessarily in an unpleasant way, that a child's enjoyment of Christmas might be diminished without belief inSanta. But that's definitely not been the case for us. We have had some wonderful Christmases. In 2004, when the boys were nine and six, we decided to spend Christmas in the middle of a teak forest in southern India. We'd each had a small amount to spend locally on gifts for each other. On Christmas Day they got wooden tops, some sweets, a comic and a ride through the jungle on an elephant. They still say it was their best Christmas ever. The visit to the jungle was part of a six-month round-the-world trip, and by Christmas the boys were already seasoned travellers. Life had taken on a different normality, and presents under a Christmas tree would have been bizarre. Other than a few trips abroad, we have mostly spent Christmas at home. In many respects it's a simple affair. We would put a small bag of goodies by the kids' beds (a couple of small toys, chocolate money, satsumas) that they could have before waking us up. The presents that we gave when we were at home may not always have been the most extravagant, but at the same time we didn't want them to feel too alienated from their mates. Now they are older, we have talked to the boys about not lying about Santa. They think it's odd that parents go along with the pretence. Robbo, 53, from Melbourne: My husband had to tell the children a reindeer kicked him after a mishap one year We had six children; they're now aged from 24 to 34. Christmas was always a huge effort. It involved taking gifts out of hiding, wrapping them, stuffing stockings, hanging them up. On Christmas Eve, all six kids would sleep in the same room, which involved lots of squealing and not much sleeping. We always told them that Santa landed on the roof with his reindeer just before midnight. The older ones were desperate to make the little ones go to sleep before that time. Once we had presents wrapped and children in bed, my husband and I would always have a drink. One Christmas Eve, he started a little early and went to sleep on the couch as soon as the kids were in bed, leaving me to wrap all of the presents. I was furious. When I finished everything, I shook him awake and made him climb over furniture to hang the stockings. One year, he made it to number five before he fell headfirst over the couch and tore the skin from the entire length of his left shin. He must have been in terrible pain, but didn't dare yell out and wake the kids. He continued to hang the last stocking on the wall while bleeding profusely. After this, we went to bed. We woke to lots of squeals in the morning at around 5am. With about four hours of sleep, we joined in their delight. But we were stumped when they asked why there was blood on the floor and how Dad's leg got hurt. Without missing a beat, my husband said: "The reindeer kicked me." Even the older kids were enthralled with that answer. And when they asked later how it really happened, we promised to tell them on their 21st birthdays. Every single one of them has waited for that precious moment to find out what "really happened", so we've had many years of joy from that one moment. Marty, from Sydney: My kids love the lights and tinsel. That's enough We go camping (it's summer in Sydney) and pretty much ignore Christmas. My kids love the lights and tinsel. That's enough. One of our first Santa encounters was with three breakdancers in a shopping mall wearing Santa fat-suits. My daughter was terrified. There's really no point in extending the myth after that. Thanks, boys, you made it easy. I was raised in the Bahá'í faith, but consider myself agnostic, and my wife is from the former Czechoslovakia, where most of the population are atheist and there is no Santa. It's a bit ridiculous to watch grown men in the middle of summer pile on the heavy suit, boots, hat and fake beard – they must shed half their weight in sweat. Jennifer Gibson, from Melbourne: We send our son a personalised video from Santa each year We get our son to write a letter to Santa each year. But we always stress it's just a wish list and he may get other things instead. We also have an advent calendar that we fill ourselves and he can open a door every day with tiny gifts of chocolate, polished stones, key chains etc. We have an outdoor and an indoor tree, too, so it's Christmas wherever you look. We also use an app called Portable North Pole to have a personalised video from Santa detailing what our son has done well this year and what still needs a bit of work. We show this to him a couple of weeks before Christmas. It works really well, and when we play it our son nods and shakes his head along to all the questions and statements about his year. On Christmas Eve we leave Santa a scotch and the reindeer a carrot or an apple on a table by the tree. Finally we check online to see what time Santa leaves the North Pole and how far he has reached before our son goes to bed. Our son has a lot of questions, so we use euphemistic and vague language to deflect them. He will ask things like: "How does he deliver all the presents in one night?" To this we say: "All I know is that kids get presents and adults don't, so maybe when you stop believing you stop receiving." Last year he was six, and he decided not to write to Father Christmas because he says Santa should know what he wants. We suggested he not take the risk and write anyway but he declined, until bedtime on Christmas Eve when a bit of panic had set in that he might get nothing. This year he says he's going to write and has made no mention of not believing – so while he goes along with it, so will we. Santa just leaves a small stocking filled with little items, and the big-ticket items are from us. This is mainly to keep Santa's gifts more equitable with families who have less. Also, why should the big fella take credit for our hard-earned cash?

Ah, Vanilla Ice. Cheeseball rapper, Madonna-fondler and originator of the "white boy fade", the haircut that's taking over the world right now. For men who like to appear as if they haven't thrown money and assorted goo at their hair, the fade is perfect. Pompadour-like at the top and army-short at the back and sides, it looks as if it has taken no time. An easy win, then, and currently worn by those style titans Zayn Malik and Mr Robot's Rami Malek. The trick is not to let your number 2 slip too seamlessly into your number 3 (that's hair parlance, FYI). There should be a distinct point between the crown and the back of the head, but not so much that it looks as if you're wearing a hat.

Indonesian police have arrested eight people for alleged treason including Rachmawati Soekarnoputri, the daughter of Indonesia's founding father, hours before a 200,000-strong protest in Jakarta against its Christian governor on Friday. Basuki Tjahaja Purnama, known as Ahok, has incensed conservative Muslims over allegedly blasphemous comments he made about the Qur'an in an election campaign. Protesters have demanded that the governor, who is to face trial for the remarks, is sent to jail. Police said those arrested had intended to use the protest to stir an uprising against the government. "They had the intention to ask and incite people to overthrow the legitimate government by mobilising the masses," police spokesman Boy Rafli Amar told reporters. The case of Ahok, who is a member of the country's ethnic Chinese Indonesian minority, has opened up a political Pandora's box said "Jail Ahok, the law must be fair", demonstrators marched through the streets for the second time in a month. Rachmawati reportedly held a press conference on Thursday in which she called upon those joining Friday's protest to occupy the parliament building. Ahmad Dhani, a rock star and political hopeful who accompanied Rachmawati on Thursday, was arrested on the same charges. Hours before the anti-Ahok protest, police announced that eight people had been arrested for suspected treason. "Eight people have been arrested and are undergoing interrogation by the Jakarta police. We will wait for the interrogation results," national police spokesman Insp Gen Boy Rafli Amar said on Friday. Two others were arrested for alleged crimes under Indonesia's electronic information law. Police did not immediately release the full names of those arrested but a lawyer for Rachmawati, the daughter of Indonesia's first president, confirmed she was among them. She is the younger sister of Megawati Soekarnoputri – a former president herself, and the political patron of the current president, Joko Widodo. "Yes, she has been arrested. Police officers arrived at her home at 5am and took her at 6am," said lawyer Aldwin Rahardian. It is believed that two former generals, Kivlan Zein and Adityawarman, and activist Sri Bintang Pamungkas, were also among those arrested for alleged treason. Under the Indonesian criminal code, treason carries a maximum life sentence. Ahok supporters say that in the world's largest Muslim-majority nation, his case is a test of the country's commitment to pluralism and tolerance. Others have suggested the protests point to rising religious conservatism, or nefarious political moves to undermine the president. But Aleksius Jemadu, a professor from Pelita Harapan University in Jakarta, said Friday's arrests should not be a great cause for concern. "It's good the government has been firm in establishing the rule of law so those accused of bad intentions to change the government, or to topple the government, should be held responsible for what they planned to do," he said. "In the eyes of the public it's good the government has been firm in order to ensure the supremacy of law." Crowds had started to thin by the afternoon after the peaceful protest on Friday, but a demonstration against the governor turned violent after dark last month, with protesters burning several police trucks and officers using teargas to disperse the crowd. Demonstrators had called on the president to come and meet them, a demand that was ignored. In an apparent move to appease the crowd on Friday, Widodo joined prayers at the national monument, commending the peaceful gathering and encouraging people to go home safely.

1. Voters were making a protest about Brexit – but were not necessarily voting against Theresa May's Brexit Zac Goldsmith triggered the byelection so he could stand as an independent and register his opposition to a Heathrow third runway, but the Lib Dems neutralised that by saying they would oppose the Heathrow third runway just as strongly. Instead they invited voters to use the byelection to vote against "hard" Brexit and in favour of a second referendum. But Lib Dems who campaigned in the seat admit many people supported them not because they were opposed to what May and David Davis are doing but because they wanted to vote against the entire 23 June referendum result. In other words, it may well have been more of a vote against Vote Leave than a vote against the Conservative government. 2. The government's working majority is now down to 13 Assuming that Zac Goldsmith would have voted with the government on everything apart from Heathrow, that's a reduction from 15. That does not help, but it is not in itself too disastrous for May. 3. Byelection losses can put pressure on governments to change policy, but there are two good reasons why there is little chance of that happening here Leaders fear losing seats in byelections not so much because their majority is reduced but because, if all their MPs start getting scared that they too will lose their seats because of, say, the poll tax or abolishing the 10p rate of income tax or whatever, the parliamentary party becomes unmanageable. But May is unlikely to face a delegation of MPs coming to see her to tell her that she must change course over Brexit. Why? Firstly, this may well have been more of a vote against Brexit than against "hard" Brexit. And secondly, Richmond Park is one of the most pro-remain seats in the country. It is estimated that 72% of people there voted remain (compared with the national figure of 48%). This figure is based on research by the academic Chris Hanretty (the referendum results were announced by local authority area, not by parliamentary constituency, which meant Hanretty had to devise a formula to convert one into the other). On the Today programme, John Humphrys said Richmond Park had the 17th highest remain vote. This Hanretty chart shows only eight English seats with higher remain votes. Few Tory MPs will worry about a remain backlash as strong as the one in Richmond Park. 4. The result will embolden Lib Dem MPs and peers, because they can now claim to have a mandate to oppose a 'hard' Brexit and to push for a second referendum Sarah Olney's election takes the number of Lib Dem MPs in the Commons from eight to nine, and the Tory Jacob Rees-Mogg was right to dismiss them as a relatively puny Commons force. But they have 104 peers in the Lords, where their impact can be decisive, and Richmond Park will make those peers feel more confident about amending the bill parliament may have to pass to trigger article 50. 5. The Lib Dems have also received a fillip nationally. One byelection win by itself will not revive the party, which is still doing dreadfully in national polls. It was at just 7% in the Guardian/ICM poll this week. But there was a fear the party had become toxic during the coalition. Richmond Park shows it can attract new voters in significant numbers. 6. The chances of an early election seem more remote There may be relatively few Tory MPs worried about the Brexit implications of the byelection. But at the last election 27 Tories won seats from the Lib Dems, and a swing on the scale achieved by Olney (21.5 points) would see many of them lose to a Lib Dem challenger. A 2017 general election now looks riskier. 7. Tactical voting is back Many of the Lib Dem byelection victories in the 1990s were achieved because the party found it easy to get Labour supporters to vote tactically for it against the Tories, and that seems to have been happening in Richmond Park. Labour fielded a strong candidate, Christian Wolmar, but his vote collapsed. Tactical voting seems the obvious explanation, which is why the result does not really tell us anything about Labour and Jeremy Corbyn, despite Tim Farron's attempts to claim otherwise. 8. The result may raise questions about the need for a 'progressive alliance' On the left there has been increasing interest in the idea that progressive parties should form electoral pacts in some seats so that the party best placed to defeat the Tories gets a free run. The Greens adopted this approach in Richmond Park, and they are suggesting it worked. Labour's decision not to adopt this approach was controversial. But Labour supporters voted tactically anyway, suggesting that perhaps formal "stand aside" deals are unnecessary. 9. Parties still matter enormously Some commentators claim traditional political parties are dying, and that the future belongs to insurgent outsiders like Donald Trump. But in the UK at least, it is virtually impossible to win an election without having a party machine behind you. Goldsmith's supporters believe that one of the main reasons he lost was that, once he decided to stand as an independent, he lost access to the activist support and voter ID data that are essential tools for victory in a contest like this. In terms of volunteer numbers, he was overwhelmed by the Lib Dems. 10. Negative campaigning can backfire Anecdotal evidence suggests some people were motivated to vote against Goldsmith because they have not forgiven him for what was perceived as the Islamophobic tone of his campaign against Sadiq Khan in the London mayoral contest. It was probably a marginal factor, but one he may reflect on. Over the last 12 months Goldsmith has seen his career crash spectacularly, losing two elections, one of which (Richmond Park) he was confident of winning until very recently. Students of May's summer purge of the Cameroons will note that this is another metropolitan Etonian who has crashed out of politics.

In April, Donald Trump pledged "at some point, I'll be so presidential that you people will be so bored." Despite being president-elect, it seems that particular pivot has yet to come. On the first day of his self-described "thank you tour", Trump returned to his bombastic style on the stump at a half-full arena in Cincinnati. He bashed Hillary Clinton to chants of "lock her up" from the rowdy crowd while settling scores with the media and former rivals as well as announcing the nomination of former marine general James Mattis to be secretary of defense. The event came at the start of an unprecedented victory tour where Trump will hold campaign-style rallies across the country. Often, however, Trump still seemed to be fighting the campaign. He reminisced, "We did have a lot of fun fighting Hillary, didn't we?" to chants of "lock her up" while criticizing conservative critics. The president-elect launched an attack on Evan McMullin, his independent, conservative third-party rival in the campaign: "What the hell was he trying to prove? I guess he wanted us to lose the supreme court." Trump didn't mention McMullin by name and simply called him "that guy". The president-elect also expressed his displeasure towards Ohio's Republican governor, former presidential rival John Kasich. Trump said of his win over Kasich in the Buckeye State: "We didn't have much help at the top levels, and it turned out it didn't matter," and noted how Kasich eventually gave him a congratulatory phone call after the election. The Ohio governor didn't vote for his party's nominee and instead wrote in John McCain on election day. In a tweet, Kasich strategist John Weaver indirectly returned fire: "No tour, but thankful every day @JohnKasich shows us the #twopaths way with honor &amp; integrity. #ItIsALongRoadWithoutATurn." The president-elect also teased the crowd with his long-expected announcement that Mattis was his choice to head the Pentagon. "I don't want to tell you to this, I refuse to tell you, don't let it outside of this room. I will not tell you that one of our great, great generals, don't let it outside, we are going to appoint Mad Dog Mattis as our secretary of defense, and we're not announcing it until Monday so don't tell it to anybody." Trump also gave his usual tirade against "the dishonest media" and expressed his displeasure that it took television networks until after midnight on election day to call his win in Pennsylvania. Trump went on to boast of his win in the electoral college, but not the popular vote: "We won in a landslide. We didn't have the press, the press was brutal." Trump began the rally with broad attacks on what he termed "globalism". "There is no global anthem, no global currency," he said. "We pledge allegiance to one flag, and that flag is the American flag." Trump added: "Global is wonderful, but right now we want to focus on our national community." The president-elect also cast blame for terrorist attacks on the admission of refugees into the United States. "These are threats that are stupidly created by our stupid politicians' refugee programs," Trump said. The venue was the same location where a packed house rained down boos towards the media at a Trump rally in mid-October. This time, the disdain for the press was far less visible in an arena that was half empty, in part because road closures due to the president-elect's visit tied up traffic in the area. The rally happened as top staffers for every presidential candidate's campaign met at Harvard's institute of politics to discuss the campaign, resulting in fiery exchanges between former Clinton staffers and Trump aides. In one instance, Clinton's former communications director, Jennifer Palmeiri, told Trump's campaign manager, Kellyanne Conway: "If providing a platform for white supremacists makes me a brilliant tactician, I am proud to have lost. I would rather lose than win the way you guys did." Conway was also asked about Trump's recent untrue tweets about voter fraud. She said, "He's president-elect so that's presidential behavior." If so, it means being presidential may not be so boring after all.

Andrew Sachs, the actor best known for playing Manuel the bemused Spanish waiter abused by John Cleese's bullying hotelier in the BBC comedy series Fawlty Towers, has died aged 86. Cleese led tributes to his co-star, describing him as a "brilliant farceur" and a "sweet, sweet man". Sachs's wife, Melody Lang, revealed that he died in a care home last week after suffering from vascular dementia for four years. "My heart has been broken every day for a long time," she said, explaining that she had collapsed while caring for her husband. Nevertheless, she said they were happy, adding that she "never once heard him grumble". Sachs, whose father was a Jewish insurance broker, was born in Berlin before his family fled the Nazis to settle in Britain. He became a household name in Britain as the hapless Manuel in the 1970s sitcom. Worried that he could not do a Spanish accent, Sachs initially wanted to play the role as a German. But Cleese, who played Basil Fawlty, insisted that the character should be Spanish. He said despite his anxiety Sachs took to the role instantly. Speaking to BBC Radio 4's Today programme, Cleese said: "If you met him you would never think for a moment that he was a comedian, you would think he was a rather cultivated bank manager possibly retired, because he was quite quiet and poised and thoughtful. And then you stuck that moustache on him and he turned into a completely different human being. He was wonderful." He added: "He is one of the easiest to work with. Not just in the sense that he was totally agreeable – he was a very nice sweet man – but he was just a brilliant farceur. It was so easy for us to work out all the physical business. Farce is the hardest form of acting." Sachs tried to persuade Cleese to stop short of physical violence during rehearsals and the scenes. But he still ended up being frequently hit, often with spoons. He also suffered acid burns from chemicals used to produced smoke in a memorable scene when Manuel's white waiter's jacket caught fire in the Fawlty Towers kitchen. Speaking of his on-screen chemistry with Sachs, Cleese said: "It's like playing tennis with someone who is exactly as good as you are. And you play with them every week, sometimes he wins and sometimes you win, but somehow there is a rapport. It comes from the very deepest part of ourselves. We never had to work at it, it all happened so easily." He said his favourite scene with Sachs was when Manuel and Basil tried to hide a dead hotel guest in a laundry basket. He said: "I think that was some of our very best physical comedy. Working out all that stuff about getting the body into the basket and then getting it out again. That was so much fun." Cleese said he was aware that Sachs had dementia. "I met him about eight or nine months ago. I realised then that although he was there, a very quiet sweet presence, he obviously wasn't totally present." He added: "Very sad. He was a sweet, sweet man. And it's still a little bit of shock, because, although I knew his memory was not so good, he was very special." Earlier, Cleese tweeted a series of tributes to Sachs. The director of BBC content, Charlotte Moore, also paid tribute to the "wonderful actor". She added: "He will be fondly remembered for his many appearances across television and radio, not least for making the nation laugh in the classic role of Manuel. He entertained millions across a brilliant career and will be greatly missed." Speaking to the Daily Mail, Lang said her husband was diagnosed with vascular dementia in 2012. The condition left him in a wheelchair and unable to speak. "It wasn't all doom and gloom," she said. "He still worked for two years. We were happy, we were always laughing, we never had a dull moment. He had dementia for four years and we didn't really notice it at first until the memory started going. "It didn't get really bad until quite near the end. I nursed Andrew, I was there for every moment of it. Dementia is the most awful illness. It sneaks in in the night, when you least expect it. It took a long time for Andy's brain to go. Even about a month before he died, he was sitting in the garden and chatting away." She added: "Don't feel sorry for me because I had the best life with him. I had the best husband and we really loved each other ... We were married for 57 years, we loved each other very deeply and it was a pleasure looking after him. I miss him terribly." She said her husband died on 23 November and his family and friends attended his funeral on Wednesday. And she paid tribute to her husband, saying he was a "very handsome guy" who "always looked gorgeous". She added: "Everybody says it but it's true, he's one of the nicest people I've met in my entire life. He's loved and respected and the public adore him." He would go on to play Ramsay Clegg in Coronation Street in 2009 – a year after the scandal in which Jonathan Ross and Russell Brand left the BBC after a prank call to him on the radio about his granddaughter. But he slipped from public life as his illness took hold. Blackadder actor and comedian Sir Tony Robinson paid tribute to his "true friend". Samuel West, whose mother, Prunella Scales, starred alongside Sachs in Fawlty Towers, added: "Creator of one of our most beloved EU migrants. Such warmth and wit; impossible to think of him without smiling." The comedy writer and director Edgar Wright said Sachs "spun comic gold as Manuel in Fawlty Towers". The Jewish group Jewish Voice criticised the Daily Mail for putting a picture of Andrew Sachs on its front page next to its lead story about a rise in migrant numbers. It tweeted:

Ride are set to release their first album in more than 20 years. The four-piece band, who re-formed in 2014, will finally follow up 1996's Tarantula with a new record in 2017. The news was broken online by DJ Erol Alkan, who revealed that he would be producing the new record. In an Instagram post of the band in the studio, Alkan wrote: "Currently in the studio with Ride producing their forthcoming album." Ride formed in 1988 and were once regarded as leading lights in the shoegaze scene with two Top 5 albums in the early 90s. They split in 1996 after relationships frayed during the Tarantula sessions. The band briefly regrouped in 2001 for a televised live performance, while Andy Bell went on to form Hurricane No 1 and then joined Oasis as bassist. In an interview in 2015, singer Mark Gardener told the Guardian that they were open to writing new material if the atmosphere was right. He said: "Last year, when we were talking, we all chose the Going Blank Again time as when we were all really enjoying it, all really together, and that was the feeling we wanted to feed from and get back to that way of working. Especially if, in the future, there's going to be more recording, then that's the way we want to do it, to recreate that and work like that again."

I, Daniel Blake, Ken Loach's study of a working man's descent into poverty and despair while battling to receive disability benefit, has rightly caused disquiet at the ways the systems and services established to provide welfare can instead cause misery. Many who work in society's "safety net" – social workers among them – have tried since the film's release to show that they are shoulder-to-shoulder with people who have been disempowered. As the film was being created, released and watched, the British Association of Social Workers' adults policy, practice and ethics group was attempting to address some of these issues. We set up a working group led by the national network of service users and disabled people, Shaping Our Lives, whose aim was to produce a charter to ensure disabled adults and social workers work together to improve wellbeing. This charter [pdf] sets out how we can work together to tackle the physical, social, economic and other barriers to independent living, so disabled adults have the same choices, control and freedom as any other citizen – at home, at work and as members of the community. The working group emerged from some uncomfortable conversations between disabled people and social workers over the past year. We talked honestly about how powerless both parties could feel and how badly we can sometimes relate to one another. One disabled member of the working group described the social care process as "hideous", saying "you want to prove what you can do and then have to prove what you can't do". Social workers in turn acknowledged the impact of bureaucratic pressures at work. "There are targets for one week to sign off assessments," explained one, "it's not long enough for people." But we also discussed how things could be if we were able to put values back at the centre of social work and prioritise conversations about ability and rights, rather than focusing on what we aren't able to achieve. This was summed up as "think big – be ambitious for each other". This small group of disabled activists and social workers decided that together we wanted to create something that would help us work better in partnership. One disabled person summarised this brilliantly: "I want my social worker to feel that she's not burdened and constrained by her environment and that I am not by mine – this binds us together." We are hopeful our resulting charter can provide a foundation for lasting change in the relationship between disabled people and social workers. We are making a case for disabled people and social workers to join forces so that we can tackle barriers together, recognising how much we have in common. Despite the very real pressure on services, when we work together we can achieve so much more. Some of the suggestions in the charter are simple and inexpensive: we will be honest about what is possible and what is not, for example. Others require sustained effort and support to promote rights and secure access to services and opportunities. We are calling on people to use the social model of disability – which says that disability is caused by the way society is organised rather than by a person's individual differences – and urge social workers to always begin with a human rights-based approach. We want people to use the charter to lobby for change and improvement at national and local level, and to get involved in joint action to improve disabled people's rights and lives. The charter ends by stating: "We will not be satisfied until everyone has full and equal citizenship." We don't know how long this will take. But we do know that this is what all of us should be entitled to. Ultimately, this is about recognising each other as fellow humans – we could all be Daniel Blake. Join the Social Care Network to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare) and like us on Facebook to keep up with the latest social care news and views.

Film Chi-Raq The debut offering from Amazon's big-screen arm gets its cinematic release this week. Spike Lee's latest relocates the classical Greek play Lysistrata to modern-day Chicago, for a satire with a timely message. When a child is accidentally shot dead, the title character, played by Mad Men's Teyonah Parris, organises the women of the city's South Side to pressure the men into putting an end to their violence by withholding sex. Big, bold and controversial, Chi-Raq tackles gun crime in the age of Black Lives Matter through sideways means, and boasts a starry cast including Samuel L Jackson and Jennifer Hudson. On general release from Friday 9 Dec Comedy A John Kearns Christmas A new project from the fake-toothed Edinburgh award-winning comic: a show based on his family's Christmas dinners past. It promises stories about buses and cod, among others. From 6-10 Dec, Battersea Arts Centre, SW11 Ricky Gervais In some ways, Ricky Gervais's career trajectory has been textbook: the critical acclaim; the cracking of the US; the slide into deeply unsettling levels of self-indulgence. Yet he's also seemed like a comedy outsider at times, at least in part thanks to his apparently graftless sideways move into standup comedy stardom post-Office. So it will be intriguing to see a potentially rusty Gervais return to the live stage after six years, warming up for his new tour Humanity. First announced in 2012 and finally set to materialise in full next year, tickets for the show proper are available now. At Royal Theatre, Bath on Sunday 4 Dec Games The Last Guardian After nine years in development, the spiritual sequel to revered video games Ico and Shadow Of The Colossus is finally released this week. The tale of a young boy exploring a magical castle accompanied by Trico, a giant griffin/dog (pictured, above), this painterly Japanese action-puzzler is one of the year's most eagerly anticipated releases – if only to find out whether or not it was worth the wait. Out on Friday 6 Dec Books The Daily Show (The Book) Missing the Jon Stewart-fronted version of The Daily Show? Us too, but this mammoth oral history should help ease the pain, with insight from Samantha Bee, John Oliver and Stewart himself. On sale now Television Westworld Triumphantly picking up the water cooler-chat baton from Game Of Thrones, HBO's handsome and pensive thriller has gradually unfurled a labyrinthine plot over nine masterful episodes. Now for the finale, and there are plenty of threads to pick up, not least whether Maeve can finally raise her army of cowpoke simulacrums, take revenge on her creators and escape the park. On Tuesday, 9pm, Sky Atlantic Events Granada @ 60 Manchester's Granada TV celebrates its 60th anniversary with a season of screenings. On offer is a retrospective of its beloved kids' TV output featuring a talk on Children's Ward with one of the show's writers, Russell T Davies, plus screenings of vintage current affairs show World In Action and, of course, the jewel in the Granada crown: Coronation Street. From 3-12 Dec, HOME, Manchester Theatre Hedda Gabler The Affair star Ruth Wilson (pictured, above) leads a new production of Ibsen's 1891 classic at the National, taking on the title role previously portrayed by the likes of Diana Rigg, Ingrid Bergman and Glenda Jackson on stage and screen. This time around, the tale of twisted antiheroine Gabler is brought to life by Belgian director Ivo van Hove, latterly of David Bowie musical Lazarus. Starts Monday 5 Dec, National Theatre, SE1 Exhibitions Zaha Hadid The renowned Iraqi-British architect, who died in March of this year, is celebrated in this new exhibition at the Serpentine Sackler, a building she herself designed. This new show focuses on Hadid's earlier, rarely seen drawings and paintings from the 1970s to the 1990s, offering a fascinating window into the mind of an ambitious and visionary creator. From 8 Dec-12 Feb, Serpentine Sackler, W2 Music Jorja Smith The hotly tipped teen soulster released her debut EP, Project 11, last month, mixing piano balladry par excellence with smart future R&amp;B, and including collaborations with musician Maverick Sabre and film-maker Thea Gajic. Currently on tour: London, Manchester and Birmingham

1 Dave Despite a rather ordinary moniker, there's good reason to pay attention to this young rapper from Streatham. Firstly, he's been longlisted for the BBC Sound of 2017 poll. Secondly, he lists everyone from Pink Floyd to Hans Zimmer as influences, ensuring tracks such as JKYL+HYD and AJ Tracey collaboration Thiago Silva stand out. You won't be confusing him with Gary or Steve. Camden Assembly, NW1, Fri 2 Low: A Christmas Performance Thanks to their 1999 Christmas EP, Low are inextricably linked to the festive season. It wasn't exactly loaded with party jams (unless a slowcore rendition of Silent Night is your idea of a banger), so expect these shows to be low on Baileys-fuelled raucousness and high on hushed reverence. Brighton, Sat; London, Mon &amp; Tue; Bristol, Wed; Salford, Thu; Halifax, Fri; touring to 14 Dec 3 Lissie The Illinois songwriter's last album documented her move from the shallow LA scene to the more rural pleasures of Ojai, and did so in tones so husky you imagine her idol Stevie Nicks would approve. She brings her bohemian, west coast tales across the country this week. Birmingham, Sat; Portsmouth, Sun; London, Tue; Brighton, Wed; Norwich, Thu; touring to 14 Dec 4 Pixies Brixton Academy is a legendary venue for Pixies, who not only played there in their 1991 pomp but also sold out a run of comeback shows in 2004. Their current UK tour has brought them back once more and they'll be returning again this week as they round things off. Newcastle upon Tyne, Sat; Manchester, Sun; London, Tue; Cardiff, Wed; Birmingham, Thu 5 Nicolas Jaar The avant-electronic musician has said in the past that his favourite venues are the ones in which the architecture suits the music, especially Berlin's Berghain, which he described as a "church for music". Here's hoping our nation's structural foundations can handle him. Old Granada Studios, Manchester, Mon; Heaven, WC2, Tue &amp; Wed

Volga Linen bib apron A tip from Cook fave Jeremy Lee, these are aprons to make you stand up straight and cook like a legend. Available in many hues, though the Chinese yellow is where it's at for us. volgalinen.co.uk, £49 EXP Multi Tone mug The priciest items on our list are actual artworks. Peter Shire has been making these playful, sculptural ceramics since the 1970s, but they are absolutely having a moment right now. momosanshop.com, £62 Cuisinart Mini Prep Pro food processor Not a day goes by without Cook needing to use one of these. And its diminutive size means having it out won't clutter up your counter. cuisinart.co.uk, £40 Brass scissors by Hay Solid and pleasingly simple, these are as easy on the fingers as they are on the eyes. hauslondon.com, £9 Crane cookware As sturdy as Le Creuset – and burnproof, to boot. A minimalist cook's dream. cranecookware.com; frying pan £85, casserole £135 Muji stainless steel sieve and bowl The sieve doubles up as a colander and fits its bowl snugly; you can use a couple at a time without handle clash. Stashed away, they take up no more space than a stack of bowls. muji.eu; sieve £12.95, bowl £6.95 Kana Basic White bowls Comfortingly rustic to the touch and visually subtle – vessels to make your food shine bright. kanalondon.com, £16-£40 Land of Fish and Rice, Fuchsia Dunlop Another tome to travel with; Dunlop's prose is as masterful as her Chinese: unbeatably authentic. Bloomsbury, £26 The A-Z of Eating, Felicity Cloake An adventurous cooking primer from the person who's perfected the recipe for just about everything. Fig Tree, £25 Fresh India, Meera Sodha Sodha's second book confirmed what we sensed from the first: her's is the tastiest, liveliest, spice-infused fare this side of the Sabamarti river. Extra points for the vegetarian focus. Fig Tree, £20 Weck jars Exactly what any budding preserver needs: glass lids so nothing rusts, wide mouths for easy filling, and shapes for all purposes. twentytwentyone.com, £4.50-£6 Paul Hollywood stainless steel dough cutter Perfect for cutting dough, yes, but also for measuring slices, scraping surfaces, gathering choppings ... its uses are legion, and its price is just right. johnlewis.com, £6.99 Shino Takeda spoons Each little work of art is a tiny stub of a spoon (and a surprisingly useful thing). We don't just want one. We want them all, in a row. momosanshop.com, £14-£24 The Nordic Cook Book, Magnus Nilsson Not so much a cookbook as an encyclopedia of tastes from a part of the world you instantly – from page one – want to travel the length and breadth of. Phaidon, £29.95 Food for All Seasons, Oliver Rowe A beautifully illustrated personal memoir of a year of eating good platefuls. To shelve alongside Nigel Slater's Kitchen Diaries. Faber &amp; Faber, £20 East London Food, Rosie Birkett A snapshot of an exhilaratingly alive part of London's food scene. Nuno Mendes lovingly wrote the intro. We delightedly put it on our shelf. Hoxton Mini Press, £28 Everything I Want to Eat, Jessica Koslow Recipes from Sqirl, the LA hotspot that everyone seems to want to go to – don't miss the ricotta toast and the sorrel pesto rice bowl. Abrams, £21.99 This article contains affiliate links to products. Our journalism is independent and is never written to promote these products although we may earn a small commission if a reader makes a purchase.

Intimate photographs of Madonna's wedding to her first husband Sean Penn are among the lots up for auction at the pop singer's star-studded benefit show in Miami on Friday night. The three photographs taken by Herb Ritts in Malibu in 1985 will be sold, along with prints from Madonna's infamous 1992 book Sex and artwork by Tracey Emin from the superstar's private collection, to raise funds for her Raising Malawi organisation. Comedian James Corden will be master of ceremonies at the event, billed as "an evening of music, art and mischief", in which Madonna will revive her bawdy cabaret show, Tears of a Clown, first performed in Australia earlier this year. The singer shared a photo of herself dressed in a pink clown suit on Instagram earlier this week to tease her performance at the Faena Forum in Miami Beach. Other lots up for auction include a private game of poker with actors Edward Norton and Jonah Hill, a week in Leonardo DiCaprio's Palm Springs home, a private dinner performance by the magician David Blaine, and artworks by Ai Weiwei, Richard Prince, Cindy Sherman, Julian Schnabel, Marilyn Minter and Damien Hirst. But the chance to mingle with celebrity guests, including Sean Penn, comedian Chris Rock and singer Ariana Grande, comes at a high price, with tickets starting at $5,000 for seating at the event and rising to $150,000 for a "philanthropist package" that includes a premium table for 10, access for four people to a VIP cocktail reception and a photograph with Madonna. Lapo Elkann, the 39-year-old grandson of Giovanni Agnelli, the late billionaire industrial magnate who was chief executive and controlling owner of Fiat, has donated a customised Fiat 500 described in the auction catalogue as "a car inspired by Madonna that invokes the Miami of over-the-top style, baroque prints, glitz and glamor". Elkann, has recently been charged with falsifying his own kidnapping as part of an alleged ploy for ransom money, according to police in New York City. The event comes amid Art Basel Miami Beach, the biggest art fair in North America, which attracts super-rich art collectors and celebrities from across the world. Guests will also have the opportunity to bid on a trip to Malawi with Madonna, a portrait session with photography duo Mert Alas and Marcus Piggott, and the star's Swarovski crystal encrusted flapper dress, as worn on her Rebel Heart tour. The singer's first Tears of a Clown concert, in Melbourne, saw her enter the stage riding a tiny tricycle and singing a cover of Stephen Sondheim's Send in the Clowns. Over the two-hour show, she recalled visiting her mother's grave, tearfully discussed losing custody of her 16-year-old son, Rocco, to her second ex-husband Guy Ritchie, and visiting her then-husband Penn in jail. The auction of Madonna and Penn's wedding private photos – jointly donated by the pair – reflects their renewed friendship in recent years. Their four-year marriage was beset by rows and his clashes with the paparazzi. At their wedding ceremony in 1985, Penn scrawled "Fuck off" in the sand at the media helicopters flying overhead. All proceeds from the evening will benefit Raising Malawi, the non-profit organisation founded by Madonna in 2006, which is building a new paediatric surgery and intensive care unit in the country, named after the singer's adopted daughter, Mercy James, set to open next year. "Founding Raising Malawi is one of the most meaningful things I have done in my life," said Madonna. "Raising Malawi's evening of art, music and mischief at Art Basel will support our latest project to establish Malawi's first paediatric surgery and intensive care unit. I'm excited to give others the opportunity to be part of this undertaking that will ultimately save lives and help the children of Malawi." "This fundraiser is critical to supporting Raising Malawi's goal of improving access to high quality pediatric healthcare in Malawi, one of the poorest countries in the world," said Sarah Ezzy, executive director of Global Philanthropy Group, which manages Raising Malawi.

Ten of the best theatre shows this week 1 Strictly Ballroom Expect the dancefloor to sizzle with the UK premiere of this musical version of Baz Luhrmann's hit film. The story of success against adversity set in the highly competitive world of ballroom dancing will spring few surprises. No matter, because with the brilliant Olivier award-winning Drew McOnie both directing and choreographing this is likely to set sparks flying. LG West Yorkshire Playhouse, Leeds, to 21 Jan 2 Bollywood Jack Tara Arts marks its first Christmas in its new permanent home in Earlsfield with an Asian take on a familiar tale. The company already has panto previous with versions of Dick Whittington and Cinderella, and now offers a version of Jack And The Beanstalk, written by Farrukh Dhondy and directed by artistic director Jatinder Verma, making his debut at the venue. MC Tara Arts, SW18, Wed to 7 Jan 3 Sweet Charity Sweet Charity is one of the most iconic musical films of the 60s, starring Shirley MacLaine and featuring the stunning choreography of Bob Fosse. Derek Bond (who returns to Manchester after a praised Little Shop Of Horrors), directs the struggles of dancehall hostess Charity Hope Valentine to find love in New York, while Aletta Collins choreographs such showstoppers as Big Spender and The Rhythm Of Life. MC Royal Exchange Theatre, Manchester, Sat to 28 Jan 4 Peter Pan You are never too old to fly to Neverland, and JM Barrie's masterpiece continues to both delight and horrify in equal measure. Sally Cookson's free-flying, brilliantly playful version was first seen at Bristol Old Vic in 2012, and unlike its eponymous antihero it should have matured very nicely in this revised version. Cookson gives Wendy a more central place in the story and there's plenty of cross-dressing, including Anna Francolini's Captain Hook. LG Olivier, SE1, to 4 Feb 5 Cinderella Besides its live Sunday-night TV variety show of the 50s and 60s, the London Palladium was also known from 1948 to 1987 for its pantomimes. Now, nearly 30 years on, panto returns to the iconic venue with a star-stuffed Cinderella. Natasha J Barnes – Sheridan Smith's acclaimed understudy in Funny Girl – plays the title role, joining Paul O'Grady, Julian Clary, Amanda Holden, Nigel Havers and Count Arthur Strong. MC London Palladium, W1, 10 Dec to 15 Jan 6 Annie Get Your Gun Things go both wild and west in Sheffield, where the brilliant Anna-Jane Casey stars as sharpshooting Annie Oakley. It's an unashamedly old-fashioned show but it should be whip-crackingly good fun with songs including There's No Business Like Show Business and Anything You Can Do. Following the departure to Chichester Festival Theatre of Daniel Evans, who always delivered a bullseye of a festive show, the Crucible will be aiming straight for the heart with this one. LG Crucible, Sheffield, Fri to 21 Jan 7 Saint Joan Until recently, Gemma Arterton (pictured, right) was best known for her film career, but her latter forays on to the stage have seen her theatrical star rise in productions including Made In Dagenham, which earned her an Evening Standard best newcomer award. Now she tackles a more meaty role – last played by Anne-Marie Duff at the National, so no pressure – as Joan of Arc in George Bernard Shaw's powerful state v church drama. MC Donmar Warehouse, WC2, Fri to 18 Feb 8 Simon Callow With those fruity tones – like a Christmas pudding – Simon Callow (pictured, below) is the go-to actor for all things seasonal, and he's more than familiar with Dickens, too, having written two well-received books about the author. With his one-man version of A Christmas Carol, all our Christmases have come at once. MC Arts Theatre, WC2, Thu to 7 Jan 9 The Siege Of Christmas Contact Young Company comes together with Slung Low's Alan Lane to make a Christmas show with a difference. Taking children and adults on a journey around the theatre, this is an interactive adventure in which everyone must work together. Lane had terrific fun with 59 Minutes To Save Christmas at the Barbican a few years back, so this should be one of the most original Christmas shows around. LG Contact, Manchester, 15 to 22 Dec 10 Black Beauty Make sure hankies are at the ready when you saddle up for this new version of Anna Sewell's classic story. Three of Scotland's finest theatre-makers for young audiences – Shona Reppe, Andy Manley and Andy Cannon – reimagine the story from the point of Black Beauty himself, using storytelling, puppetry and music. LG Traverse Theatre, Edinburgh, to 24 Dec Three of the best dance shows this week 1 The Nutcracker A welcome return for Sir Peter Wright's engagingly lively but fully traditional version of the Christmas classic, brought to life by Birmingham Royal Ballet. JM Birmingham Hippodrome, to 13 Dec 2 The Wolf And Peter A breakdancing wolf (pictured, above) takes centre stage in David Bolger's funny and imaginative family show for CoisCéim Dance Theatre, with pianist Conor Linehan playing live. JM Birmingham Hippodrome, Sat; Dance City, Newcastle upon Tyne, Wed to 10 Dec 3 Up &amp; Down Eifman Ballet's new jazz-age production takes inspiration from George Gershwin and F Scott Fitzgerald's Tender is the Night, among others, to tell the story of a psychiatrist-turned-patient. JM Coliseum, WC2, Tue to 10 Dec

1 Spitalfields winter festival This annual week-long splurge in London's Spitalfields offers a mix of concerts and events, making full use of the vast range of East End venues. Included this year is choral music from groups including Siglo De Oro, and a piano recital by Melvyn Tan. Various venues, Sun to 11 Dec 2 A Brazilian Christmas Jeffrey Skidmore's Ex Cathedra choir make another foray into the largely unexplored treasury of South American music composed between the 17th and 19th centuries. Their latest programme is built around a work by Brazilian composer João de Deus de Castro Lobo. Town Hall, Birmingham, Sun 3 El Niño With soloists including Joélle Harvey and Davóne Tines, John Adams himself conducts the LSO and Chorus in his opera-oratorio, which reimagines the nativity story using a variety of sources. Barbican Hall, EC2, Sun 4 Schnee The London Sinfonietta prefaces Hans Abrahamsen's exhaustive exploration of canons with two new works: Simon Holt's piccolo concerto Fool Is Hurt is inspired by Fellini's film La Strada, while Morgan Hayes's Overture: The Kiss continues Abrahamsen's canonic obsession. St John's Smith Square, SW1, Tue 5 Christmas Oratorio Bach's collection of six cantatas, spreading the nativity story over the major feast days of the church's Christmas season, is regular fare at this time of year. But the Orchestra Of The Age Of Enlightenment's performance – split across two evenings – promises to be a special one, for it's conducted by one of the leading Bach specialists of our time, Masaaki Suzuki. Cadogan Hall, SW1, Fri &amp; 10 Dec

I suppose we should begin with hygge (English translation: "Bah Humbug"). Missed out on the whole hygge phenomenon? Not to worry: as far as I can tell, it's mostly about fairy lights and cable-knits, with a bit of Scandi-nationalism thrown in for good measure. Among the least annoying of the season's must-have hygge books are Marie Tourell Søderberg's Hygge: The Danish Art of Happiness (Michael Joseph) and Signe Johansen's How to Hygge: The Secrets of Nordic Living (Bluebird), which offer insights such as: "The personal element and wonderful smell of something homemade underlines that what you are about to eat is authentic and unique and far away from mass production" and "time spent outdoors can improve your mental health and reduce stress levels". I can certainly testify that time spent indoors – reading books about hygge – can have the opposite effect. Christmas is traditionally the time for publishers to cash in with handsomely repackaged reprints and reissues. London Perceived (Daunt) by VS Pritchett, first published in 1962, is a celebration of what Pritchett calls "Londonishness" and is perhaps the finest among this year's second-hand offerings, though Pushkin Press give him a run for his money with Stefan Zweig's Genius and Discovery: Five Historical Miniatures, a collection of essays about significant episodes in human history. Pushkin also have a smart little series of books "Found on the Shelves" at the London Library – including Hints on Etiquette and A Woman's Walks – all priced at £4.99 and with exceptional cover designs by David Pearson. Forget the Christmas crackers – give everyone one of these beauties. Books are the new table gifts, apparently. They do it in Denmark. (I'm joking. I have no idea if they do it in Denmark.) Comedy is difficult at any time of the year, as evidenced this Christmas by The Brexshit Book: A Remainer's Self-Help Guide to Leaving the EU (Portico), and Katie Kirby's anti-parenting-book book, Hurrah for Gin: A Book for Perfectly Imperfect Parents (Coronet), both of which contain sub-Shrigley drawings that don't do much to improve the content. (The best actual book of drawings this Christmas is probably Richard McGuire's Sequential Drawings, which collect his minimalist line drawings from the New Yorker in a very handsome hardback pocket book by Hamish Hamilton.) Last year's funny is often this year's turkey, yet Penguin have understandably seen no reason to mess with their winning formula. They follow the success of last year's Ladybird books for grownups with a whole new range of titles – The Ladybird Book of Red Tape, The Dog, The Meeting and The People Next Door. If you like this sort of thing you will also like the "hilarious" I-Spy books – Pets, At the School Gates (HarperCollins) – and the Haynes Explains series on Babies, Teenagers, Marriage, etc (Haynes). Quercus have gone one further and commissioned a whole set of spoof Enid Blytons, including Five Go Parenting, Five Go Gluten Free, and Five Go On a Strategy Away Day. Laugh until you cry. As for other novelty items, just when you thought the colouring book craze was over, along come The Poldark Colouring Book (Boxtree) and The Kama Sutra Colouring Book (Unicorn), which are self-explanatory and – frankly – not dissimilar. The richly illustrated This Bearded Life (Aurum Press) by Carles Suñé and Alfonso Casas belongs in a niche all of its own, as does absolutely every indescribable thing from the Redstone Press, who specialise in affordable art books with a twist. A stocking without a Redstone Diary – this year's theme, Time, richly illustrated throughout – can hardly be called filled, and you could easily top it up with Redstone's all-new Psychobook, which contains a veritable battery of psychological tests. People with pets of course tend to like books about pets, which presumably explains Leslie Mosier's Doug the Pug: King of the Internet (Boxtree), the pug equivalent of Grumpy Cat; Dogs and Their Faithful Celebrities (Blink); and Brooke Barker's Sad Animal Facts (Boxtree) – if bees were paid minimum wage, a jar of honey would cost $182,000, and so on. Even if you don't like pets, you would need a heart of stone not to love Monty Don's Nigel: My Family and Other Dogs (Two Roads). The best of this year's TV spin-offs is probably SAS: Who Dares Wins: Leadership Secrets from the Special Forces (Headline), published to accompany the Channel 4 series, in which you learn how to cope at work from people whose idea of coping at work is killing their enemy at close quarters. Since you'll probably be watching a lot of TV over Christmas – particularly if you follow the advice of the Special Forces, and end up on remand – you might want to go the whole hog and read about it too, with David Thomson's comprehensive history, Television: A Biography (Thames &amp; Hudson). And if you haven't already read Clive James's Play All: A Bingewatcher's Notebook (Yale), you really should. Finally, the inevitable quiz and fact books. QI and Pointless keep chuntering on, with 1,342 QI Facts to Leave You Flabbergasted (Faber) and A Pointless History of the World (Coronet), while Brian Clegg's What Colour Is the Sun? (Icon) bravely keeps up the tradition of fun-filled festive science Q&amp;A books. But this year the much coveted Sansom Stocking Filler of the Year award goes to The GCHQ Puzzle Book (Michael Joseph). Reading it is like sitting the non-verbal reasoning paper for the old 11-plus. Sample question: "If 3 = T, 4 = S, 5 = P, 6 = H, 7 = H ... what is 8?" Not a clue: I failed my 11-plus, which presumably means I wouldn't have made a very good spy. My wife and daughter got all the questions right, which makes me deeply suspicious. This is a fiendish work, as frustrating, divisive and annoying as it is deeply fulfilling: the true spirit of Christmas. Save at least 30% on this year's critics' choices when you buy at the Guardian Bookshop. Visit bookshop.theguardian.com or call 0330 333 6846. Support the Guardian and its journalism with every book you buy this Christmas. *Free UK p&amp;p for online orders over £10. Minimum £1.99 p&amp;p applies to telephone orders.

1 Chi-Raq (15) (Spike Lee, 2015, US) 127 mins. Ancient Greek comedy and Chicago gun violence make unlikely bedfellows, and they're pretty much the only bedfellows in Lee's energised, anything-goes satire. Lysistrata (Teyonah Parris) and her women refuse to have sex with their trigger-happy partners until the violence stops, in a film that careers from rap musical to bawdy comedy to fiery social drama. 2 Moana (PG) (Ron Clements, John Musker, 2016, US) 113 mins. This year's Frozen? A different climate but an equally classy mix with Disney's latest, based on Polynesian myth and culture. Throwing together an independent-minded teen (don't call her a princess) and a preening demigod (Dwayne Johnson), it's a high-seas adventure with the requisite catchy songs, broad comedy and lush visuals. 3 The Edge Of Seventeen (15) (Kelly Fremon Craig, 2016, US) 104 mins. This proficient teen movie does nothing radical but doesn't put a foot wrong either. Nadine's (Hailee Steinfeld) penchant for self-absorbed melodrama goes into overdrive when her best friend and her brother hook up, sucking everyone into a crisis that's both hilarious and tender. Woody Harrelson as her teacher/confidante is the icing on the cake. 4 Fantastic Beasts And Where To Find Them (12A) (David Yates, 2016, UK/US) 133 mins. Eddie Redmayne's Potter-spun franchise-opener is of a similar crowd-pleasing standard, and the 1920s American setting creates opportunities for lavish production design and fresh performers, including Katherine Waterston, Colin Farrell and a suitcase full of creatures. 5 Paterson (15) (Jim Jarmusch, 2016, US) 118 mins. Adam Driver plays a driver. Named Paterson. In Paterson, New Jersey. That seems entirely apt for a blank-verse kind of story musing on life and art and ennobling the every day. It's virtually free from plot, or even drama, but full of personality, reflection and charm. That's no mean feat.

1 Zaha Hadid The subversive architecture of Zaha Hadid is one of the true visionary achievements of our time. This exhibition of her drawings and paintings offers a trip inside a spectacular mind, her designs revealing an expansive, abstract sense of adventure. It will be a long time before we see her like again. Serpentine Sackler Gallery, W2, 8 Dec to 12 Feb 2 Joan Eardley The two sides of Scotland were pungently painted by this important artist of reality who was just 42 when she died in 1963. Eardley divided her time and her art between urban Scotland and an immemorial rural landscape. In Glasgow she portrayed street children in images of tremendous humanity, while at her other base in Catterline, a fishing village near Aberdeen, she painted brutal stormy vistas. What links her visions, however, is a tough raw strength. At her best, she has something in common with wild painters of postwar Europe like Jean Dubuffet and Karel Appel. Scottish National Gallery Of Modern Art, Edinburgh, Sat to 21 May 3 Andy Warhol The Artist Rooms collection is one of Britain's modern treasures, featuring top-quality works by some of the most important artists of recent times. This exhibition features one of its most haunting stars, whose obsession with death is apparent here in images of electric chairs, a self-portrait next to a skull and another in which he seems to be strangling himself. The Whitworth Art Gallery, Manchester, to 16 Apr 4 Huma Bhabha Cork sculptures and drawings on top of photographs fill this exhibition by Pakistan-born, New York-based Bhabha. Ancient art and contemporary culture merge in her expansive imagination to create strange totemic figures with a visceral, expressive power. Is she trying to release primal forces of nature or just having a lot of fun via bizarre forms reminiscent of early Buddhist art and inflatable toys of Munch's Scream? Stephen Friedman Gallery, W1, to 28 Jan 5 Magnus Plessen Disturbing images of dismantled bodies populate Plessen's new paintings, as if the colourful hues of a German expressionist painter from the early 20th century were combined with Hans Bellmer's shocking surrealist dolls. In fact, the inspiration is Ernst Friedrich's 1924 book War Against War!, in which photographs of maimed first world war soldiers were published as a warning against militarism. Here, those horrific pictures are made eerily beautiful. White Cube At Mason's Yard, SW1, to 14 Jan

Last week I messed up. A copy-and-paste error led to me failing to recognise fully half of the contestants who had correctly called all six games correctly in week 11, and for that I can only apologise. Well, that and belatedly seek to make amends. Congratulations to FatSamurai, Flattery2 and especially to Angchan – to whom this has somehow now happened twice in the same season. Sorry! Five others matched their achievements in week 12, so please remain on your feet, ladies and gentlemen, as we offer bobajob86, DSizzle2013, FraserAH, onestepforward and Steve Mansfield an equally rapturous round of applause. And then plonk yourself down in your comfiest chair, and get to picking this weeks games. Kansas City Chiefs @ Atlanta Falcons (Sunday 1pm ET/6pm GMT) The path to the postseason does not get any easier for the Chiefs. Even after an impressive road win over the Broncos, their 8-3 record is still only sufficient to place them second in the AFC West, with further divisional matchups against Denver (7-4) and Oakland (9-2) still to come after this game against NFC South leaders Atlanta (7-4). In Kansas City's favour is an improving pass rush: both Justin Houston and Tamba Hali were deemed healthy enough to have snap-count restrictions lifted for the win at Mile High Stadium, and subsequently combined for four sacks. Dee Ford, who leads the team with 10, missed that game but was back at practice on Wednesday. As a trio, they should certainly make life difficult for Matt Ryan – but will that alone be enough? He faced plenty of pressure from the Cardinals' No1-ranked defense last week and still helped his team to put 38 points on the board. Falcons to win San Francisco 49ers @ Chicago Bears (Sunday 1pm ET/6pm GMT) With a shot at next year's second overall draft pick on the line (Cleveland won't blow the No1 from here, right?), neither team's fans will much relish the idea of winning this Sunday. Players and coaches, though, are out there fighting for their careers, and at least one has done a pretty good job these past few weeks. Colin Kaepernick threw for 1,110 yards, and rushed for 223 more, in the month of November – putting up a total of nine combined touchdowns against just three turnovers. Week by week, he is making a case to be retained as the 49ers' starting quarterback for next year. In Chicago, by contrast, they might be happy to take anybody who can stay healthy for more than two weeks at a time. Matt Barkley threw for 316 yards and three scores in his starting debut against Tennessee, but much of that came in junk time against a prevent defense. In a game between two very bad teams, having a reliable option behind center should make all the difference. 49ers to win Miami Dolphins @ Baltimore Ravens (Sunday 1pm ET/6pm GMT) Six consecutive wins have propelled Miami into the thick of the playoff hunt, but is their form sustainable? They have been outgained by three of their past four opponents, including the Jets and 49ers. Teams are working out how to slow down Jay Ajayi – held to fewer than 80 rushing yards in each of this last three games – and, whilst the returns of left guard Laremy Tunsil and left tackle Branden Albert should help his cause immensely, the Ravens own the stingiest run defense in the league. They should get a major upgrade in the secondary, as well, after Jimmy Smith rejoined practice on Wednesday. Oh, and visiting teams have averaged just 14.3 points per game at M&amp;T Bank Stadium. Ravens to win Tampa Bay Buccaneers @ San Diego Chargers (Sunday 4.25pm ET/9.25pm GMT) The Chargers are a talented team who find ways to lose games that they should win. The Buccaneers a team whose talent was questioned after a poor start (anyone remember that 40-7 shellacking in Arizona?), but who have lately been winning matchups – from a road victory in Kansas City to a suffocation of Seattle – in which few people had even given them a hope. An offense featuring Jameis Winston and Mike Evans knows how to hang in a shootout, but it is the improvement on defense that is most eye-catching. Russell Wilson had been sacked 20 times and thrown two picks all season before he went to Tampa Bay. The Bucs reached him six times, and made sure that he matched his interception total in a single afternoon. Coast-to-coast road trips always make me uneasy, but this team is playing well on both sides of the ball. Buccaneers to win Washington @ Arizona Cardinals (Sunday 4.25pm ET/9.25pm GMT) Only one of these teams looks like a playoff contender. Washington earned that status by beating two possible rivals – Green Bay and Minnesota – in November before pushing Dallas right to the end. With the league's No2-ranked offense, led by a quarterback playing at an All-Pro level – Kirk Cousins completed 72.4% of his passes for 1,086 yards, eight scores and no interceptions last month – this is a team that nobody wants to face. The same could not be said for Arizona. The Cardinals have won once in their last five games and have practically been eliminated from the playoffs at 4-6-1. Their quarterback keeps getting pummeled behind a broken offensive line and only one of his receivers can be trusted to catch the ball. So why would I give them a shot in this game? Maybe it's the No2-ranked pass defense – the best Cousins has faced yet in this run. Maybe it's the injuries that threaten to keep DeSean Jackson and Jordan Reed out of Washington's lineup. Maybe it's nothing more than a hunch. Cardinals to win Indianapolis Colts @ New York Jets (Monday 8.30pm ET/Tuesday 1.30am GMT) Andrew Luck cannot have fond memories of playing the Jets. In two career meetings with these opponents, he has thrown five interceptions and both times posted a passer rating below 53.0. Assuming he does make it through the NFL's concussion protocol, however, this time ought to go better. The Jets' defense – and especially their pass defense – is flagging, with Darrelle Revis a shadow of himself and reportedly contemplating retirement. Only two teams have fewer sacks, and we all know what Luck is capable of on those rare occasions when he is actually given time to pick a pass. Colts to win

What does a perpetrator of violence against women look like? For many, the question still evokes images of shadowy strangers pouncing in the dark or thuggish drunken husbands stumbling home from football matches – stereotypes challenged tirelessly by women's organisations and campaigners, especially throughout the current 16 days of action against gender-based violence. In reality, women are statistically most likely to be assaulted by someone known to them, and domestic abuse can be, and is, also perpetrated by handsome middle-class professionals. Busting myths is therefore a crucial tool in the fight against a culture which relies on them. But for all these vital and urgent conversations about the true face of perpetrators, there is one that remains largely invisible in spite of both ubiquity and power: the state itself. Violence does not exist solely in the instant that blow meets body, but in the circumstances that facilitate it and the systems which excuse it. One needs only glance at violent crime statistics since 2009 to spot a sharp increase in violence affecting women, correlating neatly with the introduction of austerity measures in the same year which have since seen 34 women's refuges close and 95% of women's organisations facing a funding crisis. The subsequent diversion of the tampon tax into women's charities, while widely hailed as a feminist victory, in fact achieved little more than imposing the financial burden of their own health and support services on to women, while men continue to enjoy state-funded "mainstream" care. Changes to the welfare system, too, illustrate at best a naivety around violence against women and at worst a complicity; for all the widely acknowledged flaws of universal credit, for example, little has been made of the stipulation to pay it only to one "head of household", limiting the financial autonomy of women and gifting abusive partners ammunition by which to keep their victims hostage. If economic policy too accurately embodies its violent language of slashing and cutting, legislation around crime and justice delivers an almost laughable irony. In some cases, the very laws purportedly designed to protect women from violence can, in practice, enable it: the criminalisation of various activities relating to the sale of sex, for example, is universally opposed by sex worker-organising collectives, on the grounds that it limits their ability to work safely – for instance, in groups or designated zones – and without fear of violence from both clients and state agencies. When women do experience violence at the hands of a male perpetrator, as 1 in 4 UK women will in their lifetimes, a tangle of state systems and institutions make the path to justice anything but easy, despite the criminalisation of such violence in law. Cuts to legal aid, for instance, disproportionately affect women bringing claims of sexual violence and domestic abuse, and that's if they haven't already been put off by the degrading and painful experiences that women before them have legally faced in the UK justice system, or the country's unrealistically low prosecution rate for gender-based violence. Women's experience of such state-sanctioned violence does, of course, differ based on individual identities, and predictably those also marginalised elsewhere are both hardest hit and affected in unique ways: a lack of affordable housing trapping women in poverty in abusive relationships; black women living in fear of police brutality; trans women routinely placed into male prisons with little regard for their increased vulnerability to sexual violence and suicide there. In particular, refugee and migrant women remain especially at risk of state violence, in large part through their interactions with detention centres like Yarl's Wood, where a protest tomorrow aims to oppose the inhumane treatment of detainees including the prevalence of sexual violence against women held in the facility. These are the findings that Theresa May, then home secretary, last year refused to disclose details of for fear of "prejudicing commercial interests" – a stark assertion of exactly where this government's priorities lie when it comes to the safety of vulnerable women. Taken as a whole, then, the picture in the UK is one where women still face epidemic levels of violence, but lack the support of a state which at best enables and at worst perpetrates it. It's time to move beyond an understanding of violence against women as a personal issue between individuals, and see it as a strategy built into our institutions and society in order to maintain a status quo where women – particularly the most marginalised – are subordinated. Politicians are good at talking the talk: "No woman should live in fear of violence and every girl should grow up knowing she is safe," reads May's foreword in the government's Ending Violence Against Women and Girls strategy. But until her own actions and that of her government say otherwise, this noble vision remains far from realised.

MediaGuardian's top stories Channel 4 boss attacks government interference after board veto Daily Mail group refuses to rule out sale of newspaper titles Paul Dacre to step down as chair of journalists' code of practice committee Andrew Sachs, Manuel from Fawlty Towers, dies aged 86 Burst your bubble: five conservative articles to read this week Best of the rest Great British Bake Off : BBC and Channel 4 in bust-up as show makers start search for new contestants (Mirror) CNN's coverage of Trump was biased, presidential candidates' aides say (New York Times) AT&amp;T's $85bn Time Warner: Fears ebb of Trump blocking deal (Financial Times £) 'Sons of Anarchy' spinoff pilot ordered at FX, 'Mayans MC' will shoot in March (Variety) UK government spent nearly £5m last year advertising with Sun, Times and Mail titles (Press Gazette) And finally... All the money, time and fuss expended on the big Christmas ads may not be having much impact, according to a poll suggesting they do little to influence where people spend their money.

Environmentalists in China are celebrating after controversial plans to build a series of giant hydroelectric dams on the country's last free-flowing river were shelved. Activists have spent more than a decade campaigning to protect the Nujiang, or "angry river", from a cascade of dams, fearing they would displace tens of thousands of people and irreparably damage one of China's most spectacular and bio-diverse regions. Since the start of this year, hopes had been building that Beijing would finally abandon plans to dam the 1,750-mile waterway, which snakes down from the Tibetan plateau through some of China's most breathtaking scenery before entering Myanmar, Thailand and eventually flowing into the Andaman Sea. On Friday, campaigners said that appears to have happened after China's State Energy Administration published a policy roadmap for the next five years that contained no mention of building any hydroelectric dams on the Nu. "I am absolutely thrilled," said Wang Yongchen, a Chinese conservationist and one of the most vocal opponents of the plans, which first surfaced in 2003. Wang, who has made 17 trips to the Nu region as part of her crusade to protect the river, said geologists, ecologists, sociologists and members of the public who had been part of the campaign could all take credit for halting the dams. "I think this is a triumph for Chinese civil society," the Beijing-based activist said. Stephanie Jensen-Cormier, the China programme director for International Rivers, said environmentalists were "very happy and very excited" at what was a rare piece of good news for China's notoriously stressed waterways. "The state of rivers in China is so dismal. Thirty years ago there were 50,000 rivers in China; today there are less than 23,000. Rivers have completely disappeared. They have become polluted, they have become overused for agriculture and manufacturing," she said. "So it is so exciting when a major river – which is a major river for Asia – is protected, at least where it flows in China." Jensen-Cormier said the shelving of plans to dam the Nu – which is known as the Salween in Thailand and the Thanlwin in parts of Myanmar – represented "a great turning point for the efforts to preserve China's rivers". "It is a really good indication that China is starting to look at other ways of developing energy, and renewable energies especially, that mean they don't have to sacrifice their remaining healthy river." China is the world's hydro champion, having built tens of thousands of dams since the 1950s – including the Three Gorges, the world's biggest project of its kind. Hydropower is a key plank of the country's bid to reduce its dependence on "dirty" fossil fuels such as coal and produce 20% of its energy from renewable sources by 2030. And while dambuilding is set to continue in other parts of China, such as Tibet, activists highlight three key reasons as to why Beijing may have decided to ditch plans to dam the Nu. One is the growing concern for the environment shown by China's leaders, after decades in which economic growth was given precedence over environmental protection. "We will make China a beautiful country with blue sky, green vegetation and clear rivers," President Xi Jinping promised in September when world leaders gathered in China for the G20. A second explanation is concern over the wisdom of building such mega-projects in China's seismically active south-west, where geologists warn of potentially catastrophic accidents were an earthquake to strike near such dams. Third, and perhaps most importantly, is the economics. Waning demand for power, a consequence of China's slowing economy, and the difficulty of transmitting electricity from remote regions such as Yunnan to the rest of the country, means many believe large-scale dams no longer make financial sense. "There is already an excess of energy that is produced in Yunnan and can't actually be used and also it's not really financially viable either to be developing the river at this time," said Jensen-Cormier. Having, for now, turned away from plans to dam the Nu, local politicians are poised to push ahead with plans to develop tourism in the impoverished border region. Speaking in March, Li Jiheng, Yunnan's Communist party chief, spoke of plans to transform a region some call "China's Grand Canyon" into a world-class tourism destination that would surpass its namesake in Arizona. Jensen-Cormier predicted that the influx of investors and tourists to the bio-diverse area, which scientists say is home to half of China's animal species and 6,000 species of plant, would pose a new set of challenges for environmentalists. Wang Yongchen, who runs Green Earth Volunteers, one of China's oldest environmental groups, cautioned that while the decision to scrap plans for dams on the Nu was a significant triumph, it was not necessarily a permanent one. "They haven't said they will never build the dams, so we still need to carry on fighting. It is too easy to say this is the final victory." Additional reporting by Christy Yao

Islamic State recruiters are targeting vulnerable refugees in Europe to radicalise them in an effort to further polarise the European Union population, counter-terror experts have warned. Europol, the law enforcement agency of the EU, said it was in the interests of Islamic State to inflame the migration crisis and to turn EU citizens against refugees seeking asylum. A number of jihadis are already travelling through Europe for this purpose and German authorities were aware of about 300 recorded attempts to recruit refugees trying to enter Europe by April 2016, Europol said in its report, Changes in Modus Operandi of IS revisited. "Given that it is in the interests of IS (Islamic State) to inflame the migration crisis to polarise the EU population and turn sections of it against those seeking asylum, there is a risk of some infiltration of refugee camps and other groups," the report published on Friday said. "A real and imminent danger is the possibility of elements of the (Sunni Muslim) Syrian refugee diaspora becoming vulnerable to radicalisation once in Europe and being specifically targeted by Islamic extremist recruiters." However, Europol said the extent of such infiltration was unknown, making the subject susceptible to exaggeration and exploitation by populist factions and extreme rightwing parties. In the same report, Europol warns that as Islamic State is defeated or severely weakened by coalition forces in its former stronghold of Syria and Iraq, there may be an increase in the number of foreign fighters and their families returning from the region to Europe. The agency said further attacks in the EU, both by lone actors and groups of terrorists, were likely to be attempted – with estimates from some intelligence services suggesting that several dozen people directed by Islamic State might be currently in Europe with a capability to commit terrorist attacks. Gilles de Kerchove, EU counter-terrorism coordinator, said: "We have to be vigilant, since the threat posed by the so-called Islamic State and returning foreign fighters is likely to persist in the coming years. These people are trained to use explosives and firearms and they have been indoctrinated by the jihadist ideology."

The editor-in-chief of the Age, Mark Forbes, has been stood down and is being investigated by Fairfax Media after a young female reporter complained of sexual harassment. The woman made a formal complaint to management after Forbes allegedly "groped her on the bottom" at the Age Music Victoria awards in November, sources told Guardian Australia. After inquiries from Guardian Australia on Friday, Fairfax Media confirmed the investigation. "Mark Forbes has been stood down pending the outcome of an investigation that is underway," a spokesman said. "Fairfax is committed to a safe workplace and has zero tolerance for any behaviour that does not meet the highest standards. "Alex Lavelle, editor of the Age, will oversee the newsroom." Forbes was stood down just hours before the Walkley awards celebrating excellence in journalism, being held in Brisbane. He was expected to attend. The Age has been campaigning against sexual harassment in the workplace, publishing a major investigation on Monday. The Walkley Award and United Nations Media Peace award-winning journalist was appointed to the role in April after three years as The Age's news director. Fairfax Media is publisher of The Sydney Morning Herald, The Age, WAToday, Brisbane Times and The Canberra Times. Forbes, who started his career at Fairfax in 1985, has been a foreign correspondent and editor of the Sunday Age. Fairfax Media editorial director Sean Aylmer praised his talents when he was appointed earlier this year as a replacement to Andrew Holden, who stood down in February. "As a political correspondent, investigative reporter and foreign correspondent, Mark won numerous awards, including several Quill Awards and a Walkley Award for an expose of Australia's role in the international steroid trade," Aylmer said. "He has also won the United Nations Media Peace Prize for a ground-breaking journey into Indonesia's Papua province. "Mark is an outstanding journalist, with a keen news sense and belief in quality reporting. He is the ideal person to continue The Age's transformation, providing quality journalism across print and digital."

1) Martial and Mkhitaryan should keep their places One of the biggest accusations aimed at José Mourinho down the years has been that he favours workmanlike players who can follow instructions over unpredictable talents who are harder to control but more likely to decide a game with a moment of genius. Mourinho's treatment of Henrikh Mkhitaryan and Anthony Martial at Manchester United has provided his critics with more ammunition. But now is the time for the United manager to give both of them a proper run in his strongest side. Mkhitaryan created Zlatan Ibrahimovic's early opener in Wednesday's League Cup win over West Ham with a silky backheel, before Martial scored two emphatic goals in the second half. Although it was a cruise for United against mediocre opposition, both players did enough to keep their places for Sunday's tougher trip to Everton. JS Mourinho praises Mkhitarayan after win over West Ham United glad to have Schweinsteiger back says Carrick Everton slump to defeat after Austin's early strike 2) Will another man-marking job test Liverpool? Bournemouth's home form is decent and their record of having lost only one of their last five matches at their mini-fortress is commendable. Truth be told, they were desperately unlucky in that defeat Sunderland and the three clean sheets they have kept at Dean Court already this season suggest Liverpool will not have it all their own way this weekend. What they almost certainly will have is opposition that do not sit back and defend in the way Southampton and Sunderland did with varying degrees of success in Liverpool's most recent league excursions. At St Mary's Jürgen Klopp's men drew a very rare blank, while it took them 75 minutes to break the deadlock a week later at Anfield. Eddie Howe will have noted the success of the limpet-like man-marking job done on Philippe Coutinho by Sunderland's Jason Denayer until the Brazilian succumbed to injury. The first blast on the referee Bobby Madley's whistle will reveal if the Cherries manager has planned a similar scheme to try to keep Liverpool's front three quiet. BG Defoe sinks Bournemouth to give Sunderland victory Andy Hunter: Woodburn's rise is no surprise Klopp: Liverpool are equipped to play against 'parked buses' 3) West Ham need Noble's leadership West Ham were wretched at Old Trafford on Wednesday, defending poorly, creating little of any note and rolling over with far too much readiness once the game began to run away from them in the second half. Their lack of belief and fight must be a huge concern for Slaven Bilic, who needs his players to realise they are in a relegation battle. There is no room for complacency and Bilic needs Mark Noble's leadership more than ever now. Noble has been unable to replicate the form that led to him being tipped for an England call-up last season but West Ham badly missed their rested captain against United. Arsenal will run riot at the London Stadium if Bilic's side perform so meekly again. JS West Ham sunk at Old Trafford in EFL Cup Hammers set to bid £25m for Bournemouth's Wilson Wenger dismayed by Arsenal conceding 'cheap goals' 4) Omens there for City to end Chelsea's winning run Chelsea have won seven league games in a row, something they last achieved in the period spanning the end of the 2009-10 season and the start of the next when, as now, their run had featured the concession of but a single goal. Ominously that string of victories came to an end with a 1-0 defeat at Manchester City. Four points clear at the top of the league (this was late September, and they had played only five games) when they set off for what was still known as the City of Manchester Stadium, Chelsea had been overtaken by the end of November and they ended the season nine points behind Manchester United. There are omens there for both of these teams. After all, on the same weekend this season it was City who had a four-point lead at the top of the table (at that stage their advantage over Chelsea was eight), yet a couple of months later they lie third and Pep Guardiola has been speaking of this match as a chance "to play the best team at the moment in the Premier League". "The last five or six weeks they have played amazing," he said of Antonio Conte's side. "We have to try and discover his secret and what we need to do to beat him and will prepare as best as possible." This could be a definitive test of City's mettle, in their first meeting with another of the league's top four sides (they have already lost to the side currently fifth, and are yet to beat a top-half team at home). Given they are unchanged in their last six games, Chelsea's best team seems established; Guardiola's will remain uncertain at least until late on Saturday morning, when it will become clear precisely how impressed he has been with Yaya Touré's recent good performances (Ilkay Gundogan is expected to return to the starting XI in his place). SB Premier League frontrunners: who is best equipped for the Christmas rush? Guardiola v Antonio Conte: a tactical showdown of brooder against extrovert 5) How much gas is in Crystal Palace explosion? The focus will once again be on Alan Pardew as the beleaguered Crystal Palace manager goes into the home match against Southampton clinging to his job in the wake of last week's extraordinary defeat at Swansea City's Liberty Stadium. In a lengthy interview with Dominic Fifield for the Guardian as recently as mid-October, Pardew said he was aware of talk linking him with the England job but suggested he had no wish to leave Palace and wanted to be remembered for the legacy he would leave at the club. That much, at least, seems assured. The interview made for interesting reading, not least Pardew's talk of the numerous technological innovations he had overseen at Crystal Palace's training ground. Blinding your players with science is all very well but, when smartphone apps, Sky Pads and number-crunching appear to come at the expense of the rudiments of defending set pieces, something has clearly gone terribly wrong. Crystal Palace's inability to defend corners and free-kicks was highlighted in this column last Friday and the following day they shipped four goals from dead-ball situations. "I don't just want them to do basic things, I'm asking them to do complicated things," said Pardew of his players in October. Five consecutive defeats later he must be ruing those words. BG Pardew makes transfer plans amid doubts over future at Palace Palace set to lose Wickham for season with cruciate injury Alan Pardew interview: 'Why would I leave Palace?' Southampton swagger past Arsenal in EFL Cup 6) West Brom's chance to assert themselves Flying under the radar, West Bromwich Albion are an unlikely presence in the top half of the table. That looked unthinkable when they slumbered to a goalless home draw with Middlesbrough at the end of August, when a few rumbles of discontent could be heard from West Brom's fans about their team's style of football. Yet now, at the start of December, Tony Pulis has West Brom in ninth place. They are tipped as possible relegation candidates at the start of every season, yet Pulis has never been relegated from the Premier League and, while his pragmatism can be tough to watch, it is impossible to argue that he is not meeting expectations at The Hawthorns. But can he exceed them? With two wins and a draw from their past three matches, three points over Watford could see West Brom end the weekend in sixth place. JS Pulis ordered to pay Palace £3.77m after 'deceiving' tribunal Watford's lethargy is punished by Stoke 7) Eriksen must produce more Christian Eriksen is one of those players whose reputation often protects him from widespread criticism. Yet many Tottenham fans have been unimpressed with the Dane's contribution this season. Sure, Moussa Sissoko is the main whipping boy at White Hart Lane at the moment. Mauricio Pochettino pulled no punches with his assessment of the £30m summer signing's form last weekend. But it was also interesting to hear Pochettino demanding more desire from his attacking midfielders in the final third a few weeks ago, when Harry Kane was yet to return from his ankle injury and Tottenham were struggling for goals. As the most high profile of Tottenham's creators, much of the responsibility falls to Eriksen. Compared with his rivals at other clubs – Mesut Özil, say, or Philippe Coutinho – he has not produced enough. Having scored his first league goal of the season with a fine strike in last week's defeat at Chelsea, Eriksen needs to push on when Swansea City visit White Hart Lane on Saturday. JS Kane signs new Spurs contract worth £22m Pochettino says Sissoko is falling short of expectations Llorente settles 5-4 thriller for Swansea 8) More Premier League indifference from Leicester City? Make no mistake, Leicester are in serious danger of being relegated. They will always have last season's fairytale title win but they desperately need to arrest their current slide if they are to avoid the ignominy of becoming the first reigning English champions to go down the next season since Manchester City in 1936-37. While their adventures in Europe have made a mockery of their domestic form, they may also have contributed to it; most of the current squad have been there, done that and were always unlikely to do it again as far as the league title is concerned, while their run in the Champions League is a novel and exciting escapade. Leicester have won only one top-flight encounter since beating Burnley in the middle of September – against the haplessly charitable Crystal Palace – and are currently on a run of four without a win in the Premier League. Failure to beat the bottom side Sunderland would get the alarm bells jangling in earnest but it is a measure of the champions' apparent indifference to their league form that this is a match Sunderland will go into with something approaching bullish confidence. BG Paul Doyle: Ranieri tries to find Leicester's balance after title hangover Paul Wilson: Surely Leicester deserve Spoty team award Slimani rescues draw against Middlesbrough for lacklustre Leicester Sunderland owner Short open to offers – beginning at £170m 9) Another northern Monday night Tinfoil hat-wearing southern conspiracy theorists may be curious to learn that Middlesbrough v Hull City continues a quirky six-match run of Sky Monday Night Football matches featuring teams almost exclusively located north of Watford Gap, with the Welsh side Swansea City and ... actual Watford being the exceptions. Since Chelsea beat West Ham in an all-London needle match in August, Sky has used its Monday night showcase to present Sunderland v Everton, Burnley v Watford, Liverpool v Manchester United, Stoke v Swansea and West Brom v Burnley – a largely uninspiring selection of fixtures in which the only one likely to get neutrals bubbling with anticipation turned out to be the lamest of the lot. Obliged to televise a certain number of each team's games, Sky is clearly keeping its powder dry until the business end of the season by fulfilling its obligations to less glamorous sides who will not be involved in the title shake-up early doors. On the face of it events do not really get less glamorous than Middlesbrough taking on Hull City at the Riverside on a freezing Monday night in December. Indeed, the huge number of empty seats at the KCOM Stadium stadium for Hull's midweek EFL Cup quarter-final win over Newcastle suggests many of the visiting side's increasingly disaffected fans will not even bother tuning in. In the absence of any pre-match hoopla, those who will are left to hope both teams contrive to serve up a decent game for a TV show that remains more popular for its fascinating extended pre- and post-match punditry than most of the football action it hypes without an ounce of shame or sheepishness. BG Boro denied victory at Leicester by Slimani penalty Hull beat Newcastle in shootout to reach semi-finals 10) Stoke and Burnley labour over whether to stick or twist Burnley's five away games this season have brought one point and a 1-13 aggregate scoreline, the most recent – a 4-0 reverse at West Bromwich Albion – so riling Sean Dyche that he called his charges "weak-willed" and promised extensive change. "The definition of madness is always doing what you've always done and expecting a different outcome," he has since mused. Stoke showed the potential benefit of a bit of change when using an unfamiliar 3-4-3 formation to secure a 1-0 win at Watford last weekend, a result achieved despite the absence of Joe Allen, Glenn Whelan, Jack Butland and Ryan Shawcross – at least the first two of whom are likely to return here. "We had a different formation, a different game plan than we've normally had," Mark Hughes said this week. "That's another string to our bow, it's one we can revisit. We may well continue in the same vein." Burnley will surely look to add another string to their bow rather than sticking with the 4-4-1-1 with which they started at The Hawthorns. "We've got to rethink our mentality away from home and what we're about," Dyche said, "rethink how we can take maybe different shapes, different formats, personnel." Their poor away form certainly increases the pressure on the home side to beat them but Hughes is not worried about being taken by surprise by Dyche's anticipated noodlings. "It might be the case that we face a team that we're not expecting," he said, "but we're in good form, so it doesn't matter what they do really." SB David Squires on ... Steven Gerrard, Paul Robinson and Mr Pardew's Palace Football Weekly Extra: Remembering Chapecoense

Spare a thought for Anthony Martial. Perhaps because nobody bothered to monitor what was going on in Manchester United's youth ranks the talented young Frenchman was brought in at great expense to be the club's token precocious forward. Then someone thought it might be a good idea to remind the powers that be about a lad called Marcus Rashford. And now it would seem that nurturing two highly-talented youngsters is certainly one job too many for renowned polisher of raw talent José Mourinho. Which is why he might well wave au revoir to Martial if PSG come knocking with a fistful of euros and the offer of regular first-team football for the 20-year-old in January. If Martial scores four more goals he will cost United many more millions due to add-ons in his contract being monitored closely by his former club Monaco too. If United do sell would they just bank the money and take it easy in the coming transfer window? Pfft. Of course not. It says here they'll continue to be ridiculous by waving £180m in the direction of Barcelona in the hope of airlifting Neymar away from his trouble with prosecutors in Spain, who have recommended he spend two years in the big house for alleged wrongdoing related to his transfer to Barça from Santos. Having watched his side concede their first goal in 987 years, Antonio Conte wants to fortify his blue wall. To do so he'll get Chelsea owner Roman Abramovich to write a cheque for £24m and pop it in the post c/o Napoli president Aurelio De Laurentiis. In return he'll get the 25-year-old rock-solid Algeria left-back Faouzi Ghoulam. He may also return next summer to steal away centre-back Kalidou Koulibaly for £50m. Conte quite likes the cut of the Atalanta midfielder Franck Kessie's jib too. The 19-year-old Ivory Coast international has scored five goals and can run all day, which means he might even be able to keep up with his potential midfield partner N'Golo Kanté. He'd cost £15m, which is equivalent to 50p last season. Arsenal are planning a serious move for a Real Madrid forward. But cool your guns Gunners, it's not Karim Benzema; it's not Álvaro Morata; it's not even James Rodríguez, if you can call him a forward or even a footballer for that matter these days. No, it's Marcos Llorente. Heard of him? Thought so. Well, he's on loan at Alavés where he's scored exactly no goals this season. But he does run around a lot and has smart hair. And finally, both Jürgen Klopp and Slaven Bilic have been alerted to Polish forward Lukasz Teodorczyk's impressive Soccerbase page. The 25-year-old has scored 17 times in 22 games this season at Anderlecht, where he is on loan from Dynamo Kyiv. West Ham may hold the advantage over Liverpool in attracting Teodorczyk though, because they would probably play him due to the fact that they actually need a striker who isn't injured or rubbish. He'd cost £12m, whatever his preferred destination.

The treasurer, Scott Morrison, says the Turnbull government will not be revisiting negative gearing, but has agreed to play a role in the expansion of affordable housing for people with low incomes. Morrison met his state counterparts in Canberra on Friday, before next week's Council of Australian Governments (Coag) meeting. Speaking after the meeting, he said the government's opposition to negative gearing changes was clear, despite renewed calls for a reconsideration of the tax regime. The New South Wales planning minister, Rob Stokes, reignited the debate about negative gearing last week, saying it did nothing to improve housing supply where it was needed, but did help some people reduce their taxable income at the expense of other Australians. The NSW premier, Mike Baird, then said the federal government ought to drop its ideological opposition to any reconsideration of negative gearing. But Morrison said on Friday that any changes to negative gearing would upset the market. "It is the government's view that the mum and dad investors who actually provide the capital for the nation's rental housing stock, if we were to withdraw that, then that has the only outcome of increasing rents, which is not good news for people on the lowest of incomes who are renting," he said. The treasurer said everyone at the meeting agreed to the recommendations in a report from the affordable housing working group. The report, called Innovative Financing Models to Improve the Supply of Affordable Housing, recommends creating housing bonds to attract more private sector investment to affordable housing. It says government support is required to leverage long-term institutional investment for affordable housing. It defines "affordable rental housing" as housing that reduces or eliminates housing stress for low-income and disadvantaged families and allows them to meet other essential basic needs on a sustainable basis. "One of the challenges that is faced by those developing affordable housing is access to longer term affordable finance," Morrison said. "The access to capital is a critical issue for that sector and this would involve states and commonwealth working together to act as a bond aggregator to put finance into those developments. "Whether the commonwealth just took that or did it in partnership with states, that's something we will now work on." Morrison said much of the discussion about housing affordability centred on first home buyers, but 30% of Australians rented and half of them were on low incomes. "We believe that when you're dealing with housing, you've got to deal with it from homelessness all the way through," he said. "Today's report, I think, demonstrated that our focus is right across the spectrum, and all treasurers were very keen to stress that point." The shadow treasurer, Chris Bowen, has criticised Morrison's refusal to consider negative gearing changes as part of a suite of housing policy reforms. "Scott Morrison is simply not up to the job of leading reform on tax and housing affordability," he said. "Malcolm Turnbull and Scott Morrison are oblivious of the housing affordability crisis that threatens to see a generation of Australian young people locked out of the housing market."

Health secretary Jeremy Hunt this week quoted Oliver Twist as he argued down pleas for more money for the health service, dismissing a report by the lobby group NHS Providers as amounting to saying: "There isn't enough money, please sir, can I have some more?" It was presumably lost on Hunt that the bearer of the begging bowl is the hero of the piece – a small orphan living in that Victorian forerunner of the welfare state, the workhouse. Bearing in mind the political power of selective quotation, we have ransacked the annals of literature to find some more useful quotes, ready for misuse. For Donald Trump, US president-elect "Good fences make good neighbours," from Mending Wall by Robert Frost. It's surely only a minor inconvenience that the spouter of this homespun "wisdom" is ignoring the fact that "Something there is that doesn't love a wall ... [nature] sends the frozen groundswell under it." For Vladimir Putin, Russian president "Out of the strong came forth sweetness," from the Bible, Judges 14:14 The pugnacious leader and ally of the Orthodox church is admittedly unlikely to listen, but generations of golden syrup eaters could tell him that, in the riddle of Samson, it is only after the lion is dead that the bees can get to work making honey in its carcass. For Boris Johnson, UK foreign secretary "East is East and West is West, and never the twain shall meet," from Rudyard Kipling's The Ballad of East and West. Given previous form, it should be no problem for Boris to forget the lines following, which add: "But there is neither East nor West, Border, nor Breed, nor Birth, / When two strong men stand face to face, though they come from the ends of the earth!" For Justine Greening in her role as education secretary "Teach these boys and girls nothing but Facts. Facts alone are wanted in life. Plant nothing else, and root out everything else. You can only form the minds of reasoning animals upon Facts: nothing else will ever be of any service to them. " From Charles Dickens's Hard Times Never mind that the words are spoken by schoolmaster Gradgrind, who has become a watchword for educational bad practice. For Justine Greening in her other role as minister for women and equalities "Of course, men know best about everything, except what women know better," from George Eliot's Middlemarch. There's a small problem with the sentence that precedes this piece of sisterly advice to Dorothea from her sister Celia: '"Why can't you think it your duty to submit a little to what James wishes?" said Celia, with a sense of stringency in her argument. "Because he only wishes what is for your own good."' For David Davis, Brexit secretary "In Europe one gets used to doing nothing. You sit on your ass and whine all day. You get contaminated. You rot." From Henry Miller's Tropic of Cancer. Resounding words of euroscepticism avant la lettre, written long before the first stirrings of the EU. Tempting, but Davis would have to overlook the fact that the character who utters this sentiment is described as "a snob ... an aristocratic little prick who lives in a dementia praecox kingdom all his own". For Nigel Farage, former Ukip leader and 'friend' of Donald Trump "How puzzling all these changes are! I'm never sure what I'm going to be, from one minute to another!" From Alice in Wonderland by Lewis Carroll. Alice was under the influence of magic mushrooms at the time. Please feel free to add the quotes of your choice for the politicians who need them in the comments below.

The US should completely quit the United Nations forum to tackle climate change in order to quickly exit the Paris climate agreement, according to a conservative lawyer who is part of Donald Trump's transition team. Abandoning the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) would allow the US to back out of the international climate effort within a year, far sooner than the four-year period that would be required to ditch the Paris accord, which came into force in November. Such a move would probably prove a severe blow to global efforts to avoid dangerous warming. Steven Groves, a lawyer at the conservative Heritage Foundation, said exiting the UNFCCC would be the "most practical" way for the US to drop its climate change commitments. Groves is part of the state department transition team for the president-elect, who has promised to "cancel" the Paris deal. "There's a practical reason for canceling the UNFCCC in that it would provide the shortest timeframe," Groves, who said he was speaking on the Heritage Foundation's position on the issue as he was not authorised to speak on behalf of the Trump transition team, told the Guardian. "If we only withdrew from the Paris agreement, that's still three or four years. We've declined to join other international agreements and there were dire threats of the end of US influence in the world and that hasn't come to pass. It's not as if Nato would disband if we did that." Although Trump recently said he has an "open mind" about the Paris agreement, he has consistently threatened to exit the deal. Reince Priebus, Trump's incoming chief of staff, told Fox News Sunday that Trump's position on the climate accord remains that "most of it is a bunch of bunk". Trump, who has himself called global warming a hoax, has appointed a number of people who reject the overwhelming scientific position on climate change to his transition team. Myron Ebell, who has said climate science is "phony", is heading the transition team for the Environmental Protection Agency, while Groves, albeit in a less influential position, has used Twitter to assail "climate change alarmists" and Hillary Clinton for "shilling for the orthodox climate change 'consensus'". Meanwhile, Bob Walker, a Trump campaign adviser who is not part of the transition process, has advocated eliminating climate research at Nasa and claimed that scientists are deeply divided on the cause of warming. In fact, the vast majority of peer-reviewed science, along with all of the world's major scientific bodies including Nasa and the Royal Society, agree that the world is warming and that human activity is the primary cause. Nine of the 10 warmest years on record have occurred since 2000, with 2016 set to be the warmest yet. Separate lines of evidence, such as rising sea levels, shrinking glaciers and the shifting range of species, all point to a rapidly changing climate. President George HW Bush, with ratification from the Senate, committed the US to the UNFCCC in 1992 following the Earth summit in Rio. Following two decades of often fraught negotiations, 196 nations agreed in Paris last year to cut emissions in a bid to avoid a temperature rise of 2C globally. Trump's election has raised concerns that the US, the world's second largest emitter, could exit the process and discourage other nations during a period when emissions must be radically reduced to avoid disastrous heatwaves, sea level rise and the mass displacement of people. The new president could choose to simply ignore the Paris agreement but Groves said the US should quit the entire framework to undo what he said was Barack Obama's improper signing of the deal. Obama did not ask the Republican-controlled Senate to ratify the Paris agreement, which has a binding goal but leaves emissions reduction targets and methods to individual nations. "The current administration wouldn't submit it to the Senate, where it would've gone up in flames," Groves said. "It's being a little too clever with the constitution and the treaty-making power. There is a balance between Congress and the executive on this issue and the Paris agreement has thrown that balance off for raw political reasons. "Just because you're the president, you don't become a dictator. President Obama was betting that another president, such as Hillary Clinton, wouldn't withdraw the agreement. He made a political calculation and we'll soon find out if that was right or not." Other legal experts have maintained that Obama was well within his powers to put the US's name to the Paris deal, given that it is largely unenforceable. John Kerry, the secretary of state, successfully pushed for key parts of the text to use the word "should" rather than "shall" in order to negate the need for Senate approval. David Wirth, of the Boston College law school and formerly of the state department, said that previous Senate approval of the UNFCC, along with the language of the Paris deal, meant there was no executive overreach. "There's no question that it's constitutional," Wirth said. "The state department was extremely precise in making sure of that. If anything, they were extra cautious. These are aspirational provisions and the president has the authority to review an existing situation, that's self-evident. The legal authority is already there. "Withdrawing from the UNFCC would leave the US without a seat at the table, having withdrawn from a set of requirements that are procedural rather than onerous. That would be political grandstanding and contrary to the national interest. There would be opprobrium and criticism from the rest of the world, for no apparent benefit." Scientists have warned that renewed efforts are required to avoid breaching the 2C threshold, with the current Paris commitments still leaving the world on course for a temperature increase of 3C or more. Adam Sobel, a climate scientist at Columbia University, said Groves had presented "a misleading and inaccurate portrayal of both the science and economics of climate mitigation, greatly understating both the risks of human-induced climate change and the benefits of the Paris agreement while overstating the costs. "It is transparently a piece of advocacy on behalf of the short-term interests of fossil fuel companies, against the broader interests of both the US and the rest of the world. "The majority of the American people support US participation in the Paris agreement. If the US withdraws from the UN convention and the Paris agreement, history will judge us harshly." The US's status in international climate talks will be heavily influenced by Trump's choice for secretary of state. Former presidential nominee Mitt Romney, ex-New York mayor Rudy Giuliani and former CIA chief David Petraeus have all been linked to the role. There has also been speculation that Rex Tillerson, chief executive of oil giant Exxon, is being considered by Trump for the position, a prospect that has horrified environmental groups due to the company's history of concealing the full impact of climate change. "If the goal is to drain the swamp in DC, Tillerson might not be your man; Exxon's business plan continues to require raising the level of the ocean to the point where Foggy Bottom will be well underwater," said Bill McKibben, co-founder of climate group 350.org. "But this is certainly a good way to make clear exactly who'll be running the government in a Trump administration - just cut out the middleman and hand it directly to the fossil fuel industry."

Iceland, the land of fire and ice, is taking on Iceland, the purveyor of frozen chicken tikka lasagne, in a major trademark battle. The Icelandic government launched legal action against the British supermarket last week, arguing that the grocery chain, which owns the Europe-wide trademark registration for the word Iceland is preventing Icelandic companies from promoting themselves abroad. The contest is one of many brand name legal battles offering more entertaining plot points than your average box set. We look back at six of the best: Elvis Presley v BrewDog Elvis Presley may have died (or so most of us believe) in 1977 but his name lives on, and sometimes not in quite the way the guardians of his estate would like. This year the Presley estate entered a trademark dispute with Scottish brewer BrewDog, demanding it drop the name of its beer brand "Elvis Juice IPA". In response, BrewDog's founders, James Watt and Martin Dickie, have changed their names by deed poll to Elvis so they can argue they named the beer after themselves. Watt and Dickie explained in a pun-strewn press statement that they were "caught in a trap" and advised the "grey-suited hound dogs" at the Presley estate divert their attention to "another potential source of quick remuneration: a brewery that calls itself 'The King' of beer". Apple Corps v Apple Computer When he named his company Apple, Steve Jobs must have foreseen he'd attract the attention of Apple Corps, the holding company founded by the Beatles in the late 1960s. In 1978, two years after Apple Computer launched, Apple Corps, owner of the Beatles' record label Apple Records, sued it for trademark violation. In 1981 they settled with the understanding that Apple Computer would never enter the music industry. Needless to say, this settlement didn't last. The dispute came to a head after Apple unveiled iTunes in 2003 and it wasn't put to rest until 2007 when it was agreed Apple Inc, the company dropped "Computer" from its name that year, would own of all the trademarks related to "Apple" and would license certain trademarks back to Apple Corps, including Apple Corps' granny smith logo. The Beatles' back catalogue finally became available on iTunes in 2010 after years of negotiations. Jobs, a Beatles fan, described the whole saga as a "long and winding road". As the most valuable brand in the world, according to branding consultancy Interbrand, Apple can easily afford such wrangles, but there's a lesson here for the rest of us. "When creating your brand name, from the very beginning you need to look at where your brand might be going in the future," advises Rebecca Robins, global director at Interbrand. WWF v WWF When wrestling company Titan Sports changed its name to the World Wrestling Federation it was drawn into a legal fight with another WWF, the World Wildlife Fund, that lasted 13 years. The conservation charity took action to protect its brand from what it described as an "unsavoury" connection with wrestling, and, in 2001 a court in London ruled in its favour. Not one to take a beating lying down, the World Wrestling Federation challenged the ruling, and, after that was dismissed, it threatened to appeal. The wrestlers eventually gave in and spent millions rebranding to World Wrestling Entertainment, WWE. It also used the line "Get The 'F' Out" as a marketing slogan. After the World Wildlife Fund's victory, a spokesman for the charity said: "It's been the wrestlers against a cute little panda bear. And the panda won." Victoria Beckham v Peterborough FC In her previous incarnation as a Spice Girl, Victoria Beckham found an unlikely sparring partner in the form of football club Peterborough United. In 2002, Beckham opposed Peterborough United's attempt to register "Posh", the club's nickname, as a trademark, with her publicity company claiming that the word was "inexorably associated with her in the public's mind". The club contested that it had been using its Posh moniker since the 1930s and Beckham's challenge was overturned. "People get very attached to a name they've either adopted or used for aeons and they feel they have a God-given right to it," says Michael Johnson, founder and creative director of branding and design consultancy Johnson Banks. "It's pretty ridiculous that Victoria Beckham even considered she owned the word 'posh', and Peterborough claiming they own it is also dodgy. Posh is a word." Instagram v LitterGram Combating Britain's litter problem was Danny Lucas's goal when he founded LitterGram, an app that encourages users to share and geotag pictures of litter they see on the streets and report it to their local council. However, his app came to the attention of lawyers for Instagram and its owner Facebook who told him in September to change the name or face a lawsuit. They argue the use of "gram" in the title could undermine the world's most famous photo-sharing site's brand. Lucas says: "They've said 'change your name' and they've given us deadlines which have come and gone. We make an appeal and they don't respond." He has delivered a public plea to Facebook founder Mark Zuckerberg claiming the "unreasonable demands that we rebrand will kill our momentum", and last month it was announced that Instagram had dropped the case. Facebook takes brand protection seriously, as evidenced by a previous wrangle it had with a teacher's community website in the US called Teachbook in 2010 for using the word "book" in its name. In the end Facebook agreed to drop its trademark suit after the group changed its name to TeachQuest. Starbucks v Sambucks Starbucks has not been one to shy away from trademark battles with considerably smaller adversaries. The world's largest coffee chain once went after a restaurant in British Columbia because it was called HaidaBucks and took a Texan bar owner to court over a beer he brewed and sold named Star Bock. Sam Buck Lundberg, a coffee shop owner in the small town of Astoria in Oregon, didn't have long to wait for her Starbucks order when she used her name to brand her shop "Sambucks". Starbucks sent her a cease and desist letter and reportedly offered her $500 (£400) to rebrand, but when she didn't comply the case went to court. In 2005, a judge ruled in favour of the coffee giant, ordering her to drop the name "Buck" from everything in her store, including the coffee cups and the front window. Lundberg's verdict? After the ruling she told ABC News: "People think this is a crock of crap." To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your inbox, sign up free for Media &amp; Tech Network membership. All Guardian Media &amp; Tech Network content is editorially independent except for pieces labelled "Paid for by" – find out more here.

Germany The German political mainstream is getting increasingly nervous about the effect that the rise of fake news might have on federal elections next autumn. Fake news and Russian interference – either by influencing fake news sites, or by hacking or misinformation – are viewed as a serious threat to the democratic process, particularly since the US presidential elections. From rumours that Merkel was in the east German secret police, the Stasi, to others suggesting she is Adolf Hitler's daughter, Germans are also proving themselves susceptible to false information. The most blatant example of fake news to hit Germany so far occurred earlier this year over reports that a 13-year-old girl of Russian origin, known as Lisa F, had been raped in Berlin by refugees from the Middle East. The story received extensive coverage on Russian and German media who reported the allegations that she had been abducted on her way to school and gang-raped. The attack turned out to have been fabricated, as Berlin's chief of police was quick to point out. According to Berlin's public prosecutor's office the girl had spent 30 hours with people known to her, and a medical examination proved she had not been raped. But having been shared widely on social media and through Russian news sites, hundreds took to the streets to protest at the "attack", along with far right and anti-Islam groups. Sergey Lavrov, Russia's foreign minister went so far as to accuse Merkel's government of "sweeping the case under the carpet", heightening suspicions in Berlin that the Kremlin was deliberately trying to cause trouble. There are suspicions that the story was spread in the first place by Russian elements keen to undermine the refugee policy of Angela Merkel. She is viewed as a key enemy to Russia over her tough stance on Ukraine. The ultimate aim is said to be to destabilise her domestically just as she has said she will stand for a fourth term in office. In an interview with Der Spiegel magazine Hans-Georg Maaßen – the head of the BfV, Germany's domestic security agency, – accused Russia of using KGB-style techniques of misinformation. Addressing the Bundestag on the subject last week, Merkel said: "Today we have fake sites, bots, trolls – things that regenerate themselves, reinforcing opinions with certain algorithms, and we have to learn to deal with them." Fake news has also spread to neighbouring Austria and been used to discredit both candidates in this weekend's presidential election. Most startling have been the attacks on the Green-backed independent candidate Alexander van der Bellen, whose opponents have attempted to spread the news that he is suffering from dementia and is gravely ill. Kate Connolly France Over the last 10 years, France has seen a sharp increase in the readership of alternative, far-right sites, blogs and social media operations, referred to collectively as the fachosphère – ("facho" is slang for fascist). Promoting views including anti-immigration, nativism and ultra-nationalism, these sites are run independently, rather than by a political party. But they feed into a mood of distrust of the traditional media, both on the far right and the far left. Samuel Laurent, head of Le Monde's fact-checking section, Les décodeurs, said: "In France, there isn't a wide presence of totally invented fake news that makes money through advertising, as seen in the US." But he said France was seeing increasing cases of manipulation and distortion, particularly during election periods. One example, in the recent primary race to choose the French right's presidential candidate, was a campaign on the fachosphère to claim the centre-right candidate Alain Juppé was linked to the Muslim Brotherhood. The accusation dated back to local elections in 2014 when distorted stories circulated on a far-right opinion website, accusing Juppé of wanting to build a "Mosque-Cathedral" in Bordeaux, where he is mayor. The story grew and was embellished during the primary campaigns to portray Juppé as a Muslim Brotherhood-linked "Ali Juppé". Juppé said a "disgusting campaign" had been run against him. Laurent said: "I think the French presidential election campaign [next spring] will be fraught with this type of thing." In January, as the presidential election campaign prepares to kick off, Le Monde's Les décodeurs will launch a database of questionable sites that portray themselves as information sites. The recent Paris terrorist attacks were also subject to conspiracy theories and distortions, including reports this summer that gunmen who killed 90 people at a rock gig at the Bataclan last November had mutilated their victims. These reports cited partial evidence to a parliamentary inquiry into the attacks, without adding that the inquiry also heard officials deny that any mutilation took place. There is also an ongoing row over fake information websites about abortion in France. The lower house of the French parliament has approved government plans to ban fake abortion information websites which masquerade as neutral, official sites with free-phone helpline numbers but which the government said promote anti-abortion propaganda and pressure women not to terminate pregnancies. The women's minister, Laurence Rossignol, told parliament on Thursday that anti-abortion groups in France were setting up sites "that appear neutral and objective" and copy official government information sites but were "deliberately seeking to trick women". She said these sites often had helplines run by "anti-choice activists with no training who want to make women feel guilty and discourage them from seeking an abortion." Angelique Chrisafis Myanmar A Burmese friend recently put it like this: in the old days, people went to the tea shop to get their news. Now, they go to Facebook. After decades of isolation under successive military regimes, Myanmar's 51 million people began to come online rapidly in 2014 after telecoms reforms. They leapfrogged the era of dial-up and desktops, starting with mobile phones and social media. For many, Facebook is synonymous with the internet. With scores of voices clamoring to be heard for the first time, it's a dynamic, sometimes dangerous space. As well as "#foreveralone" statuses and a barrage of updates from staunchly Facebook-first media organizations, news feeds are crammed with fake content. Much of it is tinged with religious hatred. With tensions between the majority Buddhist and minority Muslim populations running high, many are ready to believe vitriolic nonsense about Islam and its followers, often propagated by nationalist accounts set up for the purpose. A Muslim journalist was recently the victim of a campaign by some of these accounts, when a widely followed nationalist posted pictures of him juxtaposed with images of an unknown Rohingya Muslim militant. The post claimed he was involved in attacks on border police and called for his immediate arrest. Nothing happened – the post was eventually taken down, though not before more than 3,000 people shared it. But the episode was a hint of the frightening power that fake news can have in a context like Myanmar. Poppy McPherson Italy In Italy, the spread of propaganda has become such a worry for the government that a top official in prime minister Matteo Renzi's circle of advisers recently filed a defamation complaint against a mystery Twitter account – it has since disappeared – who tweeted under the name "Beatrice di Maio" and routinely took aim at Renzi's government. In one example, the Twitter account showed a picture of Elena Boschi, the reform minister, on the phone. It suggested she was sharing insider information with her father, who was a top executive at Banca Etruria, a Tuscan bank. The bank was rescued by the Italian government in 2015 but there is no evidence that Boschi helped her father or committed wrongdoing. In Italy the attacks against Renzi have been stepped up ahead of the critical 4 December referendum. In some cases, news about Italy reported by Russian state-controlled website RT Today has been especially skewed against the prime minister. In one case highlighted by La Stampa, the Italian daily, the Russian website falsely claimed that a rally in Rome held by supporters of Renzi ahead of the referendum were actually his opponents. The story has since been removed. Members of Renzi's Democratic party have complained that "mud-slinging" websites controlled by the anti-establishment Five Star Movement, which abhors traditional political advertising, are to blame for spreading false and defamatory news about the government's activities. Stephanie Kirchgaessner China As reports emerged that fake news had influenced the US presidential election, China trumpeted its system of a "internet management", portraying freedom of speech as broken when it can affect the outcome of an election. "China is on its way to strengthening internet management," said an editorial in the Global Times, a tabloid affiliated with the Communist party mouthpiece People's Daily. "The western democratic system appears to be unable to address" the problems and conflict unleashed by the internet, the paper added. The fake news that spread on Facebook in the run-up to the election even spread to China. Articles originally posted on pro-Trump websites, including Breitbart, were directly translated into Chinese and shared on the country's social media platforms. Problems with fake news and fraudulent reporters have existed for over a decade in China, with people often presenting themselves as journalists and threatening companies with negative coverage in an attempt to extort money. In one high-profile case, a journalist was paid more than $70,000 to write negative stories about a construction equipment manufacturing company, sending its shares tumbling. But the authorities have seized on the phenomenon as a justification to censor a wide-range of content. In 2013, the government launched a crackdown on online "rumour-mongering" targeting influential users on the Twitter-like website Sina Weibo, but it was widely seen as an attempt to stem criticism of the ruling Communist party. More recently, Chinese authorities have clamped down on "fake news" they feel harms social cohesiveness, targeting "rumours" that affected property prices in Shanghai or stories the government says increase antagonism between urban and rural residents. Earlier this year China's cyberspace administration issued new rules designed to curb the number of stories using information culled from social media, stating "it is forbidden to use hearsay to create news or use conjecture and imagination to distort the facts". News outlets cannot use information posted on social media without prior approval, it said. More recently a top official at the administration suggested there should be a database to identify internet users' true identities so they could be "rewarded and punished". China maintains extensive control over the internet and many foreign websites, including Facebook, Google, Twitter and YouTube, are all blocked by a government program known as "the Great Firewall". The country's vast censorship system that imposes media blackouts on topics ranging from missteps by China's leadership to investigating corruption cases. A recent directive banned websites from live streaming coverage of the US election. Benjamin Haas Brazil Brazil has a growing problem with fake news and its importance has grown as political opinion polarized following the close re-election victory of leftist president Dilma Rousseff in 2014 and her controversial impeachment in August this year. According to a BBC Brasil report from April 2016, as the impeachment process that Rousseff and her supporters called a politically motivated coup began heating up, three out of the five most shared news stories on Facebook were false. A story shared by the Pensa Brasil (Think Brasil) site that falsely said that federal police wanted to know why Rousseff had given 30bn reais ($9bn) to the giant meat company Friboi came third in the ranking with 90,150 shares. Last year Brazilian journalist Tai Nalon left her job at the Folha de S Paulo, one of Brazil's leading newspapers, to found the site Aos Fatos (To The Facts) – Brazil's first fact-checking site. "There is a lot of false news," Nalon said in an email interview, "but I would be cautious about saying the problem is similar to what happens in the USA". Instead, she said there are politically motivated pages that reinterpret and distort existing stories from big news outlets and that much of what they share is more biased opinion than pure falsehood. But plenty of false stories do circulate on Brazil's garrulous internet. The two-year investigation into the Petrobras scandal, called Operation Car Wash, was a key driver in Rousseff's impeachment. Although she has never been accused of graft, many in her party have been and the scandal prompted huge street demonstrations calling for her removal. BuzzFeed Brasil this month published this story about how more false news about the operation has been published than real. This year, the 10 most popular false news stories about Car Wash were shared 3.9m times, BuzzFeed said, citing Facebook data. The 10 most popular real stories were shared 2.7m times. Dominic Phillips Australia Fake news is not a problem of any scale in Australia: the media market, dominated by a handful of key players serving a population of just over 21 million people, does not seem fragmented enough. But Australia is not immune to issues with untruths spreading on Facebook. Over half the population (13.3 million as at end of June) is connected to the internet; of that number, more than half is believed to be active on Facebook. Some issues seem to be more of a lightning rod for untruths in Australia than others. The link between the halal certification industry and terrorism – repeated by politicians despite a lack of evidence – was so persistent that an inquiry was held late last year. Concerns over halal certification – often failing to completely mask rampant Islamophobia – flourished on Facebook, even after the inquiry found there was no basis to the connection. The Boycott Halal in Australia group has close to 100,000 members on Facebook. In November 2014, it shared a satirical news article, apparently under the impression it was true. The post was subsequently deleted, but the page is a hotbed for views that have no basis in fact, as is the page for supporters of the Q Society, which bills itself as "Australia's leading Islam-critical movement". Pauline Hanson, a fringe figure in rightwing politics who is outspoken against Islam, was re-elected to the senate in the federal election in July with support that surprised many pundits. Her One Nation party took four seats in the 76-strong senate this year and the party is expected to do well in the Queensland state elections. Parallels have been drawn between her return to politics and Trump's election: both have embraced social media, where they have significant followings, and are similarly unfazed by evidence. In August, research showed 62% of voters agreed with the statement: "I might not personally agree with everything she says but she is speaking for a lot of ordinary Australians." She is active on Facebook, as are many of her supporters. She recently announced that the majority of her press releases would be released only on Twitter. Elle Hunt India After India's prime minister announced the introduction of a new, 2,000-rupee note last month, phones around the country lit up with the news the bill would come installed with a surveillance chip, linked to a satellite that could track the notes even 120 metres underground. The claims, debunked by the country's reserve bank, nonetheless spread like fire over Whatsapp – which has more than 50 million users in India – and migrated into mainstream news. As in the United States and elsewhere, increasing numbers of Indians are getting their news from social media. But the 2,000-rupee episode illustrates the deeper impact of fake news in a country where media is prolific, but journalistic standards, especially in regional media, can still fall short. "Mainstream media in India is more impacted by the phenomena [of fake news] because they broadcast these kinds of stories without verifying," says Prabhakar Kumar, from the Indian media research agency, CMS. "There is no standard policy for TV news and newspapers about the process of researching and publishing stories." Police have arrested people accused of concocting false stories, especially when they run the risk of igniting communal tension. Administrators of Whatsapp groups have been warned they could be held responsible for the messages they oversee. But social media has only enabled a much older reliance on rumour and innuendo, especially in India's villages. Two boys in Dadri village, near Delhi, didn't need Whatsapp last year to spread rumours a local man was storing beef in his freezer. They broadcast from the loudspeaker at the village temple. Mohammed Akhlaq, the 50-year-old labourer named by the boys, was lynched. Michael Safi

Knowing how to present a strong point of view clearly and concisely is essential for any writer. Whether you are a journalist who wants to sharpen their opinion voice, an activist wanting to write about their passion or a communications expert who is looking to produce poignant advocacy articles, this one-day course is a must. Guardian Australia columnist and experienced teacher Van Badham will share her trademark humour in this practical Masterclass for aspiring op-ed commentators. Participants will learn how to tap into their inner comment voice, but also be provided with the practical nuts and bolts of opinion writing from conception to publication and beyond. You'll be armed with an overview of the changing market for commentary in Australia, be introduced to structural templates, be walked through the pitching process, and be given personal insights into the protocols and practicalities of promoting your work. The class is particularly suited to policy wonks, spokespersons, activists and an opinionated democratic citizenry trying to develop media comms skills. This course is for you if... You're an aspiring columnist who wants to tell clear, persuasive stories with a distinctive voice You're a journalist who wants to more effectively use your editorial voice You write for a website or blog and want to learn how to present your arguments with skill and confidence You work for a NGO, lobby group or similar and need to submit advocacy pieces to comment pages and websites You're new to writing and want to break into the industry through comment pieces or citizen journalism You're a journalism or communications student PLEASE NOTE: Please bring laptop to use in class. A course preparation document will be provided ahead of class. Course description The Masterclass is a practical introduction to the market context of Australian commentary, with a focus on the technical craft of writing it. Van's inimitable style incorporates formal instructions within an accessible, casual atmosphere. Topics covered on the day include: What is op ed? A basic overview of what op-ed is and its role within journalism and civic participation Op-ed in Australia: providing a context to the current market for commentary in Australia Expertise and inspiration: understanding the source of commentary and what differentiates an opinion from a rant Objective and conception: exploring the foundations of how to conceive and pursue articles How to pitch: the protocols of getting your work before editors - what works and what doesn't Structure and content: how to structure your content for effective and clear commentary Stylistics of writing: the trickiest bit, involving an analysis of what differentiates merely clear comment to effective writing Building your reputation: advice on how to build a personal brand as a commentator and increase your chance of greater exposure Encourage yourself: dealing with rejection, common commentary hazards and some concrete advice to stay sane You will leave this Masterclass with the bones of an effective article of commentary in your hand and a better understanding of what gets published and why in your head. PLEASE NOTE: Successful participation in the course presumes a high degree of English language skills, written and spoken. Tutor profile Van Badham is an award-winning writer and experienced teacher and communicator. In addition to being a weekly columnist for Guardian Australia, she is also a Guardian cultural critic, the winner of three Premiers' literary awards for her creative work and a theatremaker of international renown. She holds a Masters in Writing from the University Melbourne and undergraduate degrees in writing, English and communications from the University of Wollongong/University of Sheffield, UK. She has taught writing, theatre, film, performance, radio and visual art theory subjects within degree programmes at Monash University, the London Academy of Music and Dramatic Art (LAMDA) and the University of Wollongong. Active on social media, you can follow her on Twitter or Periscope via @vanbadham. Book now This Masterclass is now closed Details Date: March 8 Times: 10.30am-5.30pm Location: Guardian Offices, Level 2, 19 Foster Street, Surry Hills Price: $299 Event capacity: 20 Dress code: There is no dress code for Masterclasses. Please wear whatever you feel comfortable in To contact us, click here. Terms and conditions can be found here. Returns policy Tickets may be refunded if you contact us at least 7 days before the course start date. Please see our terms and conditions for more information on our refund policy.

The Liberal Democrats threw everything they had into the Richmond Park byelection triggered by Zac Goldsmith's resignation from the Conservative party. In the weeks since he announced his decision to stand as an independent in protest at Heathrow expansion, activists have carried out more than 150,000 door-knocks, resulting in more than 50,000 conversations. Tim Farron's party also tried to plaster themselves all over the constituency with more than 1,000 window posters and 700 stake boards. They finished their effort with a flourish: 400 activists pounding the streets on election day, starting with a somewhat antisocial 4am leaflet drop. Their literature included one pamphlet entitled "Your choice on Thursday", on which there was an arrow pointing to "hard Brexit" and another to the "single market". From Goldsmith, there was a newsletter about a strong track record with a map of Richmond covered in the red scrawls of potential flight paths. Goldsmith had been desperate for it to be a referendum about a runway; the Liberal Democrats were determined to make it a byelection over Brexit. Two weeks out and it was Farron's party that began to win the battle as the residents of Richmond started to respond to their Brexit mantra. After all, the pro-Heathrow Tories did not put up a candidate and the Lib Dem contender, Sarah Olney, was also against the third runway, leaving Goldsmith with no serious opposition on his central campaigning point. The Lib Dems, however, were able to tap into unease in an outer London borough that voted 72% in favour of remain in June's EU referendum. The constituency itself was thought to be even more pro-staying inside the EU than the council-wide average. Goldsmith's strengths were his massive local popularity – turning what was a Lib Dem seat until 2010 into a 23,000 Tory majority by 2015 – and his principled stand over a third runway in a constituency already marred by aircraft noise. He was well liked enough that few local voters seemed to blame him for the controversy surrounding his attempt to become mayor of London with a campaign that was criticised for playing on Sadiq Khan's race. An issue that had seriously damaged his reputation across the city barely featured in this byelection race. Some felt that the former Tory stood a good chance because Olney was not a well known Lib Dem figure like Vince Cable, who lost his seat in neighbouring Twickenham in 2015. But Goldsmith's position in support of Brexit put him well out of step with these normally loyal constituents, many of whom work in the City in jobs with strong European links. He was further hampered by the so-called progressive alliance through which the co-leader of the Green party, Caroline Lucas, threw her support behind Olney, as did the Women's Equality party. While Goldsmith might have felt buoyed that Labour did not follow suit, despite calls within the party to do so, it was of little help in the end. Labour's candidate, Christian Wolmar, was unable to break through a wave of tactical voting that squeezed his vote to an embarrassingly low, deposit-losing level as supporters turned in droves to Olney instead. The result underlines a major challenge for Jeremy Corbyn's party, which must beware that while it understandably needs to look over its shoulder at Ukip, it should not forget that its potential supporters are also packed at the other end of the Brexit divide. On the final weekend, three Labour activists even turned up at Lib Dem HQ and asked if they could go door-knocking to help get out the vote. On the day of the poll, many local residents admitted they were voting Lib Dem in order to make the statement that Olney wanted. One Goldsmith supporter even admitted she thought he had lost because "the Lib Dems made this all about Brexit but he barely mentioned the referendum". It all resulted in a stunning victory for the Lib Dems, who overturned one of the Tories' safest looking seats. The party will deservedly cheer the result as a statement about the government's direction on Brexit and also take heart that they still have the ability to squeeze a third party – often a critical factor in first past the post elections. But these should be cautious celebrations. This byelection has shown that Farron's 48% strategy – targeting the very large minority of voters who backed remain in the EU referendum – can cut through in a place like Richmond. Still, for a party crushed to just eight MPs in 2015, Richmond Park is only a tiny step back in the right direction. The Lib Dems have made it into the foothills of a hike back to electoral relevance. They know that to make serious gains up the mountain of a general election means much more than persuading the most fiercely pro-EU electorate in parts of London. Instead, they need to win time and again, with stretched resource and in target seats that are largely scattered across a much more Eurosceptic south-west England – which also voted Tory in 2015 but then went on to back Brexit a year later.

A bizarre suburban byelection has been rescued from meaninglessness by 20,510 Richmond Park electors who have put Liberal Democrat Sarah Olney into the House of Commons and given erstwhile Tory pin-up boy Zac Goldsmith an almighty boot in the Brexits. The billionaire's son who was once the environmentalist facelift of David Cameron's rebranded Conservatives and who began the year with hopes of becoming London mayor will end it twitted, tarnished and politically unemployed. Everything about the contest was unreal. Goldsmith resigned as the affluent, Thames-side seat's Conservative MP in protest at the Conservative government's decision to expand capacity at Heathrow airport despite regretting having promised to do so when initially winning the seat in 2010. The party he has formally left in order to see that pledge through as an independent indulged him in his act of reluctant principle by not standing a pro-expansion candidate against him. They weren't alone. Olney and Labour's candidate Christian Wolmar didn't want a bigger Heathrow either. The Greens opted out to assist the Lib Dem. The way was left fatally clear for a contest Goldsmith had intend to be a referendum about aircraft noise in south-west London to instead became one about the even bigger and more polluting din that is the aftermath of the EU ballot held in June. Goldsmith, like his father before him, is a dedicated Leaver in one of the most Remain-leaning quarters of Remain City. Ukip stepped aside to help him win. He was in trouble from the very beginning. Goldsmith's EU view wasn't the only reason the anti-airport man was cruising for a bruising. He'd fought his wretched mayoral campaign claiming that the greatly increased majority he'd secured in 2015 showed that his constituents valued his independent spirit and personal style. Yet the air war part of that mayoral campaign was the nastiest example of negative tactics the capital has seen since the notorious 1983 Bermondsey byelection - won by the Liberal Democrats, by the way - and the most sly and pernicious example of dog-whistle politics the capital has yet endured. The Tory muck machine fed its media conduits - primarily the Evening Standard and the Sunday Times - guilt-by-association non-stories designed to stir Londoners' anxieties about Islamist terror to the disadvantage of Labour's candidate, the Muslim Sadiq Khan. Called out, Goldsmith became indignant. His defence was that he'd never claimed Khan himself held extreme views but that his past support for causes also backed by alleged fanatics brought his judgment into question. But it was Goldsmith to whom London voters assigned guilt by association. Rather than Khan being "linked" with extremists in the majority's minds, Goldsmith became linked with dirty politics. This was the direct antithesis of all he claimed he stood for, and it did not go unnoticed in Richmond Park. The issue came up on the doorstep. Challenged about it, Goldsmith stuck to his stubborn denials. A politician long hailed for his grace and purity has become indelibly soiled. For Olney and her party, victory will feel like the next step on a national comeback trail in a region of the capital that used to be an orange stronghold. For London, it is a local reassertion of its people's disquiet over the turbulence triggered by the Brexit vote and the destructive mentalities it has unleashed. A freak of a byelection that risked being pointless has ended up as a restatement of some of the capital's most distinctive values. It won't be the last time the city makes its feelings known. Dave Hill is the author of Zac versus Sadiq: the Fight to Become London Mayor, which can be bought from the Guardian Bookshop or directly from the author.

John Gaustad, who died in June, argued that "the best sports books are about life itself, as much as sport". The range, depth and ambition of the books published in 2016 prove his point. The judges for Gaustad's creation, the William Hill Sports Book of the Year, did him proud with a winner so leftfield – William Finnegan's exquisitely observed surfing memoir Barbarian Days (Corsair) – that even its author questioned its eligibility. But more mainstream works also show sport illuminating life. Jonathan Wilson's Angels With Dirty Faces (Orion) offers a perceptive, wide-ranging history of Argentina seen through the prism of football. Messi, Maradona, Boca Juniors and the 1978 World Cup have their expected places, but so too do Juan and Evita Perón, the Malvinas and refrigerated beef in explaining a nation so singular that economist Simon Kuznets divided countries into "developed, undeveloped, Japan, and Argentina". Similarly, academic Alan McDougall's The People's Game (Cambridge) uses football to examine life, and to explore the limits of authoritarian state power, in the little-lamented German Democratic Republic. Australian writer Gideon Haigh's Stroke of Genius (Simon &amp; Schuster) brings a virtuoso's breadth of reference and perception to a famous photograph of cricketer Victor Trumper. His book explores broad themes, ranging from aesthetics and the business of commercial photography to the lives of Trumper and photographer George Beldam, to Australia's cricket and its wider history. In June, the UK voted to leave the European Union, and England, less willingly, left the European football championships. Fine books help explain both. Rory Smith's Mister (Simon &amp; Schuster) casts a fresh long-term perspective on footballing insularity, showing how British coaches helped bring the game to the world but found themselves and their insights forgotten or ignored at home. Anthony Clavane's compelling A Yorkshire Tragedy (Riverrun) spotlights both the decline of the county's sports teams and its many "leave" votes in detailing the destruction of once-thriving industrial communities. Yorkshire at least still manufactures good history. John Dewhirst's Life at the Top and Room at the Top (Bantamspast) are well-researched accounts of earlier, happier sporting times in Bradford, while Leeds rugby league memories feature in Bev Risman's highly readable memoir of a life across two codes Both Sides of the Fence (Scratching Shed). Elsewhere, Spurs followers were similarly well served by Martin Cloake and Alan Fisher's A People's History of Tottenham Hotspur (Pitch), a splendid chronicle of the club's fans, and an evocation of Spurs's greatest years in Cliff Jones's It's a Wonderful Life (Vision Sports). It was not entirely a year of British footballing failure. Wales's joyously unexpected progress to the Euro semi-finals will be comprehensible to anyone who reads Chris Wathan's Together Stronger (St David's), while the 50th anniversary of England's World Cup win inspired Peter Chapman's Out of Time (Wisden). His memoir of a postwar Islington childhood, goalkeeping for Leyton Orient juniors, and turning 18 in 1966 – with numerous rites of passage – is vivid, acute and affectionate while evading the trap of sentimentality. More British historical figures in Christopher McGrath's Mr Darley's Arabian (John Murray), a picaresque chronicle of horse racing whose ingenious storytelling via bloodlines gives both the pleasure of a chapter titled "A Groom With a View" and offers the alarming fact that every British thoroughbred is traceable back to Aleppo. If some books explain the world, others hope – and deserve – to change it. Guardian writer Anna Kessel's Eat Sweat Play (Macmillan) indicts the social and cultural forces that deny women access to sport. It is personal, passionate and polemical, drawing on her own story and the experiences of others – from sporting enthusiasts to Olympic medallists – to reveal the true "killjoys". They are not, as the jibes would have us believe, the campaigners for women's rights, but the body shamers who deny women the straightforward fun associated with sport. Meanwhile, Carrie Dunn's The Roar of the Lionesses (Pitch) offers valuable insight into women's football. The biography shelves hold three terrific lives of the extraordinary long-distance runner Emil Zátopek. All do justice to both his athletic achievements and his contested role in Czech national life, particularly after the Soviet invasion of 1968. Elegant accounts are given in Rick Broadbent's William Hill-shortlisted Endurance (Wisden), with its compelling subplot about Zátopek's dissident coach Jan Haluza, and Richard Askwith's longlisted Today We Die a Little (Yellow Jersey), while Pat Butcher's shorter, quirkier and more personal Quicksilver (Globerunner) draws on the author's experience as both athlete and athletics journalist and includes some sharp political insight. The much-missed Guardian sports writer Frank Keating might have seen three of the William Hill shortlist as fresh ammunition for a complaint about its taste for "misery memoirs". And there is little to cheer in Chasing Shadows (Hardie Grant), Tim Lane and Elliot Cartledge's life of cricketer and writer Peter Roebuck, who died in contested circumstances in 2011. But it is a brilliant investigation of a gifted and profoundly troubled man. Both Oliver Kay's Forever Young (Quercus) and Diana Nyad's marathonswimming memoir Find a Way (Macmillan) carry "misery" stigmata, but also uplift. Kay's story of Adrian Docherty, a Manchester United shooting star cut off by injury and an early death, is as much celebration of an engaging and original personality as lament for his loss. Meanwhile, Nyad, abused by her father and her school swimming coach, chronicles her astonishing achievement in her 60s. Readers who still need cheering up can turn to cartoonist David Squires's The Illustrated History of Football (Century), which should leave them both happier and better informed, a tough combination to achieve in 2016. Save at least 30% on this year's critics' choices when you buy at the Guardian Bookshop. Visit bookshop.theguardian.com or call 0330 333 6846. Support the Guardian and its journalism with every book you buy this Christmas. *Free UK p&amp;p for online orders over £10. Minimum £1.99 p&amp;p applies to telephone orders. Best book lists of 2016 Best fiction Best crime and thrillers Best science fiction and fantasy Best biography and autobiography

We are living in times of uncertainty — budgets are being slashed, consumers are changing and competition is coming from places we least expect. And it's tough to get great ideas out into the world when we're already bombarded by billions of messages. How do we innovate in times like these? Creative Problem Solving offers a customer-centric framework to define a real-world problem, co-create solutions and pitch a concept. In this one-day workshop you will build your problem-solving toolkit and learn how to approach ideas in new ways. You will be taught to apply sound principles to design your own innovative, effective, and impactful solutions. Your idea might be for a startup, an app, a new business, or product. Either way, you're about to invest a whole lot of time and effort and this course will help you qualify the problem before you jump to an expensive solution. Your teacher for the day will be Suzanne Boccalatte, an awarding winning design director and communication specialist who has worked for over 25 years placing design at the core of business strategy. This course is for you if... Have a business issue you wish to solve Are struggling to get buy-in or funding for an idea Run a not-for-profit, arts or social organisation or a start-up and want to solve issues from your markets' perspective Struggle to understand what your customers want and need Have identified a problem in your organisation but don't know what to do next PLEASE NOTE: A course preparation document will be provided ahead of class. Prior design knowledge is not required, just enthusiasm to work on problems in a collaborative creative setting. Course description Your idea might be for a startup, a campaign, a website, a new business, or your brand might need a refresh, but what are the issues you're trying to solve? Have you considered your markets and if they care? Have you thought through an approach? You could spend a great deal of resources (and enthusiasm)—but what if nobody wants it? Have you a plan to test it? Why risk guessing a solution? Topics on the day include: What kinds of issues have you or your markets been experiencing? What are the key priorities to success? How do you know? What would the 'solution' allow you to do that you can't do now? What's the pay off? How do you measure success? If it's created such a big problem for you what has stopped you from addressing it before now? You will leave this Masterclass with the bones of a creative framework and implementation strategy. Tutor profile Suzanne Boccalatte is a designer, writer and business advisor. Her mission is using design to bring together people, business and culture. Suzanne has been Director of design consultancy Boccalatte for over 25 years and has a Bachelor of Visual Arts (First Class Hons), University of Sydney, qualifications in Communications Management (UTS) and Copywriting. Her passion for culture and creativity has led to her producing a series of books and events—including Trunk, an award-winning compendium with contributions from a global community of writers and designers. She has appeared on TV and radio, lectured at universities and sat on judging and advisory panels. In 2012 she was appointed to the NSW Government's Creative Industries Taskforce—the industry-led body set up to develop strategies to drive growth and innovation in the creative industries. She sits on Supported Studio Network Advisory Board for people with a disability and presented a keynote address at Arts Hub Conference 2015, on how business needs to articulate brand to thrive in a changing world. She was a mentor in the Semi Permanent X Telstra Innovation Lab and Telstra's Imaginarium 2015. Book now Link to eventbrite page https://www.eventbrite.com.au/e/a-crash-course-in-creative-thinking-sydney-march-22-tickets-29841890899 Details Date: March 22 Times: 10.30am-5.30pm Location: Guardian Offices, Level 2, 19 Foster Street, Surry Hills Price: $299 Event capacity: 20 Dress code: There is no dress code for Masterclasses. Please wear whatever you feel comfortable in To contact us, click here. Terms and conditions can be found here. Returns policy Tickets may be refunded if you contact us at least 7 days before the course start date. Please see our terms and conditions for more information on our refund policy.

In The Sikhs of Smethwick (BBC4), Ravi paid a visit to Sonia's mum's house. It was the final, sombre act in the incredible drama of their wedding. Ravi, of Punjabi ancestry, is a Christian, while Sonia is a Sikh, born and raised in the Black Country. "A generation ago," said director Billy Dosanjh in voiceover, "this marriage would have been practically impossible." The couple had two wedding ceremonies, one with a woman priest at Birmingham's St Philip's Cathedral, the other at the nearby gurdwara. "Sonia and Ravi are challenging tradition in a very British way," added Dosanjh. True, but a very Sikh tradition persisted. Ravi ceremonially bartered for his bride on Sonia's mum's doorstep. Only when his wad of proffered banknotes got thick enough was he let inside. Then, as Sikh tradition dictates, he was permitted to take Sonia to live with his family. The couple walked in sombre procession through Smethwick to his rented Rolls-Royce. In the Punjab, Dosanjh said, the bride might move to another village and never be seen by her family again. In this case, Sonia was only moving 20 minutes down the road. But still: how chastening for non-Sikhs such as myself to reflect that a wedding is not just pure joy, but also a bereavement for the bride's family that Sikhs, at least, solemnise in ritual. How different Sonia's marriage was from her mother's in the 1980s. Pam Kaur recalled arriving at Heathrow to meet her husband for the first time. She had never even seen his photo, so it was unclear which of the turbaned men in arrivals was her intended. Fortunately, he turned out to be "a wonderful guy". He died in 2009, though, so missed his daughter's wedding. I wonder if he would have approved of this British challenge to tradition? Let's hope. Not that Dosanjh disparaged arranged marriages in his film. He presented us with several Sikh couples who found love only after they married. Among them was the star of the show, ex-foundryman Balbir Bhujhangy, who sang a subtitled, a cappella tribute to his wife in their living room. Next year they celebrate their 40th anniversary when, you'd like to think, he'll eulogise her charms in song again. Two programmes last night asked who their respective subjects thought they were, but only one – Dosanjh's – came up with a satisfying answer. Who do the Sikhs of Smethwick think they are? If Dosanjh, born and raised in the former steel town, is anything to go by, they are Britons who want to honour their ancestors' struggles and to keep their traditions amid what he called Britain's "seeming anarchy". In 1964, his 14-year-old dad travelled 8,000 miles to work in the Black Country, and like other Punjabi immigrants, often did the dirtier, more dangerous jobs white people disdained. These single men, many with little English, often lived in overcrowded houses. Only much later could they afford to bring their families over or send for a bride.Bhujhangy wailed a lament for his and his fellow immigrants' struggles. "When I came to England I was overjoyed," he sang, wearing his hi-vis jacket and standing in front a forklift truck, "I didn't know how hard life would be." In the 1960s, Smethwick was regarded as Britain's most racist town (a hotly contested title, you'd think). Why? Because in 1964, Peter Griffiths was elected the town's Conservative MP on the slogan: "If you want a nigger for a neighbour, vote Labour." A de facto system of apartheid was in force. Pubs and clubs operated colour bars to keep Asian and black people out. A contemporary bingo hall sign read: "Colour this session: white". Dosanjh unearthed a heartbreaking old BBC recording of an Asian man complaining to a barber who wouldn't cut his hair. "I told you I'm closed." "You're not!" "I am – to you." Weeks before his assassination in 1965, Malcolm X came to the town to express his solidarity with the victims of Smethwick's racism. Dosanjh argued that Smethwick's 60s racism has its echo today. What Griffiths said then, he contested, "sounds remarkably to me like what people are saying today about immigration – but deny they're being racist". I wanted more from him to clinch that point. Instead, we got something lovelier – beguiling footage from the intervening half century chronicling the lives of the Sikhs of Smethwick - Punjabi wrestling tournaments, wedding videos, booze-ups and dancing. Not that Smethwick has been sunshine and lollipops for its Sikhs: when the foundries closed in the Thatcher-generated recession, some first-generation Sikh immigrants found it hard to get work and instead collapsed into alcoholic despair. There was one good consequence of that recession, though, Dosanjh suggested: hitherto housebound women went out to work, revolutionising masculinist Sikh culture in Britain for ever. Who do the Sikhs of Smethwick think they are? As Bhujhangy sang amid the allotments that elderly Sikhs have made flourish like their ancestral farms 8,000 miles away, I imagine they think they're people who have made the Black Country brighter. In Who Do You Think You Are? (BBC1), X Factor judge Amanda Holden found that she was descended from Bordelais viticulteurs. She stood in her ancestors' sunny vineyard sipping a glass of the 2010 vintage, looking glamorous and – understandably – slightly smug. Ever since she was a little girl and her mum had dressed her up in a beret and drawn-on moustache, Holden had dreamed of proving the family rumour that there was some French in her family. And now she had. "It's like heaven," Holden said. It's great to see our licence fee making celebs' dreams come true. I hope that doesn't sound sarcastic. What exasperated me, though, was that this series has given up showing how past shapes present in favour of cherry-picking ancestors' biographies for interesting stories - the Napoleonic-era infantryman who deserted for love, the second world war soldier who survived the navy's most calamitous shipwreck. Both stories told us a lot about their respective times, but Holden remained a soigné enigma.

Fremantle council's move to hold citizenship ceremonies on its "culturally inclusive alternative" celebration to Australia Day could be blocked by the federal government. Ben Morton, the Liberal MP for Tangney, has called on the government to stop the council "politicising" the annual citizenship ceremony. Alex Hawke, the assistant minister for immigration, said he would write to the council on Friday to advise it that its ability to preside over citizenship ceremonies would be revoked if it was found to breach the Australian Citizenship Ceremonies Code. But one Fremantle councillor, Dave Hume, told Guardian Australia that such an intervention would be "ludicrous" and "over the top". Hume, the only councillor to vote against the change, said the council had decided only to stop funding fireworks on Australia Day. He said the federal government now appeared to be attempting to distract the public from "their great big cock-up of everything else". "I think it's over the top and I think it's actually sad that something that was designed to actually be an inclusive event has proven to be so divisive," Hume said. "I think if everyone stood back and took a deep breath, they would realise that things weren't actually going to collapse and the roof wasn't going to cave in." The council had planned to hold celebrations on 28 January, the new "One Day" celebration intended by the city of Fremantle as a "culturally inclusive alternative" for Australia Day. But Hawke said citizenship ceremonies should be "non-commercial, apolitical, bipartisan and secular" and he would also ask the council to restore the ceremony to 26 January. "The government takes a very dim view of Fremantle council's decision to cancel their Australia Day events on political grounds," he said. "If Fremantle council is found to be in breach of the code, I have the power to revoke Fremantle council's ability to preside over citizenship ceremonies, under the Australian Citizenship Act 2007." Morton had expressed concern that new Australian citizens would be denied the "honour and privilege" of having their citizenship ceremony held on Australia Day. "Freo council needs to pull its head in, and focus on picking up the rubbish, fixing potholes and providing value to ratepayers," he said. "This is political correctness gone mad, I encourage anyone who wants to wear their Aussie flag shorts, green and gold caps and their thongs to head down to Freo on Australia Day and celebrate our national day. Just because the council doesn't want to, doesn't mean we can't. "Having your citizenship conferred to you on Australia Day is very special. The actions of Freo council will deny that very special occasion to our new citizens – it's a disgrace." The city of Fremantle issued a statement late on Friday saying it had not yet received any letter from the federal government but believed its plans were fully compliant with citizenship laws. The council had previously contacted the immigration department and was told there was no requirement to hold citizenship ceremonies on 26 January. "Many councils throughout Australia do not hold citizenship ceremonies on 26 January, or any other official events on that day," the statement said. When he announced the celebration on 25 November, Brad Pettitt, the mayor of Fremantle , said One Day acknowledged the fact that Australia Day "wasn't a day of celebration for everybody". He said the council had heard "loud and clear" opposition to Australia Day from local Aboriginal communities. Erik Jensen, the editor of the Saturday Paper, called for the rest of the country to follow suit with a campaign to #ChangeTheDate.

A polarised week in royal news: Kate Middleton's husband reveals she is a devotee of adult colouring books, while Princess Beatrice accidentally slices open Ed Sheeran's cheek with a ceremonial sword while trying to knight James Blunt. It should go without saying that the Yorks are the only element of the royal family it is acceptable to be spellbound by – and I haven't even got to Duchess Fergie's turn at the British Curry Awards yet, which is best described as a tumbleweed madras. Before we go there, though, a quick recap of the bit where Bea nearly blinded Ed Sheeran. It seems that the seventh in line to the throne – now that's a 10-part fantasy drama I'd watch, Daldry – threw a party at her father Prince Andrew's house in Windsor. At this event, music's James Blunt expressed an interest in being knighted. Beatrice availed herself of a sword and swung it – failing to realise that Ed Sheeran was right behind her. Somehow or other she cut Ed's cheek open, and he was taken to hospital, where he was immediately presented with a certificate for Least Rock'n'Roll Duelling Scar Ever. Meanwhile, this could hardly come at a more unfortunate moment for Princess Bea's prospects. At present, Prince Andrew is pushing hard for his daughters to be given full-time royal roles (and big apartments at Kensington Palace). I mean, bless her and everything, but they surely can't have Bea becoming a ribbon-cutting royal now? One minute, she's about to declare a new building open; the next, some poor little girl who only wanted to give a posy is undergoing an emergency scissorectomy. Imagine the potential carnage if Bea tried to launch a ship. Of course, we knew she wasn't the sharpest sword in the armoury since she was given a BMW with personalised plates for her 17th birthday, but left the keys in the ignition when she and her royal protection officers went off to the shops. Someone who technically owned a 1/60 millionth of a share in the vehicle drove off with it. Even so, this latest episode does seem to mark an escalation in chumpery, and we can only fear the worst for Beatrice's future in public service. And so to her mother's red-carpet appearance this week at the British Curry Awards – "often referred to as the Oscars of the curry industry", to read most of the reports. As is traditional with the phrase "the Oscars of our industry", it appears to have been deployed without irony, but I would very much like to see the Academy return the favour, and start conceding that the Oscars are "often referred to as the phal of the movie industry". Anyway, this year's British Curry Awards even featured a video message from the prime minister. Theresa May wasn't accepting an award remotely, in the manner of Sean Connery not being able to make it to the Baftas in the 1980s and sending his tenuously convincing video regrets from beside a pool in Hollywood. Instead, she appeared to be using the medium of curry to address some various value conflicts in British politics. "Today," she began, "curry is as close to this nation's heart as fish and chips. Right now, there must be thousands of British families sitting down to a spicy meal at home and in local restaurants," the prime minister continued, "and curry is as popular in Westminster as it is across the country." See? Us and them are not so different. However, Theresa would like it on record that the British people have had enough of curry experts. "And what makes these awards so special, better than any Michelin star, better than any accolade, better than any critic's write-up," she explained, "is that they are voted for by the public. They are the restaurants loved by local communities the length and breadth of Britain." That seems to have gone down well, but the same cannot be said of Curry Awards guest of honour Fergie, who may have lost the audience before she took the stage late, which, she said, was due to a problem with her sari. According to reports, Fergie found the crowd unresponsive, and said things like: "Well, come on everybody – it was a lousy clap"; and "Will everyone wake up and stop being so dull? And have some fun. For heaven's sake!" Things eventually became so excruciating that celebrated chef Heston Blumenthal stormed the stage and gave her a cuddle, telling a reporter afterwards: "I just wanted to protect her." My dear, the drama of it all. If the civil list doesn't work out for Bea, could Heston not consider protecting her by giving her a job in one of his kitchens? I can't imagine what could possibly go wrong, and urge him to consider it as a matter of honour.

Moving social housing tenants from one council borough to another is nothing new: in 2007, residents reported being offered housing elsewhere. But a three-pronged policy shift has intensified and increased the number and distance of placements: rising rents, the benefits cap, and new powers under the Localism Act 2011. The latter allows councils to offer out-of-borough placements and discharge their duty to house residents if they refuse such an offer. New research released exclusively to the Guardian, by Kate Hardy at the University of Leeds and Tom Gillespie at the University of Sheffield, offers a snapshot of the lives of people in the east London borough of Newham offered placements outside their areas. The researchers, working with the Focus E15 housing campaign, conducted interviews and surveys with people leaving council offices and who had been in contact with the housing department in the borough. The research shows precisely how vulnerable those in housing need are. The findings highlight the extreme vulnerability of the people accessing the housing service, with 22% reporting a disability that affected their housing needs, and 48% a health condition that did so. Of the respondents, 58% said they had been offered accommodation out of the borough and 44% were offered housing outside of London. The flats offered to these households weren't simply in adjacent boroughs: 16% were offered accommodation in Lancashire, and 13% in the West Midlands. Any move involves upheaval, but moving halfway across the country when you are already likely to be vulnerable causes huge emotional and health problems. One interviewee living in hostel accommodation with her two children said she'd come out in welts, rashes and persistent cold sores due to the stress, but as with several other respondents, avoided seeking help from health professionals for fear of social services becoming involved and removing her children. This fear isn't unfounded: in 2014 Titina Nzolameso had her children taken into care after refusing an out-of-borough placement, a decision that was quashed by the high court a year later. The researchers found women were disproportionately hit by housing problems in the sample they interviewed, comprising 67% of the group. Three quarters of the residents had been evicted: 41% had been evicted two or more times. Housing problems were worsening most people's health and causing them to become more vulnerable: 89% mentioned worsening mental health, with 66% specifically mentioning depression and 25% suffering from insomnia. Worryingly, 9% reported suicidal feelings – double the average rate of 4.3% among the general population. Half of the people interviewed had experienced problems with housing due to changes in benefits brought in during 2013. Ahmed, a 26-year-old in temporary accommodation, told researchers, "I got sanctioned last year. I missed an appointment because of a funeral. I started getting into rent arrears because of that. At that stage I got evicted due to that one sanction. The service charge and interest were massive. There was a two-week period where I literally had nothing. It was difficult, I was trying to budget, but once sanctioned it was too much, really hard." By sanctioning Ahmed once, the government have incurred more costs down the line, instead paying for temporary accommodation when previously Ahmed was renting without any problems. For many moved out of their borough, the move means they lose work and have to claim benefits instead. The research recommends several policy measures to improve the prospects and well being of households affected: ending the practice of out-of-borough placements in light of detrimental social, economic and health impacts on affected individuals; undertaking an equalities impact assessment due to the disproportionate effect on women; and that those seeking housing should be advised to bring advocates to meetings with officials. The report further recommends all meetings between council housing representatives and residents should be audio recorded. It says local authorities should consider people facing eviction automatically as at higher risk of mental health problems, with attendant referrals for services, and that full and immediate counselling should be offered to those approaching the council for help with housing and homelessness. Too often, complaints about the treatment of people facing homelessness, and indeed any service users, are met with grumbles about cost. But for many of the residents interviewed, placing them in temporary accommodation for long periods costs more than supporting people to stay in their homes and avoid eviction. Allowing people to stay in the borough and in work rather than move elsewhere and be forced into unemployment costs less in the long term. And given the link between poor housing and poor health, it's clear that investing in housing will improve life expectancy and quality. To do so, both the government, and local authorities have to commit to a more humane and thoughtful housing policy than shunting people around from borough to borough like unwanted units. Sign up for your free Guardian Housing network newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to you on the last Friday of the month. Follow us:@GuardianHousing

The first major exhibition of watercolours by the Anglo-American painter John Singer Sargent – better known for his swagger portraits of Edwardian beauties, worthies and rogues – will be shown at the Dulwich Picture Gallery in London next spring. Unlike his portraits, which often show his subjects in sombre – if expensive – clothing against plain dark backgrounds, his rapidly executed watercolours, usually made in the open air, sparkle with light and colour. The exhibition will be co-curated by Richard Ormond, former director of the Maritime Museum, the great-nephew of the artist and an acknowledged expert on his work, who said the pictures revealed Sargent's "zest for life and his pleasure in the art of painting". "The fluency and sensuality of his paint surfaces, and his wonderful command of light, never cease to astonish us. With this exhibition we hope to demonstrate Sargent's mastery of the medium and the scale of his achievement." Ormond said Sargent had been painting in watercolour from the start, but often used it later in his career as an escape from his studio and the weight of his society portrait commissions. The 80 works are coming from more than 30 lenders, including a 1911 The Lady With the Umbrella – recently identified by Ormond's co-curator, Elaine Kilmurray, as Sargent's niece Rose-Marie Ormond, painted elegantly sprawled in a white dress in the dramatic cropped composition typical of his watercolours – which has never been exhibited in the UK before. The pictures – which include figure paintings, landscapes and details of architecture – are coming from collections including the Tate, the British Museum, the Fitzwilliam in Cambridge, Oxford's Ashmolean, the Museu de Montserrat in Barcelona, the Calouste Gulbenkian in Lisbon and the Petit Palais in Paris, as well as from private owners. The exhibition at Dulwich Picture Gallery will run from 21 June until October 8 2017, during celebrations of its 200th anniversary.

On 5 July this year my world was turned upside down. Until then I was an average 28-year-old, married with two children and a full-time job, juggling the stresses of everyday life. But that morning I woke up to find my husband Daniel missing. He had suffered with his mental health for a long time, but I still did not expect what had happened. Daniel had taken his own life. My world was thrown into a spiral. So many questions were unanswered and an uncertain life now faced my family. Daniel left a lengthy note, mostly comprised of statements depicting his state of mind. But there was one element of his letter which really stayed with me: "You weren't able to save me but you can try and save someone else," he wrote. This sentence swam around in my head and the day after Daniel's death, I set up a charity called The DPJ Foundation to support others suffering from mental health problems in Wales. I wanted to use his name to make a difference. We decided that our work would focus on Pembrokeshire, a rural area with particular disadvantages for those suffering with mental health problems. It is a community where everyone knows everyone and admitting your supposed frailties isn't an option. Mental health problems are too often perceived as a weakness and just not talked about. Pembrokeshire also has a huge agricultural community. Agricultural occupations carry some of the highest rates [pdf] of suicide. Farming is a male-dominated [pdf] industry and one of high stress, especially in recent times as rates of bovine tuberculosis hit crisis level and many farmers face plummeting milk prices. So far the DPJ Foundation has raised £11,000 through donations and fundraising events. Initially this money is being used to train people within the agricultural sector in mental health awareness. By training vets, feed reps and others who work in the industry, it is hoped we can give them the tools to support those they see on a daily basis. It is widely known that farmers are a stubborn breed and we hope that by taking the support to them, rather than waiting for people to seek it themselves, we can provide help for those in need. The DPJ Foundation is very much in the early stages of its development, but we already have plans for counselling support and group support work next year. We hope that another family will not have to suffer the loss mine has. In the UK, the Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Hotline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is on 13 11 14. Hotlines in other countries can be found here. The day I made a difference is the Guardian Voluntary Sector Network's series that showcases the work of people involved with charities. If you have a story you want to share, email voluntarysectornetwork@theguardian.com with a short summary of your experience. Talk to us on Twitter via @Gdnvoluntary and join our community for your free Guardian Voluntary Sector monthly newsletter, with analysis and opinion sent direct to you on the first Thursday of the month.

The imminent article 50 hearings in the supreme court should herald a debate far more fundamental than that concerning the way Brexit is triggered. Over the past 50 years the UK has seen the growth of a democratic deficit that has brought us to the brink of bankruptcy. Ironically the sovereignty of the Westminster parliament was the crux of the leave argument against Europe. Yet the Brexiters now rail against the argument upheld in the court of appeal – that parliament, not just the prime minister, must authorise the article 50 mechanism for exit. Gina Miller, who brought the case, has been subjected to disgraceful threats and bullying. The crisis is the result of a highly centrist system in which the difference between the two main parties dwindled, and in which the actual votes cast bear little resemblance to the political complexion of parliament. In 2015 we had a majority government voted for by only 24% of the registered electorate. As the old saying goes: "If voting changed anything they would make it illegal." The extent of disillusionment and disengagement can be explained in a number of ways, but contributory factors include creeping privatisation in health, education and transport, all linked to MPs' and lords' private vested business interests; the power and influence of global corporations that duck and dive around their tax liabilities; the decision to go to war in Iraq with its inherent disregard for the rule of law; the destruction of industrial heartlands; the extraordinary lengths to which parliamentarians went to obstruct revelations about their expenses; and the impact of austerity upon the vulnerable. The eruption occasioned by the Brexit vote reflects, in large measure but not exclusively, a realisation by individual citizens that at last they were not beholden to traditional affiliations, and that each vote mattered and carried equal weight. The referendum on the EU was a radically different form of democracy to the parliamentary version, where representatives translate the will of the people. The overarching point is the huge disconnect between the lives and desires of ordinary people and those of the political elite. This has been allowed to develop because institutions and practices have gone unreformed, and because of an uncodified constitution – where the antiquated remnant of absolute monarchy, the royal prerogative, can be invoked; where secondary legislation avoids proper scrutiny; where MPs are not held to a mandate or the government to a social contract; where a prime minster can conduct a form of "sofa government" akin to an oligarchy, as was highlighted by the recent Chilcot report; or where a new prime minister takes office without a vote of any kind. It is time to go back to the drawing board, to sweep away the vestiges of inherited privilege, and reinvigorate the direct connection between citizens and government. These principles have been recognised in the recent past by the Occupy movement in Britain and the US, and at different periods in our history by groups including the Levellers and the Chartists. The need is for a fresh approach, to redefine the meaning and ambit of democracy for an emergent and politically active movement of citizens. The concept of a national convention on the constitution is already supported by campaigning groups such as Compass, Open Democracy, Unlock Democracy and Assemblies for Democracy, as well as the Green party. Such an exercise has not been seriously entertained since the Putney debates were held in St Mary's Church in 1647, when officers and soldiers of Oliver Cromwell's New Model Army discussed concepts such as universal suffrage and the abolition of the monarchy. There is still an inscription in the church that reads: "The poorest he in England hath a life to live as the greatest he." In 1688 a combination of parliamentarians and the Dutch monarchy overthrew James II to establish the supremacy of parliament, especially in matters of taxation, appointments, royal succession and the right to wage war. The 1689 bill of rights set the seal on these developments: free elections, freedom of speech in parliament, regular parliaments, and the norm of governance by consent. Now is the time to reach back into this history, and stem the advance of the new elite. Nothing should be off the table: the monarchy, the House of Lords, the relationship between the constituent parts of the UK, our outdated voting system. Questions about all these have been floating around for a long time, but rarely has the need to address them been so urgent. We need to create a democracy fit for the 21st century, in which the power of the people predominates over the people in power.

Last year, it seemed the spell had broken. The Brits critics choice award was given to Jack Garratt and – for once – the award's winner did not end the year bestriding pop like a mighty colossus, smiting competitors from his path with global smash after global smash. It was a far cry from James Bay (2015), Sam Smith (2014), Emeli Sandé (2012), Ellie Goulding (2010), Florence + the Machine (2009) and Adele (2008). This year, the Brits' organisers must have hoped the "panel of music industry experts and tastemakers" – no Guardian Music staffers in there – would choose someone a bit more likely to become the face of British pop over the coming year. So who are the three contenders for what the Brits are very keen should be referred to as the "specially designed Zaha Hadid award, one of the final commissions of her incredible career"? Anne-Marie Age: 25 From: Essex Her background: She was a West End child actor, appearing in Les Misérables when she was six and alongside a young Jessie J in Whistle Down the Wind when she was 12. She's also an international karate champion. Really. Musically, she made her mark as a featured singer with the likes of Magnetic Man, Gorgon City, Clean Bandit and Rudimental. This week, she was named the third biggest breakout artist globally on Spotify. Though we're not exactly sure what that means. Sounds like: A husky-voiced pop-dance featured artist making her way into a solo career, via husky-voiced pop-dance. Which is what she is. Release: There is no album on the schedules, but she is a "priority act" at Atlantic Records. Her most recent release was as a featured artist on Clean Bandit's Rockabye, while her biggest solo single so far, Alarm, reached No 16 in the UK. What she says: "I actually can't believe I am nominated for this amazing award [specially designed by Zaha Hadid, one of the final commissions of her incredible career]. This is so sick. To everyone who voted for me I am so grateful and humbled, here's to 2017!" Dua Lipa Age: 21 From: London Her background: If you only listen to one former model of Kosovar Albanian extraction this year, make it Dua Lipa. She's been on the tip lists for a year or so now, and her second single, Be the One, went platinum in Australia, and she was on the BBC Sound of 2016 longlist last year, meaning this is her second bite at the career-boosting award cherry. Sounds like: Hugely refined modern pop that is, dare we say, a little lacking in character. As Harriet Gibsone said of her in June: "This slick, slightly soulless operation is probably the most polished, proficient pop Glastonbury will witness all weekend." Release: Her most recent single is as the featured artist on Sean Paul's No Lie. Her debut album, Dua Lipa, will be released on Warner Bros on 10 February. What she says: "I couldn't believe it when I got the news. So honoured and grateful to be nominated for the critics' choice award [specially designed by Zaha Hadid, one of the final commissions of her incredible career]. This is the highlight of my year. I've said so many times that I've hit a lot of milestones this year, from performing at Glastonbury, to doing my own European tour, never doing the same thing two days in a row and going to places I've never been before. Truly living my dream, this is the icing on the cake. A huge dream of mine! Thank you for all the love and support from the bottom of my heart, this means the world to me! Thank you." Rag'n'Bone Man Age: 31 From: Uckfield, East Sussex His background: Here's a curious one. The critics' choice award is meant to be for new acts tipped for success, and – with the best will in the world – Rag'n'Bone Man is hardly a new artist. Rory Graham released his first EP in 2012, several years after starting out, and his Wolves EP – which featured Vince Staples and Kate Tempest among others – came out on Sony more than two years ago (it's also long enough to count as an album). Sounds like: He's certainly the most intriguing of the three artists here – a big, tattooed fella from a little English village, who, when he opens his mouth, sounds like a long-forgotten blues singer. He sings over samples from old blues and soul records – the whole thing is like some odd intersection of UK hip-hop and the classic soul revival. It's something both kids and the "real music" lot can get behind. Release: His debut album is released by Sony on 10 February. What he says: "It's bonkers that I've been nominated for critics' choice. Absolutely bonkers, I've been grafting, I built a strong fanbase over the years with help from good people that put their faith in me. And now this! I'm very grateful."

Viewed from the sunny hills of the Kaunertal valley, the outcome of Sunday's Austrian presidential election rerun is a foregone conclusion. In May, 85.1% of voters there supported the Green-backed candidate, Alexander Van der Bellen, who had grown up in the valley as the son of Estonian refugees. It was his best result anywhere in Austria. But in the Tyrolian Alps, echo chambers are a pre-digital, geological reality. One valley to the west, in Spiss, Van der Bellen's opponent, the far-right populist Norbert Hofer, scored his best result. In the village perched on the Swiss border, 87.5% of voters rooted for a candidate who has said he would have dissolved the parliament that presided over last year's refugee crisis, vowed to call a referendum on EU membership if the bloc of states takes further steps towards integration and hinted he could imagine a plebiscite on reintroducing the death penalty. The divide between Kaunertal and Spiss reflects a wider split across a country in which one half is increasingly struggling to understand the other. In May's runoff election, the two candidates were separated only by a few thousand votes, with Van der Bellen narrowly ahead. In July the constitutional court overturned the result due to "irregularities" in the processing of the postal vote. On Sunday the outcome is expected to be similarly tight. Officials are under instructions not to cut corners, to avoid a repeat of the May fiasco, so some pollsters say they don't expect the presidency to be called until Tuesday. When Hofer's Freedom party (FPÖ) succeeded in its bid to force a rerun, frustration with a divisive and costly election campaign was running high and many expected it to backfire. But recent surveys suggest Hofer may be able to swing the contest in his favour this time around: of the last nine polls, seven showed him in the lead and only one pointed to a win for Van der Bellen. "The more accustomed people have become to seeing Hofer's smile on TV, the less they think of him as a rightwing extremist," said Benedikt Narodoslawsky, of Falter magazine. Britain's vote to leave the European Union and Donald Trump's triumph in the US have emboldened the Freedom party, which governed Austria in a coalition with the conservative ÖVP between 2000 and 2005. Some senior FPÖ politicians were invited to an election-night party at Trump Tower in New York. As in the US, Austrian supporters of the far-right candidate have used social media to spread rumours about their opponent's health. The FPÖ leader, Heinz-Christian Strache, who has 400,000 followers on Facebook, recently shared a badly lit screenshot of Van der Bellen suggesting the 72-year old had forgotten to shave half his face. "What else does he forget?" Strache asked. In Unzensuriert.at, the Austrian far-right has its own equivalent of Breitbart News, railing against Muslims, the EU and biased mainstream media. And if you type "presidential vote Austria" into German-language Google, two of the top three results are official-looking websites that turn out to be run by the head of Austria's Eurosceptic EU Exit party, dismissing both candidates as "cheats". In an attempt to improve on May's results, both candidates have tried to fire up those who did not vote last time, leading them back to the regions where mood is already most polarised. Landeck, where both the villages of Kaunertal and Spiss are located, had the lowest turnout last time, at 62.1%. Tyrol used to be a relatively poor, agricultural region until the 1960s, when it began to benefit from a tourism boom. The EU's eastward expansion provided a further boost. These days tourists from not just Britain and Germany but also Poland and the Czech Republic come to explore the Tyrolian valleys. In 2014, more tourists visited the region than Greece. Kaunertal, where posters bearing Van der Bellen's face and slogan ("Sanity instead of extremism") vastly outnumber those of Hofer ("With heart and soul for Austria: so help me God"), has become the standout example of Tyrol's economic upswing. Since the former mayor Eugen Larcher managed to convince authorities to open up the nearby glacier to skiers and hikers in the 1960s, the valley has become an upmarket slow-travel destination: close to nearby skiing pistes but not overrun by tourists, with high-speed broadband and a newly built spa. "People often tell us we live at the arse-end of the world," said the ex-mayor's son Martin Larcher, 46, who runs a smart hotel in the centre of the village. "That used to be a negative, but now people seem to like it." Van der Bellen's personal connection to the area may be the key factor behind his overwhelming support here, even if the visible effects of climate change on Kaunertal's glacier have opened up the traditionally conservative-voting region to green ideas. "People appreciate Sascha," said Josef Raich, the current mayor, using an informal contraction of Van der Bellen's first name. "He's calm, unassuming, completely normal. He's never tried to force his ideology on me, and he accepts that people around here are deeply religious even though he is an agnostic." Hofer, on the other hand, "comes across as someone who is driven by his party, and the Freedom party thrives on fear and populist rhetoric," said Raich. Specifically, he was concerned about Hofer's previous comments on relations with South Tyrol. In 2015, Hofer called for the independent province in northern Italy – once part of the Austro-Hungarian empire – to be integrated into the Austrian state, and he has since proposed offering dual nationality to citizens of the autonomous province. Those comments on South Tyrol showed that "he doesn't think like a European", Raich said. "There's no economic advantage in joining Austria for South Tyrol – the borders are already open anyway. And ideologically we are all Europeans here." In Spiss, half an hour's drive away, the same comments have won Hofer support. "South Tyrol belongs to Austria, it's the same culture, shaped by the Alps," said Doris Nandin, who lets out two of the floors of her home to tourists and works in a hotel in nearby skiing resort of Samnaun. Her husband, she said, had recently bought a T-shirt that read: "Let's swap South Tyrol for Vienna." But the main reason she supported Hofer was the refugees. "I don't think it's fair that the refugees are being inundated with money while we are cutting pensions for our grandparents," Nandin said. She acknowledged there were no refugees in Spiss, a community of no more than 133 inhabitants. Last year the community voted against accepting the government's quota, but two families volunteered to take in a family each. By then the numbers coming into Austria had dropped and the offer was rejected. Yet reports of the handling of last year's crisis had shaken Nandin's faith in the government. "It's complete chaos here in Austria. Isn't it shocking that women can no longer walk home on their own at night unless they carry a can of pepper spray?" To describe Spiss as one of the losers of globalisation would be inaccurate. Like the area as a whole, the village has benefited from free movement to and from neighbouring states. But the tourism boom of the second half of the 20th century looks less sustainable here than in Kaunertal. Whereas hotels are already up and running in the valley down the road, the skiing season in Spiss has yet to start. Restaurants are shut, hotels are empty, and government red tape such as the smoking ban and allergen labelling requirements are frequently cited as reasons for poor returns. While Kaunertal plans to join up skiing areas with South Tyrol in 2018, Spiss is burdened with the harder Swiss border, where customs officers go as far as controlling the piste between Samnauen and Ischgl on skis. Some of the locals have to continue running small sheep farms on the icy hills. Alois Jäger, the mayor of Spiss, rejected the idea that the local economy had driven support for Hofer, pointing to the refugee crisis and Van der Bellen's age as key factors instead. He didn't think the outcome of the election would change much for his village. Next week Hofer may become Europe's first far-right president of the post-war era, but Jäger believed protests from other EU member states would prevent him from doing anything too extreme. He may have been trying to be diplomatic. In May, Jäger confided, he was one of the five people in Spiss who cast their vote for Van der Bellen instead.

When Andrew Witty became CEO of one of the biggest pharmaceutical firms in the world, GlaxoSmithKline, his industry was so unpopular that campaigners threw red paint at company stands during conferences to represent the blood of those who died because they could not afford medicines. Ten years on, as Witty, now Sir Andrew, prepares to retire from GSK, Big Pharma is increasingly being seen as part of the solution to global health issues and not the problem. Few would deny that a great deal of the credit goes to Witty. Two years into his tenure, with Big Pharma's reputation in the mire over the unaffordable cost of Aids drugs for people dying in Africa, Witty announced a major change of strategy. GSK would slash its prices in the poorest countries to no more than 25% of the UK price. It would also put any patents it owned over putative drugs that may have some effect on neglected tropical diseases into a "pool", which would allow anybody to investigate them. There was, he recalls, "a sharp intake of breath" from his competitors on the day the patent pools were announced, "but within a couple of years, we had 15 or 16 companies that had signed up to the patent pool and we've made huge progress." Later, he helped instigate a meeting of all the big company CEOs in London with Bill Gates to pledge to help end the neglected tropical diseases that affect millions in poor countries yet are unheard of in the west, such as leishmaniasis and trachoma. They donate drugs, pay for their distribution and continue to meet every year. "You think about the number of times you hear these meetings where everybody announces something and nothing happens," Witty says. "And in this situation we're talking about billions of doses of medicine being delivered to tens and hundreds of millions of people. It's huge and as an industry we should be super, super proud of that. "So if we played a small role in catalysing that, if that's the only thing I did in my life, that's not a terrible thing. And I'm very proud if we made that contribution, and what we've tried to do is continue to look for ways, keep on looking in different spaces, to say: is there something we can do here which can help further?" He cites as an example the "flexible IP" announcement in March, which was a pledge not to seek patents in the least developed countries and to grant licences to generic drug manufacturers to make cheap copies of their branded medicines in middle-income countries. GSK also said it intended to put new cancer drugs in a patent pool, as a response to the growing numbers dying of cancer in developing countries. "We will wait and see whether companies follow or not, but I think it raises the question for companies that may not have considered it and they have to address it," he says. Last week, for the fifth year running, GSK topped a league table compiled by the Access to Medicines Foundation, which scores the companies on a range of measures, from pricing and donation to research and development. Witty says ranking top in the index is important, but what matters more is that companies now care about it. "One day we won't be number one and I think that's fine because hopefully what we've done in the period ... is encourage other companies to compete and strive in a space which 10 years ago people probably weren't competing and striving in." GSK long ago took the view "that drug companies don't need to be just about innovation and return to shareholder". He talks of the "twin poles" of their business model, which are innovation – finding new drugs – and access. He denies there has been much resistance from shareholders, among whom there are those interested mainly in the returns and others who are, like many in the general public, concerned about societal issues. Other big businesses may want to take note. "Where is some of the discontent, whether it's of government or of big companies, where is some of that coming from?" he asks of the general mood of revolt against the establishment that has bubbled up this year. "Some of that I think is coming from the perspective that actually these companies aren't necessarily doing as much as 'the people' would like to see done on broader societal issues, whether that's environmental, whether it's access to medicine – there are a number of these themes," he says. He readily acknowledges that offering lower prices and waiving patents in Africa will help build the business there. "In the long run, these things do have a fairly concrete benefit to shareholders in the sense that you are building capacity, economic stabilisation, all of those things," he says. "You're also building trust, I think, between the company and the country and the people of the country." The access to medicine index, which has been going since 2008 and is funded by the Gates Foundation and the UK and Dutch governments, was not entirely complimentary about GSK. The company lost points for a corruption scandal in China, which Witty calls "a disappointment". And Médecins Sans Frontières criticised the index for highlighting some good practice among pharma companies that served to hide their failings. GSK and Pfizer had just dropped the price of their pneumococcal vaccine for use in emergencies but continued to charge high prices to middle-income countries, it said. Witty's answer is that the vaccine, against the leading killer of babies in Africa, is incredibly complex because it is 10 vaccines in one. "It's a very, very difficult vaccine to make and honestly it's unrealistic – when people say you can have three for a dollar, you can't. I'd love to say yes, but you can't. It's never going to happen." The bottom line is that they cannot make a loss. "I think we are doing everything we can to have the volumes available and we are already leading the way to bringing down the prices as far as we can," he says. "But at some point there is an irreducible minimum. Ultimately if you make no income on anything, you don't exist." This big question is whether Witty's initiatives will all be undone after he vacates his desk next March. He says not. His successor, Emma Walmsley, also believes in the access agenda, he says. "I don't think there's any great risk about her not being interested. She will be engaged and interested." The clashes with campaigners who want drug companies to do more will continue beyond Witty's retirement. But those who think he has not gone far enough will also hope he has taken the pharmaceutical industry in a direction from which there will be no turning back.

I have just returned from my last conference of the season – half a dozen in total, across the UK and Europe. One theme kept cropping up in conversations with fellow attendees: job insecurity, and the impact it is having on our families and lives. I spoke to a man, on his second post-doctoral fellowship, who was living across the country from his fiancée for a year to take advantage of a "good opportunity". The affianced pair were only seeing each other at weekends. There was the not-so-early-career researcher whose partner takes their daughter to play groups every single weekend, so she can write fellowship applications outside of work hours. There was the announcement that a top-notch researcher was leaving academia for the private sector, citing lack of job security and pay as the reasons. The crème de la crème was a lifetime achievement award for a professor who had never had a permanent job contract in her entire academic career. I am once again approaching the end of another fixed-term research contract. I won't say how many I have had, but I can say that this last post was longer than most. I had some time to breathe. Time to finish papers from previous posts, time to devote to writing papers for this project before having to devote evenings and weekends to trying to find the next post. I have had more time to spend with my family and friends. I have had time to exercise and take care of myself physically and emotionally. I have had time to think and reflect. Fractured relationships But the other posts, the ones that last a year or less, bring far more stress – for me and my family. I have to spend evenings and weekends on fellowship and job applications, trying to get papers accepted and preparing for job interviews. My loved ones have always been understanding, but I wonder how long they will feel this way. And, given the common cross-stress of trying to advance in academia at the same time as raising small children, I wonder how many other relationships are being fractured by this set-up. It is hard when I spend all day Saturday working and come home to find the house is a mess, a load of laundry to be done, and nothing for dinner. But I can't really complain, because my partner has spent all day with the child(ren) so I can work. It is hard to forgo spending time with my partner or catching up on sleep after our baby was awake half the night, but I have to work on that grant proposal. If I don't, I might not have a job after my current contract ends. This uncertainty means we can only plan our future a few years at a time: we can't commit to a mortgage, we can't plan which school our child will attend, we can't even plan a family holiday next summer because we don't know if I will have a job then. It brings a persistent low-grade anxiety that lingers around my heart, sometimes travelling up to constrict my throat as the time remaining on my contract dwindles. Rinse, and repeat. For years. I don't know what impact this lifestyle is having on my health, but it can't be good. Great expectations When I finished my PhD, I expected to complete one post-doctoral fellowship then move into a permanent post. I had every expectation of this career path, because that is the route that most of the researchers around me had taken. Quite a few had moved into a permanent post straight from their PhD studies. When I try to talk about job insecurity with senior researchers, they brush it off. They tell me I will be fine in a few years. They had permanent posts before they were my age. They had free education, great pension plans, and affordable housing costs. They don't understand that this is not just about me. It is endemic. Almost everyone else I know at my level, and below, is in the same situation. This is an industry-wide systemic problem that is being brushed under the rug in the name of "challenging funding environments". Don't get me wrong, academia isn't all negative. I love my job. I love what I do. But I don't know what the solution is. What I do know is that universities need to move away from thinking that a hyper-competitive, highly-mobile scientific workforce is good for science. Good scientists are not born, but trained and supported by the people and institutions that surround them. Here is a new idea: let's make science better by supporting the people who conduct it. Let's make rewards and funding to universities dependent on how they treat their staff. Let's make world rankings weighted on how many staff are on permanent contracts. Let's make Athena Swan awards dependent on low levels of fixed-term contracts. Let's reduce the Research Excellence Framework funding for universities for every staff member who is on a temporary contract. Because, if anything, the less time and energy a scientist has to spend on searching for the next job, the more time and energy they will have to actually do science. Let's see how much more productive scientists are in making scientific discoveries when they can actually make long-term plans. Let's reward people for the years of education and hard work they have contributed to the university and science with a stable professional and home life. We want to conduct science for the public good – this surely includes the scientists. Join the higher education network for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow us on Twitter @gdnhighered. And if you have an idea for a story, please read our guidelines and email your pitch to us at highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com

Thousands of pairs of used knickers have been hung above the streets of Johannesburg as part of an installation to raise awareness about the country's record rates of rape. Devised by two sexual assault survivors, the installation consists of washing lines 1,200 metres long displaying 3,600 pairs of pants – matching the number of rapes estimated to occur on a daily basis, according to the artists. Jenny Nijenhuis and Nondumiso Msimanga put out a public call for donations of underwear under the hashtag #SasDirtyLaundry, and set up a Facebook page, Pantiesplea. They arranged collection points across the city. Carmen Ives, a volunteer who helped with the project, said each pair donated "speaks loudly" of severity of the situation in South Africa. "One pair of panties is one pair too many. It made me think that today, some girl is being raped somewhere," she said. On display until Sunday, the installation has received a largely positive response from the public. On Twitter, one user wrote that the project "feels like a movement". Another said the project connected "very deeply with experience of sexual assault, emotional abuse and trauma". However, the exhibition has faced questions over the rape statistics it uses. While South Africa undisputedly has the highest rates of rape in the world, estimates on the number of assaults each day vary greatly. The 3,600-a-day estimate from the medical research council is far larger than the UN estimate of 132. Responding to criticism Nijenhuis said that the figure was "symbolic", adding that just a fraction of attacks are reported to the police. Lisa Vetten, a research associate at Witwatersrand University in Johannesburg, said: "The problem of under-reporting [assault] means that we cannot know whether the drop [in recent rape statistics] is due to fewer rapes occurring, or fewer victims reporting. "The most conservative research estimate suggests that only one in seven victims report being raped, but other studies suggest the figures may be higher." Africa Check, an organisation promoting accuracy in public debate and reporting, said the 3,600 figure remained unproven. "When people use flawed statistics, and have a voice as is the case here, they neglect the complexity of issues, and make it seem like there are valid statistics, which is not the case," said Anim van Wyk, editor-in-chief of Africa Check. "We need better statistics to do something about the root of the problem ... to offer solutions." Anne Githuku-Shongwe, a representative for UN Women, said southern Africa was "the epicentre of the pandemic of violence against women and girls", and the cost of violence "economically, physically and emotionally" must be recognised. She advocated caution when using numbers. "[The exhibition] is great to spotlight the issue, but we must be careful not to sensationalise," she said.

Twice a week we publish problems that will feature in a forthcoming Dear Jeremy advice column in the Saturday Guardian so that readers can offer their own advice and suggestions. We then print the best of your comments alongside Jeremy's own insights. After many years working for the same large company in a technical capacity on a small team, the management has finally formalised my job spec and advertised the role. I applied for it along with a more junior colleague. Although I have vast experience and I have been doing this job for nearly 30 years, the post was given to my colleague. There are lots of possible reasons – he is cheaper, toes the line (unlike me), interviewed better. (No surprise, as this was my first interview for 30 years!) I get on very well with my colleague and do not grudge him the job one bit, but I am in a dilemma. He regularly comes to me for help and advice as he does not have my technical experience. How do I proceed now he has been promoted above me? Do I say "sorry but I can no longer offer the help I have in the past", or do I continue to help him and simply lump the fact that he is getting remuneration off my back? Do you need advice on a work issue? For Jeremy's and readers' help, send a brief email to dear.jeremy@theguardian.com. Please note that he is unable to answer questions of a legal nature or to reply personally.

"We are standing on the ground that could change the future of energy," says engineer Laurent Pattison, deep in the reactor pit of the world's biggest nuclear fusion project. Around him is a vast construction site, all aimed at creating temperatures of 150mC on this spot and finally bringing the power of the sun down to Earth. The €18bn (£14.3bn) Iter project, now rising fast from the ground under the bright blue skies of Provence, France, is the first capable of achieving a critical breakthrough: getting more energy out of the intense fusion reactions than is put in. "It is a bet that is very important for humanity," says Johannes Schwemmer, the director of Fusion for Energy, the EU partner in the international Iter collaboration. "We need to get this energy once and for all." The long allure of nuclear fusion is simple: clean, safe, limitless energy for a world that will soon house 10bn energy-hungry citizens. But despite 60 years of research and billions of dollars, the results to date are also simple: it has not delivered. Fusion is in danger of following its atomic cousin, conventional fission nuclear power, in over-promising – "electricity too cheap to meter" – and under-delivering. The Iter project itself, which stems from a cold war Reagan-Gorbachev summit in 1985, has seen years of turmoil. The US pulled out entirely between 1998-2003 and in 2008, Iter had to treble its budget and shift its deadline back a decade. But leaders representing half the world's population – through the Iter partners, the EU, China, Russia, US, India, Japan and South Korea – are now making the €18bn wager that fusion can deliver and have radically overhauled Iter's management to fix the mistakes of the past. The goal is to trap a plasma in a huge magnetic ring and force heavy hydrogen isotopes to fuse together to release prodigious amounts of energy – four times more than the splitting of uranium atoms produces in conventional fission reactors. "We are convinced we can deliver hundreds of megawatts through Iter," up to 10 times more energy than is put in, says David Campbell, the director of science and operations at Iter (which means "the way" in Latin). To achieve that breakthrough, Iter will use a donut-shaped magnetic cage called a tokamak to trap the plasma. More than 200 smaller tokamaks have been built around the world and Campbell says the decades of physics and engineering that Iter is building on is a strong guarantee of success. But nothing has ever been attempted on the scale of Iter. The world record for fusion power – 16MW - was set in 1997 at the JET reactor in the UK. The longest fusion run – six minutes and 30 seconds – was achieved at France's Tore Supra in 2003. Iter is aiming for 500MW and 50-minute runs. The site is a cathedral to the fusion dream: it spans the equivalent of 60 football fields and the reactor building will weigh 320,000 tonnes, all resting on rubber bearings in case of an unlikely, but not impossible, earthquake. The reactor itself will weigh 23,000 tonnes, three times more than the Eiffel Tower. It is the most complex engineering project in history. More than 2,800 tonnes of superconducting magnets, some heavier than a jumbo jet, will be connected by 200km of superconducting cables, all kept at -269C by the world's largest cryogenic plant, which will pump 12,000 litres per hour of liquid helium. Millions of precision components will be shipped in from the seven partners to be assembled by thousands of workers. This is all aimed at keeping just two grammes of plasma hot enough and stable enough in the 30m-diameter tokamak for fusion to take place. Iter's schedule is to create the first plasma in 2025, then start firing tiny 5mm frozen pellets of heavy hydrogen – deuterium and tritium – into the plasma and generating energy. Deuterium is easily refined from seawater and fuses with tritium, which is harvested from fission reactors but could be self-generated in Iter in future. The aim is to reach its maximum power output by 2035 and, if so, Iter will be the foundation of the first fusion power plants. Bernard Bigot, the director general of Iter, is certain it will produce plentiful power, "but what is not granted so far is that this technology will be simple and efficient enough that it could be industrialised," he says. The point of Iter is finding out, says Bigot: "The world needs to know if this technology is available or not. Fusion could help deliver the energy supplies of the world for a very long time, maybe forever." Even if things go well, getting real fusion power plants online before 2050 would be a triumph, raising an awkward question: what if fusion comes too late? Climate change is driving an accelerating transformation to low-carbon energy and drastic cuts in emissions are needed by 2050. If these are achieved, will there be a need for fusion power, which will be expensive at the start? "It is certainly not going to be too cheap to meter," says Campbell. But it's a question of timescale, he says: "In the long term there are very few available options: renewables, fission and fusion." For Schwemmer, there is only one long-term option. "You would have to cover whole continents with wind turbines to produce the energy needed for 10 billion people," he says. "And if our children's children are not to sit on piles of [fission] nuclear waste, we have to make fusion work. Even if it takes till 2100, we should still do it." Nuclear fission is also limited by uranium supplies, perhaps to a few decades if it were to play a large role. Bigot said: "People have to realise, if we want a breakthrough [that could provide energy] for millions of years, 10 or 20 years is nothing." He thinks fusion may still come in time to meet the need to move the world to zero emissions in the second half of the century to defeat global warming. As a nuclear technology, some will remain implacably opposed to fusion. While fusion reactions produce only harmless helium, the high-energy neutrons also ejected irradiate the walls of the reactor, leading to radioactive waste. Again, the key is timescale, says Campbell. Waste from fission can remain radioactive for 250,000 years, making plans to store dangerous waste for many times longer than the whole of human civilisation speculative. In contrast, fusion waste will decay on the scale of decades. "Looking after the waste for 100 years is credible," he says. Fusion is also intrinsically safe, with the large meltdowns seen in fission accidents such as Fukushima and Chernobyl physically impossible. Part of the reason is the tiny amount of fuel in a fusion reactor at any one time and part is the temperamental nature of plasma, a boiling gas of ions and electrons. "If you lose control of the plasma, it doesn't just sit there, it disappears like that," says Campbell, clicking his fingers. "After Fukushima, we thought we would be flushed down the toilet like all nuclear," says Sabina Griffith, a communications manager at Iter. "But the opposite happened – governments thought if not fission, then what?" There are other fusion reactor designs that might be better and, in particular, smaller. A €1bn reactor opened in Germany by chancellor Angela Merkel earlier in 2016 uses a stellarator, in which the plasma ring is shaped like a Mobius strip. This makes it potentially more stable and, crucially, able to operate continuously, rather than in pulses like a tokamak. There are also numerous private companies, staffed by serious fusion researchers, promising much smaller reactors, including the UK's Tokamak Energy and Tri Alpha Energy and General Fusion in Canada. "There are technology routes that might let you build something smaller – in principle," says Campbell. But he says they either rely on unproven "exotic" ideas or underestimate the heavy engineering needed to contain burning plasmas. "Iter is the size our present technology allows us to build," he says. Politics remains a challenge to delivering Iter and uncertainty has been ramped up by the election of Donald Trump as president of the US, where some powerful voices want to leave the project for good. Britain's vote to leave the EU has also added to the uncertainty. But Bigot believes the need to know if full fusion power is feasible will keep the partners in. "To be frank, the US is only 9% of the project, if they were to leave alone, I believe we could go on," he said. "But it would be the wrong signal [showing] the most powerful country in the world is not preparing for its future." On Brexit he says: "It would damage Iter a little, but it would damage the UK a lot," given its long and continuing research in fusion. The political problems usually boil down to costs and the governments of Iter partners wanting to reduce the taxpayers' money spent on the project. "Iter looks very expensive to the ordinary person in the street," says Campbell. "But the cost is spread across half the world's population. Seen in that context I don't think it is such a big investment to make." The world spent $325bn on fossil fuel subsidies in 2015 alone, according to the IEA, and $150bn on renewable energy support. Fusion supporters such as Campbell also suggest fusion has geopolitical benefits because its key fuel – heavy hydrogen – is accessible to all. "No one has a monopoly on the fuel so no one is going to fight each other over it." The 1985 Reagan-Gorbachev summit that kickstarted the Iter project called for "the widest practicable development of international collaboration" in nuclear fusion to obtain "energy which is essentially inexhaustible, for the benefit of all mankind". So how far is the world from achieving that, 30 years and numerous stumbles on? Many still point to the answer given by Lev Artsimovich, the father of the tokamak and head of the Soviet fusion power programme for more than two decades until his death in 1973. Fusion power, he said, will arrive "when mankind needs it – maybe a short time before that". This article was amended on 2 December 2016 to correct General Fusion's location.

Before the fourth world conference on women, held in Beijing in 1995, Joana Silochina Foster, a Ghanaian-British activist and lawyer, attended a workshop organised by the Global Fund for Women. She happened to be seated next to Dr Hilda Tadria, a Ugandan scholar and activist whom she had not met before. Turning to Tadria, Foster said: "What we really need are our own resources." And so the idea of a fund for African women was born. At the time, it was a groundbreaking notion: no such institution existed on the African continent, where funding for women's rights was primarily channelled through international NGOs based in the global north. The creation of a fund to support the work of an African women's movement began, but was put on hold when Foster took up the role of regional coordinator at Women in Law and Development in Africa, in which she oversaw the organisation's gradual expansion into a women's law network covering 26 African countries. Despite her engagements, Foster did not give up on her dream of a fund led by African women that would support the work of African women's rights organisations. In 1996, a conversation with Bisi Adeleye-Fayemi – a Nigerian feminist who, at the time, headed Akina Mama wa Afrika, a pan-African women's rights organisation based in the UK – led to a partnership that culminated with the creation of the African Women's Development Fund (AWDF) in 2000. Co-founded by Foster, Tadria, and Adeleye-Fayemi, the institution has since provided funding of more than $28m (£22m) to a total of 1,200 women's rights organisations in 42 African countries. Speaking on AWDF's 10th anniversary, Foster said: "The concept of a fund for African women was an innovative idea. The launch of AWDF in 2000 was the result of a compelling vision, strategic planning and years of hard work. AWDF is an excellent example of solidarity amongst African women." Foster died on 5 November 2016, after a two-year battle with cancer. She was 70. Her lifelong journey as an activist started at 17 when she became a member of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament in the UK. She studied law, and practised in both the UK and Ghana, focusing on poverty, race equality and women's rights. From the early 1990s Foster devoted her working life fully to the non-governmental sector, becoming the country director of Cuso, Ghana, a Canadian non-profit organisation committed to social justice around the world. Foster was an elegant, graceful woman, with an aesthetic and style that spoke to her dual Ghanaian and Indian heritage. She often dressed in white or cream-coloured cotton tunics, with a colourful shawl draped around her slender frame. She always made time to give everyone a hug, and had a particular interest in connecting with – and inspiring – younger feminists. "Joana put all her energy into everything she did," said Dorcas Coker-Appiah, executive director of the Gender Studies and Human Rights Documentation Centre based in Accra, which Foster co-founded. "[She was] willing to stand back and let others take the limelight. As a co-founder of the gender centre, she was always ready to support our work, pointing us in the right direction." Akua Kuenyehia, a Ghanaian lawyer and former international criminal court judge, said: "Joana, together with others, began the process of getting African women to realise that they can do whatever they set their minds to because they are capable." The African women's movement has lost a formidable activist. Joana Foster is one of 60 feminists commemorated in Awid's 2016 online tribute to women's human rights defenders who have died

There are some things I'd like you to know, but we so rarely sit down to speak face to face. On the odd occasion when we do, I have the feeling that you are going through the motions; like the smile that doesn't reach the corners of your eyes, it feels fake. You might wonder why I feel like this, why my foot is half out of the door on a job that I love. Isn't the work itself – helping young people at risk of social exclusion and marginalisation – meaningful enough? I've spent an afternoon with a young person in floods of tears because she can't get work. I have another person worried because her housemates are addicted to drugs and she doesn't feel safe. I'm not able to make these situations go away. In my role there's a risk of becoming desensitised to the struggles these young people face. But the very reason I do my job is because I feel acutely the injustice that affects the people I work with. I'm proud of the in-depth work I do to support young people, but there's increasingly little room for it. The people I'm supporting face serious financial, social and emotional difficulties in their lives. And each person needs far more attention than I'm allowed to give. Every day I have to make a choice: people or targets. I can either support young people with their dreams and aspirations and try to lessen the barriers they face and miss targets, or I can work quickly "speed supporting" individuals, hitting targets, but making little tangible impact on their lives. I'm expected to deliver a conveyor belt of success stories that can be churned out for the media. This means a large part of my job isn't helping the very people who need it, but marketing their stories. What would really help me is for you to talk openly about the struggle between helping people and meeting targets. Making these decisions alone leaves me feeling emotionally drained. I love my job, but I keep thinking about leaving. And statistics show I'm not the only one – staff turnover in the third sector is much higher than average. If you only had time to listen, things could be different. You never ask for my opinion. I understand that you need to be business-focused. I'm aware of the economic uncertainty of austerity and cuts. But does it not make business sense to listen to your employees, and keep them, so you don't have to waste resources constantly training new staff? Being excluded from decision-making takes the greatest toll on those at the bottom, who either buckle under the pressure or leave the sector – which ultimately affects the very young people we are trying to protect. It's your responsibility to lead us, not ignore us. Leading means collaborating, cultivating trust, valuing the opinion of others, and listening when we tell you: it's not working. All the training, wellbeing initiatives, or new processes can't fix an organisation that doesn't listen, value or support its frontline staff. Better pay might make it harder to leave, but we work in the third sector because we care, not for the money. As a boss, you need to put people first – your staff and the young people we represent – not targets. Would you like to write an anonymous letter to your boss for this series? Get in touch by emailing careers.desk@theguardian.com

A penguin has been rescued from a stormwater drain in Sydney's inner west. Haberfield residents Josh Pirini and Scott Martin reported the young little penguin trapped and alone in a stormwater drain on Frenchs Lane to the RSPCA New South Wales. The bird, stuck inside a smaller pipe within the drain, was reportedly distressed and made "wild noises" when they attempted to pick him up. Tyson Hohlein and one other RSPCA NSW inspector managed to flush the blocked penguin out with a gush of water. Hohlein said the bird was "pretty bright and alert", if slightly underweight. "He was probably a bit confused about what was going on, a bit stressed out about the situation," he said. In two years as an inspector with the RSPCA NSW, Hohlein said he had never seen a penguin as far inland as the inner west. The bird was likely to have come from the Sydney harbour little penguin colony near Manly, about 25km by road from where it was found. There, Hohlein said, they were "very common". "But not in Haberfield," he said. The bird was taken to Taronga Zoo – which has a large colony of little penguins, including 12 breeding pairs – where he was given food and fluids. Taronga Zoo's wildlife hospital treats about 30 of the birds annually. The animal, which is just a few months old, is recovering in an intensive care ward and has been given fluids because it's underweight and quite weak, said the zoo. It was too early to say when it would be released, said a zoo spokesman. The little penguin's rescue was some weeks shy of Penguin Awareness Day – 20 January – which coincides with the birds' annual northward migration. Otherwise known as fairy penguins, the little penguin is the smallest species of penguin and the only one native to Australia. It weighs about 1kg and reaches about 30cm in height. They are usually found at the entrance to the harbour in the east of the city, and it is unusual for them to travel this far west. The emperor penguin that features in the film Happy Feet can grow as much as 1.3m tall and weigh up to 40kg. They are the largest and most southerly distributed of all species. In 2011an emperor penguin was found eating sand on a beach in the lower North Island of New Zealand – the first time in 44 years the bird had been sighted there. Named Happy Feet, he was rereleased into the wild following months of specialist care and tens of thousands of dollars of donations.

Promises &amp; Lies: The Story of UB40 10pm, BBC4 Formed in 1978, UB40's early, impassioned pop-reggae tracts lambasted global injustice and saw them rocket to fame. They set up their own studio and split royalties evenly; but despite worldwide success, they found themselves bankrupt, with millions unaccounted for. Ali Campbell left the group with two others and a bitter court battle for rights to their name is ongoing. Both sides put their case in this sad yet gripping documentary. David Stubbs Countrywise: Guide to Britain 8pm, ITV In which Liz Bonnin walks the Thames Path through Oxfordshire and Ben Fogle follows the journey of a fish from the seas off North Yorkshire to a plate opposite a heap of stodgy chips. All of which, yes, could be recreated by walking through the park to the takeaway, but the peculiar understated allure of Countrywise is that it reminds, gently, of the natural marvels that we'll notice around us, should we bother to look. Andrew Mueller Business of Disaster 9pm, PBS America Private-public partnerships were once seen as a smart political wheeze. However, they're often simply a means of shifting accountability. The aftermath of Hurricane Sandy, which struck the US in 2012, was a case in point. This frequently enraging doc explores the Kafkaesque struggles of flood victims – usually fully insured – to gain anything resembling fair redress from buck-passing central government and venal insurers. Phil Harrison Cops UK: Bodycam Squad 9pm, Really This week with the bodycam squad, the Staffordshire police are called to the river Trent on a hot summer's day, where a dip in the water might have life-threatening consequences. Elsewhere, in Hanley, members of the force's "problem solving team", or PST, are called in to conduct a raid on a suspected drug dealer, with every moment being caught on camera, and officer Andy Morley intervenes in a dispute over a phone. Ben Arnold Walliams &amp; Friend 9.30pm, BBC1 Harry Enfield resists the urge to screech "Only me!" as he joins the high-concept sketch show built around a different special guest each week. With such a veteran on board, Walliams mostly cedes the spotlight as the pair romp through some scattershot spoofs, including a skewering of MasterChef that entertainingly reimagines Gregg Wallace as a petulant, fussy eater. The talented Morgana Robinson, meanwhile, does some brilliant work in the margins. Graeme Virtue The Last Leg 10pm, Channel 4 Adam Hills, Josh Widdicombe and Alex Brooker present another satirical outing for those not yet suffering terminal news-poisoning. Given the avalanche of deplorable happenstances in any given week, it's safe to say there'll be plenty to facepalm at, and edgy current affairs questions to ponder via the series' spinoff "#isitok" hashtag. Meanwhile, will new Last Leg pin-up Justin Trudeau possibly indulge the trio's overtures to come on the show and cheer us all up? Ali Catterall The Graham Norton Show 10.35pm, BBC1 Channel 4 seems to be positioning Alan Carr's Happy Hour as a challenger to Norton's Friday-evening chokehold. But the Chatty Man still has a way to go to match Norton's cheek and charm. Norton commands a higher calibre of guest, too; tonight, A-listers Jennifer Lawrence and Chris Pratt will be discussing their imminent sci-fi film, Passengers, and, just possibly, recent events in their home country. Emeli Sandé brings the tunes. PH Film choices Gran Torino (Clint Eastwood, 2008) 12.30pm, 8pm, Sky Cinema Greats With his wife recently deceased, all embittered Korean war vet Walt Kowalski cares about is his pristine Gran Torino. He reserves his meanest snarls for the Hmong family next door, until violent local hoods cause him to befriend and defend them. It's a wry, elegiac drama, with Eastwood magnificent as the old curmudgeon who rediscovers his humanity. Live sport Snooker: UK Championship 1pm, BBC2 The 10th day's play at the Barbican Centre in York. Premiership Rugby Union: Sale Sharks v Exeter Chiefs 7pm, BT Sport 1 A game from the 10th round of matches at the AJ Bell Stadium. FA Cup Football: Macclesfield Town v Oxford United 7.30pm, BBC2 Coverage of the second-round match, from Moss Rose.

The Churchill Arms, Kensington Start by stepping into a Christmas tree. The evergreen Churchill Arms on Kensington Church Street becomes one enormous conifer each December. This year the pub is strapping 80 Christmas trees to its exterior walls and decorating them with 18,000 fairy lights. The spectacular light show will be ceremonially started on Tuesday 6 December, accompanied by mulled wine and festivities. If you get peckish afterwards, go through to the Thai restaurant. The Churchill Arms was the first London pub to sport a Thai kitchen; the Pad Siew noodles are recommended. churchillarmskensington.co.uk The Harlequin, near Angel Nothing warms the cockles like carolling. Merry gentlemen and merry gentlewomen should go to The Harlequin on Wednesday 14 December, where there will be a gathering around the piano to belt out an evening of yuletide favourites. Expect a Bohemian king, herald angels, five gold rings and a not very silent night. Vocal chords will be lubricated with mulled wine and those attempting the dog-whistle Ding Dong descant would do well to consult the pub's superior malt whisky collection in advance. This cosy little wood-panelled "beer shop", a free house, has been serving since 1848, and is popular with the pre- and post-theatre crowd attending events at Sadler's Wells nearby. harlequinpub.co.uk Simpson's Tavern, the City If you would like to boil your neighbours with their puddings and bury them with a stake of holly through their hearts, your name is probably Ebenezer Scrooge. Close up your counting house on Christmas Eve and watch your clerk slide homewards along the ice slide on Cornhill, before slouching around the corner to take your "melancholy dinner" in the "usual melancholy tavern". Or you could try Simpson's Tavern on nearby Ball Court. Founded in 1757, this snug and steamy hostelry is the city's oldest chop house and all its meals (mains from £5.75) are served with a complimentary sausage. Don't miss the "stewed cheese" (£3.50) for dessert. simpsonstavern.co.uk Argyll Arms, Oxford Circus The Spirit of Christmas Presents walks abroad. The glowing doors of megastores are drawing us in with Pied Piped muzak and will-o'-the-wisp Christmas deals. A crowd flows along Oxford Street, and you may suddenly feel the need to escape. Look no further than the Argyll Arms on Argyll Street, next to Oxford Circus. This excellent 19th-century boozer has private mahogany snugs, with etched-glass partitions, so you can hide from the shoppers and enjoy a quiet pint (or cheeky gin, a house speciality). If you need to make a swift exit, however, hunt for the secret tunnel that is alleged to run from the Argyll Arms to the London Palladium opposite. You'll pop up in Cinderella, next to Julian Clary's Dandini (maybe). nicholsonspubs.co.uk Little Nan's, Deptford For something more hygge, pull up a doily at Little Nan's on Deptford Market Yard and get snug in one of its deep armchairs. Little Nan will set things to rights with a warming teapot full of mulled apple juice, made to her family's 106-year-old secret recipe. Savour the aromas of vanilla, cinnamon, hibiscus and miscellaneous spices, or, if you fancy some pep in your toddy, Nan might be persuaded to add a shot of the house spiced rum. Expect leopard-print mugs and cat-themed cushions. littlenans.co.uk The Wellington, Fulham The Christmas meal is always a crisis: burnt potatoes, soggy parsnips, turkey grease on Uncle Norman's sweater, and the annual outing of Satan's mini cabbages. This year, take a break. Chef Aidan McGee has begun a residency at The Wellington on Haldane Road. Widely credited with the best Sunday roasts in London, McGee is now turning his hand to Christmas, rustling up trademark sharing platters of delectable festive viands (two-course Christmas menu £28, three courses £32). Begin with roasted cauliflower soup; progress to ham hock terrine by way of cured salmon in London gin; gorge on roast turkey with all the trimmings and polish off proceedings with plum pudding and cinnamon custard or a communal cheeseboard. Sorted. thewellingtonpub.com The Antelope, Tooting He's making a list. He's checking it twice. Santa Claus is coming to town and you had better have your stocking ready. The Antelope on Mitcham Road has a choice of three open fires where you can affix your undergarments. The bar area has two coal fires, but my favourite is the wood-burning hearth in the spacious, panelled back room, where you can pull up a high-backed church pew and await the arrival of St Nicholas. While away the time by examining the pub's impressive collection of antlers and assorted taxidermy. Don't let them get their hands on Rudolph. theantelopepub.com The Flask, Highgate When your commute involves 212 million miles and 233 million households, you deserve at least one for the road. Everyone knows that Father Christmas's tipple of choice is brandy, so Santa, if you're reading this, we recommend you pause in The Flask on Highgate West Hill for a quick snifter. This historic coaching inn has retained its original stable block, with two 17th-century horseboxes that will do perfectly for Donner and Blitzen. The atmosphere inside is warm with reassuringly low ceilings: a cosy place to enjoy a quiet cognac. Or, if you feel like branching out, try a pint of Dapper Ales Doctor Brown, a delicious brown ale brewed in Herne Hill. theflaskhighgate.com The Queen of Hoxton, Shoreditch Start scanning the sky for signs of reindeer and sleighbells. The Queen of Hoxton, Curtain Road, is a good vantage point: its permanent rooftop wigwam goes through a seasonal facelift twice a year. This winter you'll be stepping into Skye Halla, a Viking "Drinking Hall in the Clouds" with fire pits, driftwood sculptures and a Viking long boat. Peruse the Daily Feasting Menu: Hodhr's Hotpot (from £5) goes particularly well with a horn of Gullveig's Grog (whisky, mead, elderflower and pale ale, £8). Be sure you don't mistake incoming reindeer for the Ride of the Valkyries ... queenofhoxton.com The Roebuck, Richmond After a hearty Christmas meal, there's nothing better than a crisp country walk followed by a glass of amber refreshment. Go for a stroll in Richmond park, looking out for the deer, and wind up in the Roebuck on Richmond Hill. This historic pub catches spectacular sunsets: its view over Petersham Meadows is almost unchanged since JMW Turner painted it in 1815. It serves all the trusty Taylor Walker brews, as well as a selection of guest ales on tap. The food menu includes sharing platters (from £11.49), fish and chips (from £8.99) and classic pub grub (from £8.49). When the Roebuck was renovated in the 1950s, a cache of 18th-century highwaymen's loot was discovered in the roof. Keep your eyes peeled and Christmas might just come early. taylor-walker.co.uk Henry Eliot is co-author of Curiocity: In Pursuit of London (Penguin Books, £30), a guide full of stories, ideas and itineraries, and maps drawn by artists including Isabel Greenberg, Steven Appleby and the Children's Laureate Chris Riddell. To order a copy for £24.60 inc UK p&amp;p visit the guardian bookshop

A prestigious Brisbane school's "misconceived" responses to proposed damning findings over a sex abuse scandal include questioning testimony over "the minor difference between the words 'dick' and 'penis'", according to counsel assisting the royal commission. David Lloyd, the barrister who acted in hearings into abuse at Brisbane Grammar and St Paul's School, has urged the commission to find that senior staff at both schools did not protect students by failing to act on repeated complaints against paedophiles Kevin Lynch and Gregory Knight. The saga of serial abuse by Lynch and Knight in the 1970s and 1980s as they moved with impunity between schools also prompted Lloyd to recommend findings critical of powerful church and political figures. They include that the former archbishop and governor general Peter Hollingworth helped promote a St Paul's principal to a role overseeing Anglican schools' child protection policies, despite knowing a victim had accused the headmaster of failing to act on complaints against Lynch. Former South Australian education minister Donald Hopgood was also held partly responsible for Knight's trail of abuse because he overruled the paedophile's dismissal over suspected abuse at a school in the state. Knight subsequently left anyway. It was likely that if Hopgood or his department had notified teacher registration authorities of the "true reasons" for Knight's departure, he would not have been hired by St Paul's and then a Northern Territory school, "where he went on to sexually abuse boys", Lloyd submitted. Among the child protection failures by the late Grammar principal Max Howell was his lack of response to a 1979 complaint by a country doctor, who told the commission his son had said Lynch "fiddled with my dick". Grammar, in a response challenging many of Lloyd's recommended findings, attempted to raise uncertainties about the doctor's account by pointing to his 2002 statutory declaration that his son had said Lynch "fiddled with my penis". Lloyd in response said that "many of [Grammar's] submissions are misconceived". He cited as an example the school's attempt to dispute the doctor's credibility as a witness on the basis of "the minor difference between the words 'dick' and 'penis' [that] was explained". Lloyd said there was "no basis to assert unreliability because a witness concedes that he cannot remember the actual words used in a conversation 20 years earlier". He noted Grammar's response acknowledged "that the actions of Mr Lynch were capable of constituting a criminal offence in Queensland at the relevant times". Lloyd did concede to Grammar after it complained that he wrongly characterised the Grammar school board chairman, Howard Stack, as giving evidence the school "did not act fairly" towards former students in compensation claims over Lynch's abuse by failing to accept the school's legal liability. "Counsel assisting accepts that Mr Stack's evidence was that he understood that, 'from the boy's point of view' the school had not acted fairly," Lloyd said. "Having regard to what the school knew or ought to have known about the absence of any systems to supervise or monitor Mr Lynch, and the extent of Mr Lynch's wrongdoing, it is submitted that it is open to find that the only way the school could have acted fairly, irrespective of the view of its insurer, was to admit liability." Lloyd urged the commission to make the same finding on Grammar's unfair treatment of former students' compensation claims, but without reference to it being Stack's evidence. Counsel for Hollingworth in response said the serious allegations against him could not meet "the appropriate standard of proof" to satisfy the commission in its findings. His barrister said Hollingworth was relying on the former St Paul's principal Gilbert Case "to provide accurate information in relation to revelations concerning Mr Lynch's misconduct" before the school counsellor took his life when facing abuse charges. "The evidence indicates that Mr Case did not provide accurate information to Dr Hollingworth," the barrister said. Counsel for Hopgood argued there was no evidence "confirming the causal link between the actions of Hopgood and the [SA education] department", and Knight's employment in Queensland and the NT. There was no evidence Knight's registration as a teacher in SA "was even considered by Mr Case" in hiring him at St Paul's or by his later employers in the NT. Lloyd in response appeared to stand by his recommended findings against Hollingworth and Hopgood, declining to address their defences.

Four feet in length, of aggressive disposition, and deadly poisonous: you don't want to stand on a Russell's viper in the dark. Especially if there's no antivenom for miles around. Yet that's the daily predicament facing millions of villagers in Myanmar, where snakebites cause about 500 deaths every year. In Yin Ma Chaung, a rural settlement about nine hours by car from Yangon, villagers can rest easier knowing there are doses of antivenom chilling securely in a new refrigerator in the village's community centre, powered by solar. "Antivenom can now be supplied quickly if people in neighbouring villages need it," says Konosuke Kawahara from Japanese electronics giant Panasonic, which recently installed a 2.82kW photovoltaic (PV) system for the off-grid village. The example is just one of thousands of off-grid projects being rolled out across Myanmar as part of a huge government-led scheme, which involves private companies too, to bring electricity to the entire country by 2030. As of 2014, only 16% of rural households had an electricity connection. Myanmar Eco Solutions, a for-profit renewable energy firm, is part of a burgeoning industry looking to contribute to the development of off-grid solutions. It recently set up a solar-powered irrigation system for rice farmers near Pathein, a remote agricultural region in the Ayeyarwady delta in southern Myanmar. The submersible pump is mounted on a raft, meaning it can travel up and down the river supporting multiple villages. Sunlabob, a Laos-based solar developer, has just installed solar mini-grids in 11 villages in the remote provinces of Shan and Chin. The PV-based systems enable householders to power low-voltage electrical items such as lights, mobile phones and small televisions. Can off-grid make profits? At present, almost all Myanmar's off-grid projects are either government-funded or donor-backed. Panasonic's fridge-powering power system is financed through charity money from Mitsui &amp; Co; Myanmar Eco Solutions' raft is seed-funded by the non-profit World View International; and Sunlabob has a grant from the Japanese government for its mini-grid project. Poverty levels are the most immediate hurdle to off-grid commercialisation. Despite enviable growth rates over recent years, Myanmar is starting from a very low base. It still ranks 148th of 188 countries on the UN's benchmark development index, with the highest levels of poverty concentrated in rural areas. "Our original idea was to supply solar home systems because they are relatively affordable," says Ben Frederick, head of operations for Myanmar Eco Solutions. "But it quickly became apparent that this business model wouldn't work ... Even though the systems we were selling were about $100 [£80], they were still far too expensive for a single farmer to buy." Myanmar Eco Solutions's strategy has been twofold. In the case of the raft project, it operates a revolving fund, with participating farmers making small payments on a seasonal basis. The capital costs of the raft, around $6,000 (£4,800), should be paid back after two years or so, enabling the company to set up a similar project elsewhere. Commercial Opportunities Myanmar's lack of electrification presents a puzzling dilemma for commercial operators. With so many of the rural population having no electricity at all, it is difficult to judge future demand patterns, feasible price points and the reliability of billing systems. "It's tricky from a commercial perspective because you can't go to a lender or a financier and say, 'Yes, we can prove this is the level of demand and this is the price point people are able to meet," says Philip Napier-Moore, programme director for solar power in Asia Pacific for the engineering consultancy Mott MacDonald. The real money for Myanmar's solar firms lies in providing PV-systems for factories, hotels and other large-scale industrial users in urban areas. Myanmar Eco Solutions, for example, is about to integrate a 1MW solar plant into an existing diesel power station on an island in the country's Tanintharyi region. Sunlabob, meanwhile, is installing a 117kW solar system in Junction City, a mall and office complex in Yangon. The project is set to be the first grid-connected solar project in Myanmar. "Businesses and larger energy users are beginning to see the benefit of investing in solar-based electricity given the rising prices of grid-based electricity paired with the high cost of back-up diesel generators," says Evan Scandling, Sunlabob's managing director in Myanmar. Given the demand hurdles, Napier-Moore anticipates Myanmar's off-grid solar roll-out remaining largely government-led over the coming years. But a commercial model may provide a better guarantee of it working in the long-term, for example with a corresponding growth in a support network of suppliers and engineers. "Ideally, government-backed initiatives could harness private-sector models so that it helps to demonstrate to financiers that these models are viable rather than being just purely grant-funded," he adds.

The 82-year-old man said he wanted to remain anonymous. Then he spent half an hour telling me about the increasing difficulty of his day-to-day life. "I feel helpless," he said. He lives alone around 40 minutes from London, and has a neurological condition that leads to long spells of physical weakness. He uses a wheelchair, and depends on the care workers at his sheltered housing development for assistance with some of life's most basic tasks. Of course, it's not just him. His flat is just one of 44. Until recently, he said, there were several care workers there, but the numbers were cut. Seven or eight people once worked a busy morning shift; now there are never more than five, falling to two or three at other times, and a lone person at night. In mid-November he was called for an interview – "more like an interrogation", he told me – during which he was told that the help he gets was also to be hacked back. Care workers still assist at mealtimes and just before bedtime, but whereas he could once call for help outside those times using a pendant he wears around his neck ("I did it once, maybe twice a day at most," he said. "I'm not a nuisance") that is now strictly limited. As of last Monday, extra help with going to the toilet is only available between 10.15 and 11.45am, and 2.15 and 3.30pm; after 6.30pm only if staff are deemed available. The other day, he dropped his phone ("my lifeline"), and was told to wait four hours before someone arrived to recover it. Once he could call for help with refilling his flask of drinking water; now he has been told that outside set times, he will either have to somehow help himself, or wait. This man's problem is "social care" – or the shortage of it – and he describes a crisis that is getting worse by the week. He also highlights two questions about social care (a term surely so cold and technocratic that it dehumanises everyone) that no one seems able to answer: what are we going to do about this escalating emergency now? And what will happen as all those projections of an ageing society become a reality? Last week Philip Hammond, the chancellor, omitted any mention of social care in his autumn statement. Howls of protest followed, made louder by the unease and anger of Tory MPs and councillors. And once again we heard two big figures: the gap between need and supply now reckoned to be £5bn; and real-terms cuts to local councils' care budgets since 2011 that stand at 30%. But never mind the numbers, consider the real-life ramifications. If you are old and infirm and still manage to live at home, but need help washing, dressing or going to the toilet, the help may no longer be there. One insider at a charity that works in this area recently told me of growing numbers of people who are continent, but need help with mobility, and are these days repeatedly "left to wet themselves". If you have a fall, and go into hospital, the paucity of help available from your council increasingly means that your discharge is likely to be delayed, and you will end up staying there for fear of something worse happening at home. And such fear is well grounded; already the NHS also has to deal with the consequences of far too many vulnerable people being left to fend for themselves – witness the threefold rise since 2006 in admissions to hospital for malnutrition, adding to chronic overcrowding on the wards. The popular belief is that adult social care is exclusively bound up with older people, but there is also a mass of issues around adults with disabilities. The lives of many of these people have been enriched by what officialspeak describes as "supported living". You might think of that as people being allowed the dignity and independence they deserve. But with the supported living model under threat, more and more people may be looking at the dread prospect of life in residential or institutional care. That sector, as we know from instances such as the Winterbourne View abuse scandal, has itself been plagued by crises. This week I spoke to a woman from a charity that supports around 2,000 adults with learning disabilities across England. It has just pulled out of one of its local authority contracts because of funding cuts. She reminded me that, unlike many elderly people who need care, the people helped by her organisation are completely dependent on what councils can provide. We're going backwards, she said. "We don't want people living in big groups of 15, or 20. We want them to be in twos and threes, supported by staff who know them." This model, she said, lends itself to "life in the community". Institutional care shuts the door on all this. Other services that have long been part of the basic social fabric are also disappearing at speed: 46,000 older people are reckoned to have lost their access to meals on wheels since 2012. Many are left instead with such arrangements as a fortnight's worth of microwave meals being delivered in bulk. Meanwhile day centres, which often provide a lifeline to human contact and shared experience for elderly and disabled people, are going fast. Scan the recent news, and you find the same story in Durham, Haringey, Leeds, Doncaster, Stoke, Birmingham, and scores of other places. Government blundering makes everything worse. Last year George Osborne announced the introduction of the so-called national living wage, apparently conceived with no thought of any extra money to pay for care providers contracted on impossibly tight council budgets. Now it is causing many companies to either fold, or pull out of care contracts altogether. The over-hyped social care precept, whereby local authorities can put up council tax to meet some of their costs, raised £380m last year, whereas these extra wage costs alone totalled £520m. Speak to the people involved in social care and one message recurs time and again: the services they provide have innovated, contracted-out and de-personalised to the point that virtually nothing has been left untouched. Now, in the face of impossible pressures, they simply need money. And in a new era when deficit reduction is said to be less urgent than it was, they have a very moral question: where is it?

An exhibition celebrating the origins of Sir Hardy Amies, revered supplier of tailoring to society and royalty, opens this week in the east London borough of Dagenham. Photographs and letters, memorabilia and original designs including a pink hat and coat created for the Queen's silver jubilee will feature in the exhibition, as well as a moth-eaten and battered object Amies kept his whole life – his old cap from Brentwood School. Amies returned to the school several times, to open a bazaar in the 1950s, to give a fundraising fashion show in 1957 and, in the 1960s, to redesign the girls' uniform still being worn today. "It's been largely forgotten even by most people living in Dagenham and he is often seen as a snobby and elitist figure – but he never attempted to deny his origins, which clearly meant a lot to him," said curator Amy de la Haye, professor of dress history at the London College of Fashion, part of the University of the Arts London. The exhibition is being created in a building Amies would have known well, Valence House, a miraculous survivor in suburbia of a house datingin part to the 1400s, now a local authority museum. Amies was born in London in 1909 and moved to Dagenham as a toddler when his father got a job helping create the Becontree Estate, once the largest council house estate in the world. Their first home, an old farmhouse, was demolished long ago, but they then moved to the White House, another remarkable survivor which is being rescued from dereliction as a community arts centre by Create London. His mother was a dressmaker and he followed her into couture, but only opened his own Savile Row salon after the second world war, in which he served in British intelligence and the special operations executive. He was official dressmaker to the Queen from 1955 until he retired in 1989, and other projects included costumes for the science fiction film, 2001: A Space Odyssey. He was knighted in 1996. De la Haye said that when Amies died in 2003, many of the contents of his elegant flat were given to Central St Martin's art college and are now going on display for the first time - including the old school cap, which she described as "the jewel in the collection". Steve Lawrence, a local carpenter who has worked on the White House and the Valence House exhibition, discovered Amies when he became fed up at the buttons falling off his winter coat. "Every winter I would buy a coat, and every winter the buttons would fall off," he said. "I decided that what I needed was a proper old school overcoat, the kind everyone's dad had that lasted for ever. When I found one in a second hand shop the guy said he had some suits as well – and that was my first Hardy Amies suit." Although his suits are now museum pieces, with two on display in the exhibition, Lawrence wears one to work every day – and just this week bought another online for £5. His mate, he says in bewilderment, just spent £200 on a pair of new jeans. Lawrence says the Amies suits are "warm, they're practical, they look good - and they never wear out". De la Haye says the secret of Amies' enduring style is simple: "He was a very very good tailor." Hardy Amies, a Dagenham Designer, 3 December to 25 February 2017. Free admission.

It has been the longest year for Michael Cheika and a few days before Australia's 15th Test of the year, against England at Twickenham on Saturday, he preferred to talk about the match rather than exchange more barbs with Eddie Jones. Asked if the pair would enjoy a beer together after the match, the Wallabies' head coach replied: "That is between me and him but I do not think there will be any problem with it." His tone did not suggest he would use it as an opportunity to pour the beer over the head of his England opposite number. The only time Cheika became animated during his media call to announce his side for the final international of the year, one that contains four changes from the team who started the defeat by Ireland last weekend, was when he was asked about the claim this week by the former Wallabies centre Glen Ella, who was used as an attack consultant by Jones during the summer tour of Australia, that Cheika still had nightmares about the 3-0 series whitewash. "I would not say nightmares but you do not like losing, do you?" he said. "It's funny, everyone is up in front of the bus when they have had a win. A guy like Glen in particular is always up in the front for a handout when he has had a win but when it is tough and you have to run uphill I have not seen that bloke or a few others around." Ella said before the tour that unless Cheika returned home with a record of at least 50%, he would face the sack. "I do not think Glen is working with England any more, so any Aussie who would support England against Australia, especially a guy who has played for the Wallabies, there's got to be a reason why," Cheika said. "I don't know if he's bitter. Maybe they want to get us kicked out and have a job there, I'm not sure. We have improved since we last played England; we are going well and when that happens, as it did for us last year, you have to stay humble." Only one of Cheika's changes is enforced, with Will Genia back in France with Stade Français, who are not obliged to release him for an international match played outside the official window. Cheika has reverted to the side who started the five-match tour with a crushing victory over Wales in Cardiff – apart from on the left wing, where the Fijian Sefanaia Naivalu, reputed to be the fastest player in Australian rugby, replaces Henry Speight. The second-row Kane Douglas and the No8 Lopeti Timani return at forward, with Cheika sacrificing a lineout option in the back row for a ball carrier. "It will be a physical contest and Lopeti is a good player for that type of battle," Cheika said. "Kane showed aggression when he came on against Ireland and the idea is to play good rugby, get stuck in, be physical and do all the things that we like to do. It is not about revenge for the summer: Test matches stand alone in their importance." Jones has not missed an opportunity to wind up Australia, questioning the legality of their scrummaging and saying that, although the Wallabies finished runners-up in the Rugby Championship, he thought Argentina were the best team in the tournament after New Zealand. "He is just geeing up," Cheika said. "He has always operated with a chip on his shoulder and now things are going well, and there is no chip, he is looking for one. He is respected in Australia, a coach who took us to the 2003 World Cup final when we did not expect to go well. He said he was not respected when he was in Australia in the summer but I don't know where that comes from." Three of England's national sides, both codes of rugby and cricket, are coached by Australians. Asked if he could see himself coaching another country, Cheika replied: "Probably not but, if a person decides to do that, that's OK. No one was saying anything about it when Eddie was coaching Japan. Each to their own." England are looking to complete their first unbeaten year since 2003 when they defeated Jones's Australia in the World Cup final and they have the opportunity to equal their record of 14 consecutive victories. Eight of Australia's 14 Tests this year have finished in defeat and the loss in Dublin ended their grand slam quest. "We are playing for a lot of pride," Nick Phipps, Genia's replacement at scrum-half, said. "Stephen Moore [Australia's captain] has pointed out that this is the last time the 2016 side will play together. We have had some low periods this year and finishing it off as well as we can is important to us. We want to do it for the fans and the coaching staff. It is not about revenge for the summer; it is about us."

The NHS and social care would be run by a John Lewis-style mutual organisation and funded by higher national insurance contributions, under a radical shakeup proposed by Labour MP Frank Field. The former welfare minister says a looming financial crisis could be tackled by making the NI system more progressive and earmarking the entire proceeds to pay for the health service and care for the elderly. "The NHS now has a unique place in the public's affection," Field said in a written submission to a House of Lords committee looking into the long-term sustainability of the NHS. "Surveys show that the public not only wish to support the vision they have for the NHS, but that they are up for a change in funding which will deliver them a better health and social care package when they need it." Speaking to the Guardian, Field said he was surprised that the chancellor, Philip Hammond, provided no extra funds for the NHS in last month's autumn statement and predicted a cumulative £60bn black hole in health funding would open up over the next five years. The Labour MP proposed a percentage point increase in NI contributions for employees and employers to deal with the short-term funding pressures on the NHS, raising an extra £50bn over the next half decade. Together with efficiency savings, this would be enough to solve the short-term crisis and would be part of the transition to a new funding model. However, Field said this should be the catalyst for an entirely new funding and ownership model. Pressure for a more integrated health and social care system has been increasing in recent years as a result of Britain's ageing population. Hospitals have said that they are struggling to cope with elderly patients who should be cared for in the community. Field said in his submission that only one fifth of the £114bn raised from NI contributions last year was spent on the NHS but said his plan would involve all the money raised being designated for health and social care. The MP said the mutual organisation that would take over responsibility would have an annual budget of at least £140bn. Last year, spending on the NHS was £116bn. Field said changes to NI to make the system more progressive should include raising the lower earnings limit – the point at which employees start paying contributions – to the current income tax threshold; removing the upper earnings limit on contributions; and removing the exemption that means employees above the state pension age do not pay contributions, which would raise £6.7bn a year. He insisted the suggested change should not be used as a cloak for double taxation and said income tax should be reduced as NI contributions rose. The government has pledged to increase spending on the NHS during the current parliament, but its claim that the health service is getting an additional £10bn a year has been challenged by Conservative MP Sarah Woolaston, chairwoman of the Commons health select committee. Woolaston said the real increase was £6bn. Field said: "The funding of the NHS for the remainder of this parliament is built upon extremely shaky foundations. It is therefore likely that, at some stage in this parliament, the government will be made by public opinion to increase the NHS budget. It would be a pity if this opportunity was not seized upon." When Gordon Brown was chancellor in 2002, he raised NI contributions in order to increase funding for the NHS. Field told the Guardian this was "the most popular thing Brown ever did" but said much of the extra revenue raised was diverted to non-NHS projects. He said that by hypothecating NI contributions and setting up a mutual model – an organisation owned by its users, like John Lewis which is owned by its employees – public support for the NHS would be cemented. "It would reinforce affection for this one great institution that has survived the dismantling of Attlee's post-war consensus. "A John Lewis model would not allow members to overturn the whole system but they would have a decisive say on expenditure levels and the culture of the organisation."

Anne Aly will take part in a 25-hour dance marathon at Edith Cowan University in Perth in an attempt to set a world record for the longest continuous dance party. The Labor MP has requested R&amp;B for her moves while vice-chancellor Steve Chapman has been studying Gangnam Style clips on YouTube and is getting a white suit ready. The event is being held as part of the university's 25th anniversary celebrations and aims to beat the previous record of 24 hours and 9 minutes set by MTV's 24-hour Beyonce-themed party in 2015. Aly attended the university as a student and returned later as a professor, before being elected to the Australian parliament in July. She remains on the staff as an adjunct professor. She headed to the stage at the Joondalup campus immediately after getting off her flight from Canberra, following the final parliamentary sitting week of the year. The university is named after Edith Cowan, who became the first woman elected to any Australian parliament when she was voted into the lower house in Western Australia in 1920. She could not have suspected that another political pioneer, the first Muslim woman elected to the Australian parliament, would one day dance to Usher in her name. Chapman said they had worked out a roster of students, staff and special guests, including Aly and some members of the Perth Wildcats basketball team, to ensure there was more than one person dancing the whole time. The dance started at 12pm on Friday and was expected to balloon to several hundred people about mid-afternoon, before winnowing down to a tired but determined few in the early hours of the morning. "You don't want to get down to one person because then if they stop dancing, there's a problem," Chapman said. He will not be sharing the dance floor with Aly because of her R&amp;B request –Chapman's repertoire is limited to Gangnam Style. "I am a kind of dad dancer so free form would make me look pretty bad, I think, whereas with Gangnam Style there are certain moves that you have to do – riding the horse, whipping the horse, etc," Chapman told Guardian Australia. "If you have to make up the moves, you can look like a dad dancer." Chapman insisted he would be the star of the show. But, in what appeared to be an open challenge to any student with a camera phone, he said he had taken steps to ensure his rehearsed footwork was not captured on film "I don't want to do the first dance because I don't really want people to film it," he said. He later added: "I'm just looking at the stage and they are trying out the smoke. Hopefully when I dance they can pump out a lot of smoke and hide what I am doing – I think I'll request that."

A hogweed blooms in the violet breath of shadows on the lane. Where garden roses are bred to keep flowering compulsively in a desperate denial of the season, the hogweed (Heracleum sphondylium) opens in defiance. In a frosty corner of the hedge bank cut down at the end of summer, one flower makes a reappearance. The plant will not become a drinking den for butterflies or a dance floor for coupling soldier beetles, it's too cold for all that insect malarkey now. But there is sunshine and therefore an irrepressibly hogweedian urge to burst forth. Where there's life ... Under the lane a culvert murmurs with rain that fell in the storm named Angus. The brook, whose name is now lost, carries water branded with the new anthropomorphising of weather. Suppose all rainfalls were named (not after people) and we read them like ingredients in the soil and streams crossing into rivers, would we think differently about the land? The drains flow darkly underground, moles tunnel under wet fields, but above the hedges the sun shines with the last of November brilliance. This is a bright-as-a-berry day, as golden-as-the-last-field-maple-leaf day. It has a mucky kind of cleanliness: fallen leaves over frosted grass, a slight brewery scent of rot in air and, clear of misunderstandings, a big blue sky. There are blue tits, great tits and tree creepers in the ash woods; a dissatisfaction of blackbirds clucking around brambles, a few leaves glowing ruby red with anthocyanins in the sunshine. There are jackdaws in the graveyard and, not too far away because I saw them yesterday, a deceit of lapwings a 100 strong, flouncing with an energy that looked like joy. Despite the ritual grumbling about winter, days like this are beautiful and uplifting; bonus days, gardeners call them. But is this winter? Most leaves are grounded but out in the fields great oaks have a brassy glow, their stubborn leaves, unstripped, holding out for the last illumination of the year. And there is still a hogweed flower, symbol of daft hope, until the flail comes. Follow Country diary on Twitter: @gdncountrydiary

No matter what part of the world you live in, it's easy to overindulge at Christmas – whether it's on winter warmers such as bourbon or scotch, or on festive glasses of bubbles in warmer climates. With a little foresight and planning, it's easy to switch to Christmas tipples that punch above their weight in the flavour stakes but won't knock you out in terms of booze content. If you really want to watch how much you're drinking, take a leaf out of the professional bartender's book and invest in a jigger – this ensures you pour consistent quantities of booze every time you make a drink. 1. Amari alpini For many of us, nothing says Christmas like the smell of evergreen trees – pines, firs, cedars, etc. Italy's amari alpini (that's "alpine bitters" in English) possess more than a hint of that same evergreen scent, alongside herbal hints of chamomile, spearmint and juniper. Made in the Italian Alps – the mountainous region that borders Switzerland, and takes more than a few cultural cues from its northern European neighbours – these amari alpini are a distinct category within the broader family of Italian amari. While Italian amari and aperitivo bitters are currently having something of a moment – consider the popularity of the Aperol spritz and the Negroni – amari alpini remain underrepresented on the global market. The good news is that as the amaro craze shows no sign of slowing down, importers and distributors are more willing to take a chance on more recondite local specialties from various parts of Italy (no doubt hoping to find the next Campari or Aperol). The most widely available amaro alpino is Bràulio – now owned and made by Italian beverage giant Gruppo Campari. But other, smaller brands can be found with some patience and luck. With their low alcohol by volume (most clock in around 20%) and their refreshingly complex, wintery aromas, amari alpini make an excellent sipper for after Christmas dinner. You can enjoy one simply on the rocks or, for something more refreshing, mix one up in a spritz as they do in Bormio, Bràulio's home town. Make it at home: alpine spritz 120ml chilled dry white wine (pinot grigio or similar) 30ml amaro alpino 30ml soda water Build ingredients in a wine glass. Stir briefly to incorporate and top with ice. Garnish with a slice of orange or a sprig of mint. You can replace the white wine for prosecco or another dry sparkling wine if you'd like something bubblier, but part of its charm is its retro nature (traditionally, Italian spritzes were made with still wines, not sparkling ones). Pair it with a movie: The James Bond thriller Quantum of Solace has some lovely shots of the Italian Alps – even if the film itself is a bit of a downer. 2. Chartreuse hot chocolate At 55% ABV, green chartreuse is nobody's idea of a low-proof drink. In fact, I still have mental scars from wild nights out drinking it in my misspent youth. But just because something is fearsomely high-proof, doesn't mean the only way to drink it is to smash shots. You can, for instance, use a small quantity of it as a flavouring agent, as the French do with green chartreuse and hot chocolate. Green chartreuse is something of a love-it-or-hate-it proposition. For some, its sweetness, high proof and strongly herbaceous character (it contains the extracts of 130 different botanicals) make it mother's milk, while for others those same characteristics make it as appealing as Agent Orange. The genius of blending it with hot chocolate is that it can please both crowds – those inclined to love it will still detect its signature flavour, which shines through pretty much anything you mix it with; while those inclined to loathe it will find it much more approachable when lengthened. It also helps that chartreuse and chocolate go extremely well together. This traditional apres-ski drink makes a delicious winter warmer – just bear in mind its relatively low ABV is about the only thing it has going for it, health-wise. Pair it with a movie: The characters in Ruben Östlund's Force Majeure – a chilly social drama set in the French Alps – could probably have done with a few of these. Make it at home: chartreuse hot chocolate One cup hot chocolate 15ml (or more, to taste) green chartreuse Make hot chocolate according to your own taste. Before serving, spike with green chartreuse and stir briefly to incorporate. Garnish with a float of whipped cream on top. While you might be tempted to go for the cheaper and lower-ABV yellow chartreuse, avoid this if possible – the more pungent green version is better at cutting through the chocolate. 3. Sherry eggnog Eggnog is the American Christmas drink par excellence – even if the commercially available versions these days are a pale shadow of the drink's former glory. Fortunately for your tastebuds, it's relatively easy to whip up a big batch of delicious 'nog – but recipes for homemade alcoholic eggnog are usually loaded with serious quantities of bourbon, brandy or rum. There's an easy solution if you're after a lower-proof version: simply swap out the brown spirits for an oxidatively aged sherry. Sherry – the real stuff from Spain, that is – is loaded with the same complexity of flavour as any high-quality brown spirit, with about half the ABV. The richly nutty flavours of an oxidatively-aged sherry work perfectly with the creaminess of the eggnog. The hardest part of making this swap is finding the right sherry to fit the gap. Sherry isn't just one ingredient, but is actually a rather diverse spectrum of different styles of wine – some bone-dry and flinty, others sweet enough to be a dentist's wet dream. In order to make the recipe below (adapted from David Wondrich) work, you'll need to procure a sherry that is both dry and oxidatively aged; look for one labelled "oloroso", "palo cortado" or "amontillado", and avoid any labelled "manzanilla", "fino", "pedro ximénez", "moscatel" or "cream". Make it at home: sherry eggnog (serves 12) 750ml (one bottle) dry, oxidatively aged sherry (oloroso, palo cortado or amontillado) 10 whole eggs 150g sugar 1L full-cream milk Separate the egg whites and yolks. Mix sugar with yolks until the sugar has dissolved. Add sherry and gently stir until incorporated, then add milk and repeat. Using a beater, whip the egg whites until they form soft peaks. Gently fold the whipped whites into the mixture, then refrigerate for an hour or so to rest. When serving, garnish individual cups with freshly grated nutmeg and/or cinnamon sticks. Some people like to age their alcoholic eggnog – this is not advised for a sherry eggnog, as sherry's lower ABV makes the eggnog more susceptible to pathogens such as salmonella. Eggnog contains raw eggs, so should not be consumed by pregnant women, the elderly and people with compromised immune systems. Pair it with a film: Bruce Robinson's Withnail and I – just for the sheer camp enjoyment of Richard Griffiths's character Uncle Monty, who loves a cheeky sherry or three.

A pilot who used his plane to write "hello" in its flight path reportedly has a track record of "inventive flight art". Flightradar24 recorded the 37-minute flight beginning near Agathenburg, in the Niedersachsen region of Germany, on Monday afternoon. The Robin DR400/180 Régent aircraft is registered D-EFHN and is privately owned, though the identity of its pilot is not known. Flightradar 24 confirmed to the Guardian that the simulation showed a real flight, adding: "This aircraft has a history of inventive flight art." Earlier this year, it drew a portrait of an airplane, signing off with what appeared to be a signature; and, on a separate flight over northwest Germany, a heart. Flightradar24 is a global flight tracker that provides real-time information about air traffic around the world from data from a variety of sources, including satellite and radar. It has previously reported on "Flower Guy", who practises patterns "that end up looking like flowers" in a private plane over Santa Clara. In April last year, an Air Malta plane drew two hearts in the sky to mark the marriage of two of its employees.

If you've ever visited the Great Barrier Reef, or are one of the 70,000 people whose job relies upon it, you know why it's considered one of the seven natural wonders of the world. Yet it faces more pressure than ever before, from global warming, water quality, industrialisation of the coastline, and ever more extreme weather. Earlier this decade, the coal bonanza coming out of Queensland saw proposals for six new or expanded ports and thousands more coal ships, fed by multiple proposed mega mines. It was this industrialisation of the reef with mass dredging and offshore dumping of sludge that first saw the world heritage committee warn Australia that the reef could be placed on the "in-danger" list. The community and scientists were outraged, and in parliament the Australian Greens moved Senate inquiries and private members' bills to stop the onslaught the reef was facing. Faced with an international shame listing of "in danger" that would jeopardise this $6bn tourism icon, port proposals were marginally scaled back and both state and federal governments finally backflipped and ended offshore dumping of sludge into the reef's waters from capital dredging. The reef was placed on the watch list for in-danger listing and governments said pretty words about doing more to save it. Then 2016 happened. A combination of fossil-fuel-driven global warming and El Niño saw the reef's water temperatures skyrocket, which caused the worst mass coral bleaching the reef had ever faced. There was no temperature respite for that coral to bounce back after the bleaching, and almost one quarter of the reef's corals died, including two-thirds of the corals in the 700km northern section of the reef. On Friday, the Queensland and Australian governments had to hand in their homework to the world heritage committee on what they were doing about those earlier concerns and this mass bleaching event. It was a dog-ate-my-homework moment. What we saw was re-announcement of old plans and no new funding. The government is risking a fail on their reef homework by underfunding their Reef Plan, delaying water quality targets, spruiking new coal and ignoring global warming after the worst coral bleaching the reef has ever seen. The federal government's response plan to the worst-ever bleaching event on the reef says global warming was the cause but doesn't include any action or new funding to address it. Worse still, the Australian and Queensland governments are still desperately pushing to open up the Adani mega coalmine which would put the Great Barrier Reef in grave peril. The Greens are worried that our governments' inaction and their capitulation to big coal companies will tempt Unesco to put the reef back on the world heritage in-danger list. Global warming is the biggest long-term threat to the reef, but we must also urgently fix water pollution from land clearing and agriculture. We have ambitious water quality targets, including an 80% cut to nitrogen pollution by 2025, but report after report shows we're nowhere near on track to meet them. The experts in the Queensland government's own Great Barrier Reef water science taskforce called for a massive funding boost up to $8.2bn, but our governments have simply dismissed them. Just this week, the Queensland government decided to keep using the reef's waters as a rubbish tip for dumping one million cubic metres of sludge from maintenance dredging, in their long overdue but nearly toothless Maintenance Dredging Strategy. Elsewhere in Queensland, more than 300,000 hectares of native woodland is being cleared every year, sending rivers of sediment flowing into the reef. Despite promising to stop this clearing frenzy, the Queensland Labor government waited too long to act, and tree-clearing protections were recently voted down in the parliament. Earlier this year, I visited the worst-hit area of the reef at Lizard Island along with some of Australia's leading reef scientists and saw the destruction first-hand. The devastation was horrifying. Our leading scientists have told us of weeping into their dive masks as they witnessed the destruction. The have told us that if the current trajectory of global warming continues, even if we do fix water pollution, the reef will suffer terrible bleaching every two years by the 2030s. To save the reef and avoid an in-danger listing, both levels of government need a response to global warming that includes scrapping the Adani coalmine and banning all new coalmines, moving to 100% clean energy, finally banning all dredge sludge dumping including maintenance dredging, and strong land clearing laws. It's not too late, but time is running out to save our reef's future and secure a bright future for all Queenslanders. It's time for our leaders to step up.

Uzbeks will elect a new leader for the first time in more than 25 years on Sunday. Just don't expect a Trump-like upset. About 18 million people are eligible to vote for a successor to Islam Karimov, the long-time dictator who died in September after ruling Uzbekistan ever since it gained independence from the Soviet Union in 1991. Shavkat Mirziyoyev, Karimov's prime minister for the past 13 years, is set to step seamlessly into the shoes of his former boss and is widely expected to continue his predecessor's autocratic rule. Mirziyoyev is likely to win a landslide following a lacklustre election campaign enlivened only by a wild (and probably false) rumour that the new regime had poisoned Gulnara Karimova, the late president's socialite eldest daughter, and buried her in a secret grave. Mirziyoyev's three challengers are all regime loyalists standing only to lend a democratic veneer to an election in a country that has no political opposition or free press. "This is to show to the outside world that we have some kind of democracy in Uzbekistan," a local businessman told the Guardian, speaking on condition of anonymity for fear of reprisals. "It's a show, but the outcome will be the same." In the capital Tashkent, signs of election hurly burly are hard to detect amid the weak winter sun and snowmelt streets. Drab campaign posters hang over main roads, each featuring a middle-aged grey-haired man in a dark suit staring out at voters with an earnest expression on his face. The most colourful billboards are the bright blue and pink posters urging the electorate to get out and vote on Sunday, a sign that Tashkent wants a high turnout to legitimise the choice of Mirziyoyev as the next president. The four candidates have delivered monologues on identikit manifestos in lecture halls and meeting rooms around the country. Opposition to the status quo that has persisted since Karimov took over in 1989 has been non existent. Under Karimov the opposition was at best hounded into exile, at worst jailed, tortured and even killed. "Opposition is viewed as a destabilising factor," said Rustam Burnashev, an Uzbekistan-born analyst based in neighbouring Kazakhstan. "Not a single person in his right mind, if he really believes in this [authoritarian] model – and I think the leadership of Uzbekistan sincerely does believe in it – would go for that kind of liberalisation, because they see it as first and foremost destabilisation." The release last month of political prisoner Samandar Kukanov after 23 years in jail sparked a glimmer of hope for those rooting for liberalisation, and was hailed by the European Union as "an encouraging political message" from Tashkent. However, human rights campaigners point out that Kukanov is only one among thousands held on spurious charges in jails where torture is rife. "If interim president Shavkat Mirziyoyev is serious about showing the world that his rule will be an improvement over Islam Karimov's repression he'll need to release many more political prisoners in addition to ending torture," Steve Swerdlow of Human Rights Watch told Agence France-Presse. But Mirziyoyev is standing on a platform of continuing the policies of his predecessor – and although some voters chafe against authoritarian rule, others are happy to vote for more of the same. "He's strong, he's smart, he's experienced," explained Abduvahid, a twentysomething resident of Tashkent who gave only his first name. He planned to cast his ballot for Mirziyoyev as "Karimov's disciple". The result may be a foregone conclusion, but a dose of excitement was injected into an otherwise lacklustre election last month by the rumour that the new regime had poisoned Gulnara Karimova, buried her in a secret grave in a Tashkent cemetery and then bulldozed her resting place. Once a powerful diplomat, wealthy entrepreneur and flamboyant pop diva, Karimova disappeared from the public eye in 2014 when she was placed under house arrest after dragging Uzbekistan into disgrace through her involvement in several international corruption investigations. Her downfall coincided with a bitter public feud waged with her mother, Tatyana Karimova, and sister Lola Karimova-Tillyaeva. She once accused her mother of practising witchcraft. Tashkent has not reacted to the murder allegation, but Gulnara's UK-based son has cast doubt on the report, published by the Central Asian news website Centre-1 and quoting an anonymous source claiming to be from Uzbekistan's security services. Islam Karimov, who is named after his grandfather (from whom he was latterly estranged owing to the family feud) said he believed she remained under house arrest in Tashkent, although he could not confirm it beyond doubt. He still thinks his mother's life might be in danger following the death of his namesake, he added.

Pittsburgh Pirates infielder Jung-ho Kang faces charges in South Korea after crashing a luxury car while driving under the influence of alcohol and then leaving the scene early Friday. Police are also investigating whether Kang asked a friend to falsely report who was driving the vehicle, according to an official at Seoul's Gangnam district police station, who didn't want to be named, citing office rules. Jeeho Yoo of Korea's Yonhap news agency reported on Thursday that Kang, already under investigation for the incident, had been charged. "We have been made aware of the very serious charges filed against Jung Ho Kang early Friday morning in Seoul, South Korea," Pirates president Frank Coonelly said in a statement issued on Thursday. "We are extremely disappointed in Jung Ho and in his decision process during this matter. I know firsthand how foolish and dangerous it is to drive under the influence and am most thankful that, as we understand it, no one was injured. "We will have further comment once we have been able to gather all of the relevant facts and speak with the player." According to police, Kang didn't stop after driving a rented BMW into a guardrail at around 2:48am while returning to his hotel in southern Seoul. The crash damaged the guardrail, and the vehicle, and the debris hit a car parked nearby, whose driver reported the matter to police. A 29-year-old man who was in Kang's vehicle initially claimed he was behind the wheel. But police questioned Kang after the vehicle's security camera showed him driving it. Police said Kang's blood alcohol level at the time of the crash would have been 0.084 percent, beyond the country's 0.05 percent legal limit. Kang has so far denied asking or intimidating the friend into falsely reporting to police, said the police official. Kang, 29, signed a four-year, $11m deal with the Pirates in 2015 after Pittsburgh paid his Korean club, the Nexen Heroes, $5m to negotiate with the slugger. He hit .287 with 15 home runs and 58 RBIs for the Pirates during his rookie season, which ended abruptly on September when Kang injured his left knee while at the receiving end of a takeout slide by Chris Coghlan of the Chicago Cubs. Kang hit 21 home runs and 62 RBIs in 103 games in 2016, but his second season in the majors also included an off-the-field incident in Chicago in June when a 23-year-old woman reported being assaulted by Kang inside a hotel. The woman said she blacked out, and then drifted in and out of consciousness as he sexually assaulted her. The woman's name has not been released and Kang has not been charged. The incident in Seoul adds to a turbulent week for the Pirates, who are also exploring trade offers for All-Star centerfielder Andrew McCutchen. The 2013 NL MVP, a five-time All-Star, is coming off the worst season of his career and still has two years remaining on a contract that will pay him $14m in 2017 and carries a $14.75m club option for 2018.



News that there we have slipped further behind in global rankings in maths and science in our schools has brought the usual responses from the usual suspects. The federal minister for education Simon Birmingham says that "he is embarrassed" at the "appalling results". He says this has nothing to do with funding but everything to do with "teacher quality". That old chestnut. Nothing to do with class sizes either. Birmingham is on the record quoting research that says smaller class sizes don't make a difference. Let's just put that one to bed once and for all. Just because classes of 45 are manageable in other cultures doesn't mean they are here. We are culturally very different to many of the countries on the rankings ladder. What can a teacher do in an Australian school do if a student tells them to "fuck off" or tosses a chair out the window or doesn't do their homework? Nothing. Where is the support for such situations? In the principal's office? The same principal who is so weighed down with the demands of the parents, the departments and the education bureaucracies that they are unable to get out of their office even if they want to? When are we going to face up to the fact that we have got our priorities all wrong? When are we going to stop the blame game and take the steps that need to be taken to improve conditions in our schools for both teachers and students and, in doing so, inevitably raise standards? Is it any wonder 30%-50% of new teachers drop out in the first five years of teaching? Is it because they have been badly trained or have poor skills? Or is it because they discover that teaching in contemporary Australian schools involves so much work outside the classroom that they never get to do what they are trained for? That is, teach. Our obsession with accountability means that every spare moment of a teacher's life is spent not preparing lessons or finding resources but satisfying the bureaucratic demands of the job. In other words filling in forms. Doing paperwork, most of which could be done by anyone. Young teachers need mentors. We all know that. It's not easy controlling a class of teenagers whose respect you have to earn. That's right, earn. Our culture does everything but respect teachers. Why would anyone think our students would be any different? We have very different disciplinary expectations to some of our "rivals" on educational ladder tables. We also have students with a range of special needs. They are not going to get where we want them to be on their own. It's astounding that we can't make the link between the appalling social conditions endured by some of our communities and their educational results. People in living in abject poverty aren't doing well in maths and science. Who'd have thought? Must be the teachers. People living is disadvantaged areas aren't doing well at school? Blow me down. You know who to blame. People who have escaped war torn regions and for whom English is a second language are struggling in class. Really? Must be the fault of that young teacher trying to control a class of tearaways. Here's a simple suggestion to get the ball rolling: remove all but the most essential paperwork from teachers' inboxes and give them the space to devote the time they need to prepare lessons for their classes. Provide them with the physical and emotional support they need in the way of mentors. And, sorry Mr Birmingham, in this country, keep class sizes manageable. A conga line of politicians from both sides of the political divide have pointed to increased funding over the years as though this in itself is the panacea. As Gonski and now the Grattan Institute have pointed out, it's not the money it's how it is spent. By providing resources on a needs based formula we will go a long way to getting it right. To start on the right foot with this we need to once and for all put an end to the tired old private v public debate that chews up way too much air time and is preventing the kinds of advances being made that we desperately need. The government doesn't even need to increase funding – it just needs to identify where it is most needed and, as Grattan's Peter Goss says, make that transparent. Only a tiny fraction of private schools – 1% – are seriously over funded. That could be redressed with the stroke of a pen and most of those schools would accept the cuts because, surprise, surprise, they are teachers at heart and most teachers support Gonski's recommendations. Then cap the next 2% of private schools that have adequate funding and increase on a needs-based formula for those private schools that are struggling. Similarly, cap funding to the better resourced public schools and reallocate that funding as needs be. It really is time we took the politics out of this debate. On both sides. And stop looking for scapegoats. If we want to lift our rankings on global educational ladders we all have to contribute. After all, in the end these are all our children.

Labor's 11th-hour "hire Australian" amendment to the Australian Building and Construction Commission bill could impose onerous requirements to advertise jobs even when an Australian is hired, experts have warned. Employment law expert Andrew Stewart has told Guardian Australia the provision, which is intended to force employers to advertise for locals before hiring visa-holders, appears to impose the requirement across the board regardless of who is hired. The Master Builders Association chief executive, Wilhelm Harnisch, has confirmed it is a "live issue" that is being raised with the government and the ABCC, the new regulator that took over from Fair Work Building and Construction this week. The amendment moved by Labor requires a clause in the building code that "no person is to be employed to undertake building work" unless: the position is first advertised in Australia; the ad was targeted to reach a "significant proportion" of qualified citizens and residents any skills or experience requirements are set out in the ad; and "the employer demonstrates that no Australian citizen or Australian permanent resident is suitable for the job". The government first opposed the amendment in the Senate, but accepted it in the lower house as part of a deal to win crossbench support for the ABCC bill. Stewart, a labour law professor at Adelaide University, said the amendment was "meant to say nobody who isn't an Australian citizen or permanent resident can be employed" unless the conditions were met. "But that's not what it says – it says no person is to be hired without the conditions being met. On the face of it, it means no matter how minor, every job must be nationally advertised." Stewart said that was a "significant" imposition because of the project-based nature of building work and the fact employers generally hired from a pool of workers known to them without extensive advertising. "There is no way any contractor will comply with that requirement as written," he said. Stewart said the government could try and insert a better drafted term into the code, but that "risks the argument the code is invalid because it is inconsistent with the legislation". He said it was more likely the government would put the provision into the code then ask ABCC to ignore the unintended consequences rather than blacklist employers due to a failure to meet the technical requirement. That would give companies that didn't comply with other sections of the code an argument "that they're being singled out or treated arbitrarily because other code breaches are let go", Stewart said. Commenting on the requirement as it was intended to operate, Harnisch said: "The construction industry and contractors as normal practice hire Australians first, with high-level skills." He said use of skilled temporary 457 visa-holders was " not the first resort" of employers. Asked about the two-year phase-in period for the building code negotiated by Derryn Hinch, Stewart said it had "saved the government from a mess of its own making", the proposed retrospective application of the code. But Stewart said the phase-in would create problems for builders without enterprise agreements, or whose agreements were up for renegotiation in the next two years, if they came under industrial pressure from the union to sign a non-code-compliant deal. He said the application of the new code could arbitrarily punish some builders. "If an employer rolls over after the new code takes effect, they're in the firing line; whereas those who rolled over right away, if they did exactly what the government said they shouldn't do, they get protection until November 2018 ." A spokeswoman for the ABCC said: "The new code is yet to be published and registered. It is subject to amendments made this week." The ABCC refused to comment on the effect of the amendment, adding only that it would "review and analyse the registered version of the code", despite the fact the text of the offending provision is already contained in legislation. Guardian Australia has contacted the employment minister, Michaelia Cash, for comment.

The Liberal Democrats have produced a stunning byelection victory to unseat Zac Goldsmith in Richmond Park, overturning a 23,000 majority to remove the former Conservative MP in a vote that became a de facto plebiscite on the government's referendum plans. The swing to the Lib Dems was 21.5 points, putting this on a par with some of the party's best ever byelection results (although Goldsmith was standing as an independent, so technically it was not a proper Conservative to Lib Dem swing.) Labour's candidate came a distant third, losing his deposit. Sarah Olney, the winning Lib Dem candidate, said the result would create a "shockwave" and send a clear message to the government that people do not want a hard Brexit, or to leave the single market. (See 2.52pm.) The Conservatives have dismissed the result, insisting that it will not change government policy towards Brexit or Heathrow. (See 2.34pm.) That's all from me for tonight. I'll be back tomorrow - well, later today - with a new blog with reaction and analysis. Here is an extract from Sarah Olney's victory speech. A year and a half ago I was not involved in politics, I was not a member of a political party, I had never been involved in a political campaign, I had never thought about being a politician. But I knew I was a liberal. I believed in openness, tolerance, compassion, working with our neigbours around the world. When I saw what happened at the general election last year I felt I had ot get involved. I think a lot of people in this community had the same feeling after the referendum. Richmond Park is full of people like me who felt something was going wrong, that the politics of anger and division were on the rise, that the liberal tolerant values we took for granted were under threat. We perceived the Ukip vision of Britain in the ascendancy, intolerant, backward-looking, divisive, just as we see it in America and across Europe. Well, today we have said no. We will defend the Britain we love. We will stand up for the open, tolerant, united Britain we believe in. The people of Richmond Park and North Kingston have sent a shockwave through this Conservative Brexit government and our message is clear: we do not want a hard Brexit, we do not want to be pulled out of the single market and we will not let intolerance, division and fear win. The Conservative party was not standing in the byelection, but it is the first party to sent out a formal comment about the result. This is from a party spokesman. Commiserations to Zac Goldsmith on his defeat. Zac has been a strong and principled champion for the residents of Richmond Park and North Kingston over the past six years as their member of parliament, and a popular figure in the Conservative party. We are sorry that he is no longer in the House of Commons. This result doesn't change anything. The government remains committed to leaving the European Union and triggering article 50 by the end of March next year. In addition, we will continue to take decisive action in the national interest to secure the UK's place the world - supporting a third runway at Heathrow to secure jobs and business opportunities for the next decade and beyond. And here the results in full from the Press Association. Sarah Olney (LD) 20,510 (49.68%, +30.41%) Zac Goldsmith (Ind) 18,638 (45.15%) Christian Wolmar (Lab) 1,515 (3.67%, -8.68%) Howling Laud Hope (Loony) 184 (0.45%) Fiona Syms (Ind) 173 (0.42%) Dominic Stockford (CPA) 164 (0.40%) Maharaja Jammu and Kashmir (Love) 67 (0.16%) David Powell (ND) 32 (0.08%) LD maj 1,872 (4.53%) Electorate 77,243; Turnout 41,283 (53.45%, -23.01%) Here the key results again. When they were being read out we could not hear the full figure for Sarah Olney because her supporters started cheering as soon as they heard "twenty thousand, five hundred ..." Zac Goldsmith: 18,638 Sarah Olney: 20,510 Christian Wolmar: 1,515 Christian Wolmar says many people in this constituency wanted to vote Labour but lend Sarah Olney their vote. He tells Olney not to ignore them, and not to become Tory-lite. He says he is glad that people voted against Brexit. And this was also a vote against Zac Goldsmith, and his "ghastly" mayoral campaign, he says. He says Labour remains the party of hope. It will defend the disadvantaged in society. It understands how you build community, he says. He thanks his team, and says it was a privilege to be a candidate here. Zac Goldsmith says he held this byelection to keep a promise. He says he will miss not being MPs here. He loves this community, he says. He wishes Sarah Olney well and hopes she will serve the community. Sarah Olney is speaking now. She thanks the candidates, and tell Zac Goldsmith that she will continue his fight against Heathrow expansion. She thanks her campaign staff, and her family and friends. And she thanks party members, who helped. And she thanks the Greens, More United and Women's Equality party, who also helped. A year ago she was not in politics, she says. But she knew she was a liberal. She says a lot of people in Richmond Park felt the same after the EU referendum. They felt their values were under threat. Today they have said no. They will defend the Britain they love. She says the people of Richmond Park have sent a shockwave through Britain. They do not want a hard Brexit. They do not want to be pulled out of the single market. And they do not want to let fear win. We are now getting the results. Zac Goldsmith: 18,638 Sarah Olney: 20,510 Christian Wolmar: 1,515 The candidates have been called up to the front to be told the results. That means we should get the public declaration any minute now. Zac Goldsmith has just arrived. He did not say anything as he came in, despite Sky's Jon Craig - in best Gobby tradition - shouting at him: "What did you lose? Was it because of Brexit?" This is from the Lib Dem peer Olly Grender. The Lib Dems have called it but team Zac are not conceding yet, at least to me. "The Lib Dems probably would say that, wouldn't they?" said one aide. "We're not saying it's over." To me they looked very glum. And the Lib Dems say they're sure of victory. Official declaration soon, they say. A Lib Dem source says: We're calling it. We've won. We've overturned a 23,000 majority. The Lib Dems are saying they have won. This is from the New Statesman's Stephen Bush. A crowd of photographers are by the door, because the Lib Dem candidate, Sarah Olney, is due to arrive. On Twitter, Sky's Faisal Islam has been reminding people of this claim about the likely byelection result that Zac Goldsmith made on the day he triggered the byelection. Goldsmith said: People here feel as strongly as I do about the issue [Heathrow]. You can have a referendum about Heathrow and you will get Zimbabwean-esque results. Almost everyone is opposed. It has massive massive implications, way beyond Richmond Park. It affects a million people, it's a significant chunk of our population. I don't believe Heathrow will be delivered. I see this byelection as a referendum on Heathrow. The Labour candidate, Christian Wolmar, has just arrived with an entourage. There was no cheering. Another Lib Dem source says: It is looking good for us. What is clear is that Zac's majority has pretty much evaporated. Alistair Carmichael, the Lib Dem MP and former Scottish secretary, is at the count. He is now saying his party is "cautiously optimistic". Here's a chart showing previous Lib Dem byelection wins, and the swings achieved in them. If the figures coming out of the Labour camp are correct - and, remember, that's an if, they are unconfirmed - the swing here would be 22.5% from Conservatives to Lib Dems. Here's the scene at the count. Zac Goldsmith's makeshift team of mainly young and very enthusiastic volunteers are still insisting their man can win. "There's more twists and turns to come," one told me. "It's looking very tight." The team are a mix of Conservative activists and those who support Goldsmith personally, some from Richmond and others from around London. Of course, it's too early for anyone to be admitting defeat. But their protestations looked genuine. It wouldn't be a byelection without the monster raving loonies. We should get a result within the next hour, according to the BBC's Chris Mason. I tried unsuccessfully an hour or so ago to get the Lib Dems to say they were "optimistic". But now, according to the BBC's Vicki Young, they've managed it. This is from the BBC's Chris Mason. Those raw figures - Lib Dems 55%, Zac Goldsmith 39% - would give Sarah Olney a majority of about 6,600. But Labour think it won't be quite that high because those figures do not include postal votes. It should be stressed that these are not official figures - just internal estimates from one party. But at this stage at a count, a party with competent counting agents should be able to produce figures accurate to within 1 or 2%. Labour think the Lib Dems are on course to win with a majority of more than 2,000. From what they have seen of the ballot papers coming out of the boxes, they think the Lib Dems are getting 55% of the vote, and Zac Goldsmith 39%. These figures do not include postal votes, which should be skewed towards Goldsmith a bit, but Labour think it is very, very hard to see the Lib Dems losing. Sarah Olney should have a majority of between 2,000 and 4,000, they say. They also believe it will be touch and go as to whether Labour's Christian Wolmar loses his deposit. On Tuesday the Lib Dems took the unusual step of releasing canvass return figures showing them ahead. Parties usually downplay expectations ahead of an election, but the party decided to release its numbers, and talk up its chances, to help get its vote out. According to those numbers, Sarah Olney was on 47.2% and Zac Goldsmith 45.8%. Those figures, on the basis of today's turnout, would give the Lib Dems a majority of 579. The verification process is over, and the turnout has just been announced. Some 41,367 votes were cast - a turnout of 53.6%. The Lib Dems have certainly given this seat the kitchen sink treatment. They say they have had 50,000 conversations with voters. They have also knocked doors 150,000 times (though not each door 150,000 times, obviously - they've knocked 150,000 doors, although a lot were the same doors, because there aren't that many in the constituency. They've also distributed 1,000 window posters and put up 700 stakeboards. The boards have certainly been noticed. This is from the FT's Henry Mance. A source from the Zac Goldsmith campaign has been speaking to reporters. "It is certainly looking very tight," he said. He also thinks the turnout is around 50%. The Lib Dems are still refusing to say that they are confident of winning. But they look pretty confident to me. Labour think they have won. And so does Betfair. (See 11.52am.) Betfair now has the Lib Dems favourite to win, according to Number Cruncher Politics. If the Lib Dems win tonight, it will be the first time they have gained a seat in a byelection 10 years. There was a time in the 1990s when the Lib Dems seemed to win every byelection going, but they have not taken a seat in one since Willie Rennie won Dunfermline and West Fife in February 2006. Earlier there were predictions that turnout would be around 40%. (See 10.52pm. But now Labour and the Lib Dem sources are both saying it looks more like 50%. The Lib Dem thinks that helps them. And they reckon postal voting is relatively low, which they think disadvantages Zac Goldsmith. The Lib Dems are still officially in 'too early to tell' mode, but they do seem quietly confident. Proper counting has not started yet. The tellers are still verifying the votes - making sure that the ballot boxes contain the number of ballot papers they are supposed to contain. But counting agents can observe the process, watching the ballot papers being unfolded, and Labour and the Lib Dems are both running a proper counting operation - keeping their own tally from the crosses in the boxes they can actually observe. The Lib Dems are still being cautious, but someone from the Labour camp said it is looking like a Lib Dem win - "and not in recount territory, either". ITV's Paul Brand posted this on Twitter earlier today. My colleague Peter Walker posted this on Twitter. It prompted this response: Here is the Lib Dem candidate Sarah Olney with her husband Ben voting earlier. Sky's Faisal Islam has been tweeting from the count. In case you have forgotten the details of the Bristol south east byelection of 1963, this is what Wikipedia has to say on the subject. The seat had become vacant in 1961 when the constituency's Labour Member of Parliament (MP) Tony Benn had inherited from his father an hereditary peerage as Viscount Stansgate, thus making him ineligible to serve in the House of Commons. He had been elected at a by-election in 1950. Benn stood in the 1961 by-election anyway, but due to his ineligibility, the Conservative Party candidate Malcolm St Clair was declared the winner. When the law was later changed to allow Benn to renounce his peerage, St Clair resigned his seat, triggering the 1963 by-election. Benn won again, with nearly 80% of the votes. The Conservatives did not nominate an official candidate, the last by-election in Great Britain in which there was no Conservative candidate until the Batley and Spen by-election in 2016, and the last by-election in Great Britain where the Conservatives did not field a candidate in a held seat until the Richmond Park by-election in 2016. (The tweet above was posted a while ago. Team Zac are here now, or at least some of them.) Here is Zac Goldsmith and his wife Alice voting earlier today. A contingent of Zac Goldsmith activists have just arrived, including the counting agent. Rather confusingly, Goldsmith's rosettes are green. He is an environmentalist, but he has been criticised during the campaign for putting out a leaflet including a quote from Caroline Lucas, the Green party co-leader, complimenting his environmental record. The Greens decided not to put up a candidate here, as a "progressive alliance" move intended to help the Lib Dems, and Lucas has been backing Sarah Olney. The Lib Dems reckon turnout will be relatively low. One source is talking about 40%. Byelections often have far lower turnouts, but the turnout in Richmond Park is generally quite high. It was 76% at the general election. In Witney, where the Lib Dems came second in the byelection in October, but with a 19-point swing from the Conservatives, the turnout was 46.7%. The Lib Dems fear this means they have not been able to mobilise the anti-Brexit vote as successfully as they might have hoped. They say they had 500 activists in the constituency today working on getting out the vote. It has been cold in London today. You would expect the weather to affect turnout and it turns out that someone has actually studied this. In More Sex, Lies and the Ballot Box, a fascinating collection of essays presenting political research in a readable format, Galina Borisyuk says the figures show that election turnout falls quite markedly in the winter. A study of more than 5,000 council byelections between 1983 and 1999 showed that turnout averaged 37% from April to June, but fell to 31% between November and January. This chart shows the trend, with December turnout (the lowest) as the base. The black line shows how turnout varied month by month from 1983 to 1999, and the grey line shows the same for 2000-2015 (when the pattern changed a bit because of the introduction of postal voting). Some of the ballot boxes have already arrived and the ballot papers are being checked. There are a lot of Lib Dem and Labour activists here, but I can't see so many Zac Goldsmith supporters. Of course, he does not have a party machine behind him this time. Here is the scene at the count. This is from Sky's Faisal Islam. And here are the Richmond Park election results from 2015. Zac Goldsmith (Conservative) - 34,404 (58.2%) Robin Meltzer (Lib Dem) - 11,389 (19.3%) Sachin Patel (Labour) - 7,296 (12.3%) Andree Frieze (Green) - 3,548 (6%) Sam Naz (Ukip) - 2,464 (4.2%) Majority - 23,015 (38.9%) Turnout - 59,101 (76.5%) Here is the full list of candidates. Zac Goldsmith (independent): Son of the late Sir James Goldsmith, the billionaire financier who founded the Eurosceptic Referendum party, was known primarily as editor of the Ecologist magazine until he became Conservative MP for Richmond Park in 2010, one of several non-traditionalists lured to the party by David Cameron's modernisation project. As an independent-minded backbencher he was best known for championing recall (legislation to allow voters to effectively sack their MP) and opposing a third runway at Heathrow. He triggered the byelection when the government said it would go ahead with the third runway, as he had promised he would. He is standing as an independent but the Conservative party has not put up a candidate against him, Tories have been campaigning for him and he has not ruled out a return to the party at some point in the future. He is generally well-regarded as a local MP but he voted to leave the EU, a handicap in a constituency where it is estimated that 72% of people voted remain. Sarah Olney (Lib Dem): A local accountant, Olney only joined the Lib Dems only joined the party after the 2015 election, although she has always been a supporter. She is also opposed to the third runway at Heathrow but, in line with the Lib Dems' key national strategy, she has sought to make this a byelection about Brexit. She is promising to vote against invoking article 50, oppose a hard Brexit and campaign for a second referendum - although this commitment is undermined by the revelation that in October she wrote a blog - now deleted - saying she was opposed to a second referendum. Christian Wolmar (Labour): A former journalist and railway historian, Wolmar sought the nomination to be Labour's candidate for London mayor in 2016 but was one of the five people beaten by Sadiq Khan, coming second last. He was selected as the candidate in Richmond Park after Labour rejected suggestions it should stand aside to help the Lib Dems in the interests of a "progressive alliance". Wolmar is opposed to Heathrow expansion and has said he would vote against article 50. Dominic Francis Stockford (Christian peoples alliance) David Powell Howling Laud Hope (official monster raving loony party) Maharaja Jammu and Kashmir (one love party) Fiona Natasha Syms (independent) It has taken a while but tonight the search for the most elusive creature in British politics - the Lib Dem revival - may finally be over. Since 2010 the party has been on its knees (at best), and often flat out on the floor. But tonight the party thinks it has a good chance of gaining a seat in Richmond Park, the affluent and picturesque constituency in south west London where voters have been going to the polls because Zac Goldsmith decided to resign as a Conservative MP and stand again as an independent to protest against the government's decision to back a third runway at Heathrow. Goldsmith had a majority of more than 20,000 in May last year and, even though this was a Lib Dem seat until 2010, a victory here for the Lib Dem candidate Sarah Olney would go down as one of the party's great byelection triumphs. Goldsmith wanted to make this a contest about Heathrow. But the Lib Dems have sought to turn this into Britain's first Brexit byelection, exploiting Goldsmith's key weakness - the fact that he backed leaving the EU even though his constituents were strongly in favour of staying. That culminated in Nick Clegg, the former Lib Dem leader, claiming last week that a win for his party here could stop a hard Brexit. In an unusual move the Lib Dems put out canvassing figures earlier this week suggesting that they are on course to beat Goldsmith by 47 points to 46 points. A senior figure in the party told me a moment ago that it's too close to call (they always say that), but others in the party are briefing a more positive message. The polls closed at 10pm and I'm at the count, at the sports hall at Richmond upon Thames College. The council has been saying we might not get the result until 4am, although other people here think it will come earlier. I will be here until we get a result, covering all the developments. If you want to follow me or contact me on Twitter, I'm on @AndrewSparrow. I try to monitor the comments BTL but normally I find it impossible to read them all. If you have a direct question, do include "Andrew" in it somewhere and I'm more likely to find it. I do try to answer direct questions, although sometimes I miss them or don't have time. Alternatively you could post a question to me on Twitter.

By some miracle, Australia's much-derided political class made it to the end of parliamentary year 2016 without coming to blows. Malcolm Turnbull wanted to end the final sitting week with legislative wins, because legislative wins would result in the much-derided "elite" media class declaring, pliantly, and preferably on the nightly news bulletins, that progress was visible, palpable, wonderful – a semi-official history that would conduct out along the echo chamber. In order to generate that cheery narrative of progress, the prime minister and his colleagues adopted a posture of make the damn deal, hang the cost, so what we saw in the final parliamentary sitting week was a game of Senate roulette, balls rolling, wheels spinning, a bunch of random landings that were later spun as grand bargains and cunning plans. Let's be clear what the final sitting week was: close combat and chaos. There was progress all right, but it was progress at a price. Just one of the random transactions of the last parliamentary sitting week of 2016 tells the story. The government had the numbers in the Senate on Thursday to pass a backpackers tax rate of 13% without totting up additional expenditure, but it chose instead to do a deal with the Greens that landed an effective tax rate of 13% (once a lower clawback of superannuation payments was added to the mix) and required an additional $100m worth of expenditure for Landcare. Now, much as Landcare could use some additional investment, particularly given the government has pulled hundreds of millions out of the program since 2013, the backpackers tax was supposed to be a budget repair measure to help address the now long-forgotten budget emergency the Coalition used to issue hourly apocalyptic warnings about. Asked to explain why the government took the more expensive option when it had a cheaper deal available, the prime minister told reporters he loved Landcare and wouldn't have a word said against it, which is delightful as far as it goes, but hardly explains the earlier defunding. Let's just apply a quick sniff test. If you had burst into the prime minister's office early on Thursday morning, and told him you had a spare $100m burning a hole in your pocket, and he could spend it on anything he fancied, would Turnbull's answer have been: "I know, let's top up Landcare!" Seems pretty unlikely, doesn't it? In any case, pragmatism in Canberra is now a virtue. "We'll do a deal with anybody to get things done," the manager of government business, Christopher Pyne, said on Friday with characteristic chutzpah. In many respects this is a good thing. Having a prime minister prepared to be flexible and, dare we say, agile, consigns to history the grim futility of the Abbott period – all those petulant tantrums about how the feral Senate wouldn't rubber stamp manifestly unfair policy propositions and broken election promises. There are two other main upsides. Having to deal your way to legislative victory does, in some instances at least, provide the prime minister with protection against internal ideologues who want to shift the government's centre of gravity to the hard right. Deals struck across a spectrum of players in the parliament also have the prospect of presenting to the voters as genuinely representative, which is no bad thing in a climate where many voters regard the parliamentary precinct as little more than a toxic swamp. That's the good news. But here's the bad news. The government has set some very big precedents in the end-of-year rush to stage a capital V victory for the prime minister. It has basically told the Senate to name its arbitrary price, and if the wheel spins in the right direction at the right time, bounty will follow. Through its own behaviour, the government has told the Senate blocs – who are in fierce competition among themselves for oxygen and influence, and some of whom are in direct competition with the Coalition for votes – the best way to get what you want is hold out until the last minute and then bring the hammer down. In a managerial sense, if you incentivise deal-or-no-deal, it's a recipe for maximum mischief in the red chamber, which I suspect is rather enjoying its transformation during the last two parliaments from Sleepy Hollow to WWE. Naming your arbitrary price presumably won't thrill the ratings agencies, who are sitting on the sidelines, revving their engines, analysing the pattern of behaviour emerging from the 45th parliament. The treasurer, Scott Morrison, would presumably wave this concern away by saying all the sweet deals will be offset by savings (as he already has about the backpacker tax handshake) – and that may be true, or at least true enough to be valid. But that rationale creates a dynamic where the government is locked into responding to other people's priorities rather than getting clear air for its own. You are, in essence, cutting your own programs to fund the spending priorities of your political rivals, which is an enormously generous way to run a government, but will inevitably create internal tensions over time. Being pragmatic in politics is a good working disposition to adopt, but it has to be balanced with the clear articulation of values and priorities, lest voters fall into confusion about what you stand for. And as the parliamentary year closes out, this remains the biggest problem facing the prime minister and his government: there's still a vacuum at the centre of the mission. If you had to explain the raison d'être of the Turnbull government as of the first weekend in December 2016, the only honest answer you could provide would be: sorry folks, at this point, not a clue.

The country music legend Dolly Parton has pledged to give $1,000 a month to people made homeless by the deadly wildfires that have ravaged a swathe of her home state of Tennessee. The death toll from the fires across the Smoky Mountains rose to 11 on Thursday, according to Dean Flener of the state's emergency management agency, the worst loss of civilian life from a single US wildfire in 13 years. Although 24 hours of heavy rain had helped to dampen the fire known as Chimney Tops 2, large parts of the region have been devastated with more than 700 homes and businesses destroyed. Police and fire crews said the search for victims would begin again on Friday. Parton, whose hometown and Dollywood theme park is close to the centre of the fires, made her announcement with a video on Twitter. She said she had asked her suite of entertainment companies to help her set up a "my People Fund" to provide aid for people left bereaved and homeless by the fires. "I have always believed that charity begins at home," Parton said. "And that's why I've asked my Dollywood Companies — including the Dollywood Theme Park; the DreamMore Resort; my dinner theater attractions including Dixie Stampede and Lumberjack Adventure; plus my Dollywood Foundation to help me establish a 'My People Fund.' "We want to provide a hand up to all those families that have lost everything in the fires," she said. "And to recover, we want to make sure that the Dollywood Foundation provides $1,000 a month to all of those families that have lost their homes in the fires until they get back up on their feet. I know it has been a trying time for my people, and this assistance will help." Parton, who grew up close to the site of Dollywood in Pigeon Forge, signed off her message by saying: "We hope you'll soon visit the Tennessee mountains and experience the Tennessee spirit." Authorities said three more bodies had been found during searches of the area on Thursday, bringing the total of deaths to 10. A hotline was set up for people to report missing friends and relatives. After following up on dozens of leads, authorities said many of those people had been accounted for. They did not say whether they believe anyone else was still missing or may have died. "I think it's fair to say that the search is winding down," said Sevier county mayor Larry Waters said. "And hopefully we will not find any more [bodies]." Fire officials warned people not be complacent despite the heavy rain because months of drought had left the ground bone-dry and wildfires can rekindle. The trouble began Monday when a wildfire, likely caused deliberately, spread from the Great Smoky Mountains national park into the tourist city of Gatlinburg as hurricane-force winds toppled trees and power lines, blowing embers in all directions. "We had trees going down everywhere, power lines, all those power lines were just like lighting a match because of the extreme drought conditions. So we went from nothing to over 20-plus structure fires in a matter of minutes. And that grew and that grew and that grew," said Gatlinburg fire chief Greg Miller. More than 14,000 residents and visitors in Gatlinburg were forced to evacuate, and the busy tourist town has been shuttered ever since. At least 700 buildings in the county have been damaged. "Gatlinburg is the people, that's what Gatlinburg is. It's not the buildings, it's not the stuff in the buildings," said the town's mayor, Mike Werner. "We're gonna be back better than ever. Just be patient."

New South Wales has announced a $73m compensation package for survivors of the stolen generations, 20 years after it was first recommended in the groundbreaking Bringing them Home report. The redress scheme, which is expected to offer one-off compensation of $75,000 per person, has drawn a mixed response from members of the stolen generations. Dunghutti man Richard Campbell believes it is a positive first step, but it does little to make up for the trauma he has suffered, or the childhood that was taken from him. Removed from his family's home near Bowral under NSW's forced assimilation powers, Cambpell and his siblings were taken to the courthouse, processed, and then dumped at the infamous Kinchela Aboriginal boys' home. He still vividly remembers the day, 12 October 1966. "It was hell. As soon as you walk in the gate, they're straight into you, they hit you like a man," he said. "Grown men hitting young kids ... with their fists and whips and big sticks. "As soon as I walked in they said you're not black anymore, you're white. You're not Richard Campbell anymore, you're number 28." By the time Kinchela closed down four years later, Campbell's sense of identity had been shattered. "It just kept going until they'd brainwashed us into believing that we were white, that my name wasn't Richard Campbell and I didn't have a culture or a language," he said. NSW's $73m package will include $59m for compensation of one-off payments of up to $75,000. It will also establish a grant-based stolen generations healing fund of $5m over 10 years, which will be used to support healing centres, memorials and keeping places. A separate fund will also help fund the funerals of stolen generations members through payments of up to $7,000 each. The announcement is the government's response to a NSW parliamentary inquiry on the stolen generations, which tabled its report titled "Unfinished Business" in June. The inquiry heard that time was running out for many to be compensated for the trauma caused by forced assimilation policies. The Aboriginal affairs minister, Leslie Williams, said the response "acknowledges the real and heartbreaking trauma" caused by forcible removal and past government policy. Other survivors believe the announcement is too little, too late. Biripi man Lester Maher was taken from his family at the age of three, and spent 12 years in institutions, including Kinchela. He suffered physical and emotional abuse, and strongly remembers being stripped naked and flogged with a cane after an escape attempt. Maher said the money on offer was an "insult" compared with the lifetime of damage wrought by the government's policies. "I mean they put us in there, with no thought, to get us taken away from our parents. That's not stolen, that's kidnapping," he said. "If a black man would have done that to a white kid back in those days, he would have been strung up by the nearest tree." Both South Australia and Tasmania already have similar schemes to that announced by NSW on Friday. NSW's Aborigines Protection Act, which gave the government and the Aborigines Welfare Board almost complete control over the lives of Indigenous peoples, was only repealed in 1969. It gave NSW authorities the power to remove children from their homes, acts that caused intergenerational trauma and damage. Thousands of Aboriginal children were forcibly removed in NSW between the late 1800s and 1970s. Campbell says the reparations were a start, and said that at least the government was starting to recognise the wrong done to the stolen generations. But he said children were still being taken away from families far too often. "With this reparation, I still don't think they understand the repercussions of what they're doing to our children," he said. "They just don't understand what they're doing." Campbell and Maher now help run the Kinchela Boys Home Aboriginal Corporation, which helps members of the stolen generations heal and take control of their own future.

Australia's offshore oil regulator is censoring documents about BP's plans to drill in the Great Australian Bight on the grounds that environmental campaigners could use the information to "oppose all drilling activities" there – and that the plans are too "technical" for the public to understand. Nathaniel Pelle, a Greenpeace campaign who requested the documents under freedom of information laws, said the decision hindered democratic debate. Greenpeace sought access to BP's "well operation management plan", held by the National Offshore Petroleum Safety and Environmental Management Authority. Nopsema refused access to parts of the document, listing a range of reasons. It cited one as "the likelihood of opposition/protest groups using the information to oppose all drilling activities in the Great Australian Bight". Pelle told Guardian Australia that Greenpeace was appealing the decision. "Obviously civil society groups have a legitimate role in discussing what environmental risks are appropriate," he said. In an email to the authority, Pelle wrote: "The implication of this argument is that it is unreasonable for civil society groups to oppose high-risk activities based on the facts. This is not an appropriate determination for NOPSEMA to make." Nopsema also considered that some of the document was too technical for it to properly inform the public. "Given its highly technical scope prepared for a confined audience with specific well-engineering expertise, it is unlikely to inform the community about the government's operations or enhance scrutiny of government decision-making," it said. This was despite the FoI Act explicitly stating that government agencies cannot consider whether releasing information "could result in confusion or unnecessary debate". "It is unheard of, in my experience, and is clearly not true," Pelle said. "We've had multiple experts from the US and Australia taking part in the debate." Nopsema told Guardian Australia it wasn't appropriate to comment on the matter while it was still possible for Greenpeace to have its decision reviewed. But a spokeswoman said Nopsema's chief executive, Stuart Smith, was an advocate for greater transparency, including "for example, releasing full environment plans upfront and providing a public comment period". That is not allowed under current regulations, so Nopsema can only release the documents when required to under FoI laws. Pelle said the level of transparency surrounding offshore oil drilling in Australia was concerning. "We're the only OECD country that doesn't require this sort of document to be made public," he said. "It's untransparent in a way that is incomparable to other jurisdictions." The Department of Industry, Innovation and Science is reviewing Nopsema's transparency arrangements, considering options that include making environmental plans available to the public. In October BP – the company responsible for the world's biggest oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico in 2010 – announced that it was ditching its plans to drill in the bight. But it has continued to pursue its application. Nopsema told a Senate inquiry in November that the application "was still in play" and BP could sell its right to drill to another company if its application was successful.

Andrew Sachs, who has died aged 86, was never more effective than when playing a bewildered victim unfailingly eager to please his sometimes equally comic tormentors. The most popular and inspired example came in the role of Manuel, the waiter from Barcelona who spent most of his waking hours being abused by Basil Fawlty (John Cleese) in the BBC's Fawlty Towers (1975-79). Manuel – short, shoulders sloping in submission – was a star of the television show, which attracted more than 15 million viewers and became a comedy classic. Sachs was grateful to Manuel for making him famous, but often counted the cost. He tried to persuade Cleese, who co-wrote the series, to stop short of actual violence in rehearsals, but there was still plenty of hitting – often involving a spoon on the head. One memorable episode had Manuel setting fire to himself and later, as a reprise, emerging from the hotel kitchen with smoke billowing behind him. The "fire" was heat-free, but some of the chemicals used to produce the flameless smoke caused acid burns to his arms. Nonetheless, Sachs still felt that Manuel was the best thing that ever happened to him. Andreas Sachs was born in Berlin at the time when the Nazis were beginning to persecute Jews. His father, Hans, was a Jewish insurance broker who had been awarded the Iron Cross in the first world war. His mother, Katharina (nee Schrott-Fiecht), a Catholic, decided to remain in Berlin with her children after their father fled to Britain in 1938. She thought that as her son was only half-Jewish he would be safe – a supposition that became increasingly shaky. The family eventually joined Hans, who died in 1944. Andrew left William Ellis school, north-west London, two years later, then went to a local acting school for just two terms, before making his first professional appearance in 1947 in a seaside repertory production of Ronald Millar's Frieda at the De La Warr Pavilion, Bexhill-on-Sea, East Sussex. The play concerned the German bride of a British soldier who finds a mixed reception in the postwar UK. Sachs put the essence of his art down to detachment, an ability to sit on emotional and intellectual fences that had been produced by his birth in Germany and his residence in Britain. He admitted that he had at first wanted to act in order to be a "star" and only later had discovered that he was motivated to do the work for its own sake. The outcome was a wide range of stage parts, from romps of the No Sex Please: We're British, Not Now Darling, Dry Rot and Let Sleeping Wives Lie genre to John Mortimer's touching A Voyage Round My Father, Shakespeare's Twelfth Night and, for BBC TV, The Tempest, as Trinculo in a 1980 production led by Michael Hordern as Prospero. After undertaking national service in the Royal Armoured Corps (1949-51), for the next couple of years Sachs was in repertory in Worthing and Liverpool. His first West End appearance was at the Whitehall theatre as Grobchick in John Chapman's Simple Spymen, which ran for more than 1,200 performances between 1958 and 1961. Recruited by Brian Rix, he gained his introduction to Whitehall farces, which supported him for 20 years until his television work brought him wider fame. Following Fawlty Towers, he played a vague and bespectacled vicar in the ITV series Lovely Couple (1979). His films included Hitler: The Last Ten Days (1973), Revenge of the Pink Panther (1978) and Consuming Passions (1988). Sachs was also a writer, contributing sketches to the Yorkshire TV series Took and Co (1977), with Barry Took, but never made a mark in that activity. He wrote radio plays, including one without words, Revenge (1978), in which an escaped prisoner communicates with the audience only by his heavy breathing, running footsteps and other special effects. His stage play The Stamp Collectors was produced in Worthing in 1977. Another, Made in Heaven, staged at Chichester two years previously, was said by Michael Billington of the Guardian to be the product of random jokiness rather than a sustained comic vision. Fortunately his acting was better received. His performances in Fawlty Towers gained him the Variety Club of Great Britain award for most promising artist of the year in 1977, although he was no youth. He became a familiar face on television through the 80s and 90s, taking the title role, Alfred Polly, in the BBC version of HG Wells's comic tale The History of Mr Polly (1980), and in Every Silver Lining (1993), a sitcom in which he played opposite Frances de la Tour. Detective stories on BBC Radio 4 provided a rich seam. Sachs took the role of GK Chesterton's Father Brown (1984-86), and played Dr Watson to Clive Merrison's Sherlock Holmes (2002-10). Radio was a favourite medium of his, and brought the opportunity to play another great scene-stealing subordinate, PG Wodehouse's Jeeves, valet to the upper-class buffoon Bertie Wooster, played by Marcus Brigstocke, in The Code of the Woosters (2006). He also supplied the voices for several children's animations, such as William's Wish Wellingtons (1994-96), and Asterix and the Big Fight (1989). A popular narrator with a distinctive voice, Sachs can be heard on all five series of BBC's Bafta award-winning TV show about business life, Troubleshooter, as well as two audiobooks of Thomas the Tank Engine and Friends. In 2000 he reached a new comedy audience by narrating That Peter Kay Thing, a spoof documentary series on Channel 4 created by the Bolton comedian. He also appeared in Coronation Street (2009), playing Norris Cole's brother, Ramsay, in 27 episodes. All his roles seemed to be marked by good nature, and this made him a much-liked figure. He retained it even under provocation, when, in 2008, rowdy telephone answering machine messages were left for him by Russell Brand and Jonathan Ross during Brand's BBC Radio 2 show. At one point Ross shouted out that Brand had "fucked your granddaughter". The result was recorded and then passed by BBC executives for broadcasting. Sachs was not amused and the public sympathised. So seriously was the Ross-Brand incident regarded by the BBC top brass that Ross was taken off air for three months, effectively fining him £1.5m from his £6m yearly contract. In the subsequent media inquest, the attitude of Sachs himself was that he really did not know what the telephoning had been about; that he had no personal animosity towards whoever had phoned; and that he had scarcely noticed the whole business since his wife was in hospital at the time. As for suggestions that some newspapers were using him to boost their circulations, he said: "Oh yes, but that's their job." He also said: "My profile's up – great! They did me good. Thank you very much." At the time he had written 40,000 words of his autobiography but had only got as far as the age of 14. He said he doubted whether Brand or Ross would play a prominent part in the book. When it appeared in 2014, he drew on a memorable Fawlty Towers line for the title, I Know Nothing! His final film role came in Quartet, Ronald Harwood's story set in a home for retired musicians, directed by Dustin Hoffman and released in 2012, the year that Sachs was diagnosed with vascular dementia. His final TV role was in 2015, as Cyril Bishop in EastEnders. In 1960 Sachs married the actor Melody Lang. She survives him, along with their daughter, Kate, and sons, Bill and John. Andrew (Andreas Siegfried) Sachs, actor and writer, born 7 April 1930; died 23 November 2016 Dennis Barker died last year

Doctors treating the asylum seeker Hamid Kehazaei inside the Manus Island detention centre debated giving him gentamicin – an antibiotic that might have countered the rare bacteria that had infected him – but decided it was too dangerous because the laboratory equipment needed to monitor its use was broken. Kehazaei, 24, died in a Brisbane hospital in 2014 after he developed sepsis from a small infection in his leg that was contracted inside the Manus detention centre. His transfer to hospital was postponed a full day by bureaucratic delays and his body went into septic shock. He suffered three heart attacks and ultimately died because of a lack of oxygen to his brain. Much of the coronial inquest into his death, being held in Brisbane before the Queensland state coroner Terry Ryan, has focused on the delays in moving Kehazaei to a hospital, and the decision to take him to Port Moresby rather than Brisbane as his doctors recommended. But several doctors who treated Kehazaei have been asked about prescribing him gentamicin while he was still on Manus. The medical clinic in the detention centre had a limited supply of the broad spectrum antibiotic. Kehazaei's initial infection was ultimately found to be chromobacterium violaceum. Gentamicin is regarded as effective in treating the rare water-borne bacteria, but the drug is potentially toxic to kidneys, and is usually prescribed only in a setting where its effect can be monitored with blood chemical testing. The Piccolo Xpress blood chemistry analysing machine inside the Manus Island detention centre was broken. Kehazaei was prescribed several different antibiotics – though not gentamicin - during the 68 hours he was in the Manus Island detention centre medical clinic. The emergency doctor Leslie King said she and her colleagues debated prescribing gentamicin. "I specifically remember having a long conversation about it," King told the coroner. "We decided against it just at the time, because we had no labs, we had no chemistry. We could not monitor his renal function. "We knew he was dehydrated, we knew he was febrile, we were really afraid for his kidneys ... if we used that drug. I thought we needed to be careful with that particular medication." King said the analyser in the detention centre medical clinic was broken and could perform only a basic white blood-cell count, not any of the functions needed to monitor gentamicin's effect. "The entire time I worked there it did not function," she said. The required equipment at a laboratory within Lorengau hospital, on the other side of Manus Island, which the detention centre medical clinic sometimes used, was also broken at the time. The senior medical officer on Manus, Dr Marten Muis, said he found some gentamicin in a cupboard in the Manus Island clinic, but he had never prescribed the drug. He said it was a therapy he was more familiar with being prescribed in a hospital setting, where its effects could be monitored. The inquest heard on Friday that when the critically-ill Kehazaei was finally moved from Manus Island – by then in septic shock – he was left lying in the sun at the island's airfield, had torn out the IV lines in his arm and did not have an oxygen mask on. The inquest continues.

Robert Forster once joked about being "the hardest working man in show business" when he did two gigs in a week. Having just now taken three weeks to complete a five-date tour of New Zealand and Australia, he's still not exactly pushing himself. But the past 15 months have been phenomenally busy. In September 2015 he released Songs To Play to glowing reviews and followed that in August with Grant &amp; I, a beautiful book about his relationship with his late Go-Betweens colleague, Grant McLennan. When he last played in Sydney, just over a year ago, Forster had a full band with him for what was a superb show, but last night was just him and a guitar. Most of his songs still work in their stripped-down form – not least his opener Let Me Imagine You, a song that brought the album and book together with its line, "Is the memoir finished?". Forster still fills a suit better than most men of any age, but at first he seems oddly subdued for someone who has been long-famed for his stage patter. The magnificent Darlinghurst Nights – from the Go-Betweens' final album Oceans Apart – provides the first highlight of the gig and seems to give the artist a little fillip. Rock and Roll Friend, written in 1988, follows – it's up there with the Beatles' Rain as one of the greatest B-sides. Leave Here Satisfied, from Forster's debut solo album, Danger in the Past, makes a rare and welcome appearance. It's like a visit from an old friend and wonderful to hear it back in his set. The Go-Betweens' Part Company is also played – another old friend from Forster's 40-year back catalogue. He plays one new song – well, newish. Forster has been working on Advice to DB since 2009 and is still unsure of whether it's any good or not. The lyrics are in the style of a talking blues song, but the music is A-grade Forster: pop with a twist. He asks us to let him know what we think of it after the show. It's great, Robert. Record it. A Poet Walks is the only disappointment of the night. It's one of the best songs on Songs To Play, but does not work well with just an acoustic guitar; it needs a band with piano, drums and horns to bring out the full dynamic range. After a hilarious spiel about whether Daniel Day Lewis, Robert Pattinson or Benedict Cumberbatch would play him in a biopic, Forster plays Here Comes A City – and then says he won't leave the stage in case he is not called back for an encore. (There's no chance of that happening.) Instead he goes straight to the encore: He Lives My Life, Surfing Magazines, People Say (still his finest Dylanesque moment, four decades after he wrote it) and Cattle and Cane (McLennan's classic tale of growing up on a Queensland farm). My guest at the gig knew next to nothing of Robert Forster or the Go-Betweens, but gave the performance an enthusiastic two thumbs up. Make that four.

Kevan Jones, the MP for North Durham, raised the issue of Durham County Cricket Club's recent relegation and points deduction in parliament on Thursday, describing it as a "scandal" and urging the England and Wales Cricket Board to publish the method by which the punishment was calculated. In a debate on the subject held in Westminster Hall, Jones accused the ECB of a lack of transparency over the decision that will mean Durham starting next season in Division Two of the County Championship on minus 48 points, stripped of the right to host Test cricket and given a string of financial sanctions as agreed conditions to the governing body's £3.8m bailout of the club in October. Jones stated that, while Durham were in financial difficulty amid debts of £7.5m, the club had not gone bankrupt and therefore ECB regulations, which are unpublished but that he had obtained through a source inside the governing body, should not have been applied. He went on to state that the punishment did not tally with the document he had seen either. "I don't think openness and transparency is what comes to mind when it comes to the ECB," Jones said. "The regulations should be public documents. What have they got to hide, unless they are trying to cover something up?" He later added: "The way this has been done is a scandal. Loyal fans who have supported the club over many years through a passionate love of cricket have been completely disregarded. "You have to ask, what is the purpose of the ECB? Is it to protect interests and act a cosy club? Or is to support those people who want active involvement in cricket? That is the clear question. This type of secrecy and lack of transparency in 2016 cannot continue." Jones stated that in response to a letter he had sent to the ECB chief executive, Tom Harrison, asking for clarification on the matter, he had been told the governing body was reviewing the publication of its financial regulations in light of Durham's punishment. The sports minister, Tracey Crouch, was unable to attend but has agreed to meet Jones and Roberta Blackman-Woods, the MP for the City of Durham, who also took part in the debate, to discuss the subject further.

Neil Young has cancelled his performance at Byron Bay's Bluesfest, just days after Frontier Touring confirmed his tour of Australia and New Zealand would not go ahead. The musician was scheduled to headline the five-day festival in April, playing a three-hour set on Good Friday with his latest backing group Promise of the Real. Friday single day tickets are now available for refund, but Bluesfest is urging ticket holders to stay tuned for further announcements of new headlining artists. Three-day tickets are not available for refund or reconfiguration at this stage, and Bluesfest has confirmed there will be no refunds for five-day tickets. Young's management has not released a statement regarding the cancellation, but in a Facebook post from Bluesfest, festival director Peter Noble relayed the news with "a heavy heart". "Although I have been aware of this as a possibility for a couple of weeks now, I have been appealing to Neil's management for him to play the confirmed concert. Unfortunately, this is now not going to happen," Noble said. "Whilst details for the cancellation remain sketchy, from what I can gather Neil has decided to take 2017 off from touring." There are no dates currently listed for 2017 on Neil Young's website. Noble continued: "I have no reason to believe this is due to any illness, I have been advised he is tired from recent touring, and I surmise wants to have some down time." Bluesfest had its own contract with Neil Young's representatives, independent of Frontier Touring; the festival had paid the deposit, and had full permission to announce the performance. Noble said they are in negotiations with "other great artists" to play in Young's place. "I understand that no one can replace Neil Young, and that there will be disappointment as a result of his cancelling ... we are very disappointed at making this announcement. "I feel I have done everything I can, to cause the concert to be performed. "We value our audience, and their assumption, that when buying their ticket, they should have an expectation the advertised performance will occur. In this case, that has not occurred, and I apologise, even though the events were out of my control. "I want to wish Neil Young the very best and what he is doing for First Nations People at Standing Rock. We look forward to presenting him soon at Bluesfest." Bluesfest, which takes place on the Easter long weekend on 120 hectares at Tyagarah Tea Tree Farm, is among the largest in Australia music festivals, with capacity for 100,000 people.

Boris Johnson will issue a warning that democracy is in retreat across the world and that a "cult of the strongman" is taking hold, raising the prospect that the concept of a global liberal order will fade into irrelevance. In his first set piece speech as foreign secretary, he will argue that Britain outside the European Union could still play a global role in preventing a dystopian future in which the powerful devour the weak. He will also set out a strong warning to Russia that the UK will not normalise relations with Moscow, or buckle over Ukraine or Syria, adding that he fully supports Donald Trump, the US president-elect, in demanding that more Nato member countries lift the levels of their defence spending. The speech will be important in shaping Johnson's secretaryship, as well as shoring up his credibility as someone at the heart of the cabinet's discussions on the shape of Brexit. Since his surprise appointment, he has been accused of alienating European foreign ministers by trivialising the Brexit talks and by his determination to differentiate himself from the rest of the EU by praising Trump. He has himself been irritated by a series of public put-downs from Theresa May and the chancellor, Philip Hammond, as well as by leaks claiming that he backed a complete amnesty for all illegal immigrants in the UK on the date the UK Leaves the EU. On Thursday he was forced to deny a broadcast report claiming that he had told four ambassadors at a breakfast briefing that he supported the free movement of workers inside the EU, popular antagonism to which is supposedly the main force driving the UK's departure from the EU. He insisted: "I said no such thing," and said he had argued that "immigration had been a good thing for the UK in many respects but it had got out of control, and that we needed to take back control". In his speech at Chatham House, he will warn that if the west fails, "We risk reverting to an older and more brutal system where the strong are free to devour the weak, where might is always right, and the rules and institutions we have so painstakingly built fade away into irrelevance." Claiming that the world is still looking to the UK for leadership, he will say: "We have to acknowledge that in many respects the world is not in good shape. We have the cult of the strongman, we have democracy in retreat, we have an arc of instability across the Middle East from Iraq to Syria to Libya. What is the answer of the UK? Is it to cower and put the pillow over our heads? Emphatically not. We are struggling against non-state actors who view the whole concept of a global liberal order with contempt and it is precisely because of the intensity of these challenges that we need to redouble our resolve and to defend and preserve the best of the rules-based international order." With the Foreign Office still waiting to see the shape of the new US president's foreign policy and the extent to which Trump truly seeks to forge closer ties with Vladimir Putin, Johnson will not use the speech to rush to press the reset button with Putin. He will say: "Britain is prepared to be tough with Russia. But that does not mean that it is not also sensible to talk. Yes, it is Britain that insists on our resolve to enforce sanctions against Russia for their occupation of Crimea and their hand in the war in eastern Ukraine. And it is Britain again that has been the firmest in denouncing Russia's part in the destruction of Aleppo. For all these reasons, we cannot normalise relations with Russia or go back to 'business as usual'." Russia, he will reiterate, could still win the world's acclaim by "halting its bombing campaign in Syria, delivering Assad to peace talks, and abiding by the letter of the Minsk agreements in Ukraine". He insists he will not shy away from delivering these tough messages to Russian leaders in person. Trump has suggested that he is happy for Assad to remain in power in Syria but the Foreign Office does not believes that is a sustainable solution. Johnson will also insist the Brexit vote does not mean the UK is becoming isolationist or turning its back on the world. The UK's future role, he will say, "is to be a flying buttress – supportive of the EU project, but outside the main body of the church. To those who say we are now too small, too weak and too poor to have any influence on the world. I say there are plenty of people who do understand what this country can do and the effect it can have. "Indeed, there are many people in this country who would not recognise the image of Britain – of ourselves – as seen through the eyes of others. A nation taking back control of its democratic institutions [is] not a nation hauling up the drawbridge or slamming the door. Instead it will show that the UK is a nation that is now on its mettle."

A memorial stone to the poet Philip Larkin, inscribed with lines from one of his most famous works – "our almost instinct almost true/What will survive of us is love" – will be unveiled in Westminster Abbey on Friday evening, the 31st anniversary of his death. When Larkin attended the unveiling of a memorial to fellow poet WH Auden in 1974, he grumpily remarked in a letter to his mother: "Poets' Corner seems to be getting pretty crowded! No doubt there will be room for me." Now, far from plot 81 in Cottingham municipal cemetery near Hull – where he was buried under a stone starkly inscribed with his name, dates, and the single word "writer" – his own memorial has finally been installed in the abbey. The Purbeck limestone has been carved by Martin Jennings, who previously created a statue of the poet for his adopted home town of Hull. Jennings notes wryly that although Larkin has had to wait twice as long as Ted Hughes for a place in the abbey, because of the position of the stone his is an inch larger all round. "Maybe his spirit's had the last laugh," he said. His stone lies at the foot of Anthony Trollope's, and a few places away from Lord Byron and Dylan Thomas. The abbey's masons, according to tradition, have placed a new penny under the stone to date its installation. The famously contrarian Larkin described himself as "an agnostic, I suppose, but an Anglican agnostic, of course". The dedication ceremony will be led by the dean of Westminster, with an address by poet and author Blake Morris, and readings by Anthony Thwaite, president of the Philip Larkin Society, which commissioned the memorial, the artist Grayson Perry, and the actor Sir Tom Courtenay. The tender lines – certainly untrue of Larkin, who will be remembered for his magnificent poetry, not his tangled love life – are from his 1964 poem An Arundel Tomb, inspired by a monument in Chichester Cathedral. Many pedants have pointed out that the poet got it wrong – it is knight's right hand, not his left, which lies ungloved in his wife's – and some have suggested that the touching detail is the work of a later restorer. The poem remains his most loved, has sent streams of of literary pilgrims to see the monument, and has been read at many funerals since his own.

Plans to save money at HM Revenue &amp; Customs by moving more of its operations online are leading towards a repeat of a "catastrophic collapse" in customer service, according to parliament's spending watchdog. The public accounts committee said it was not convinced that the tax authority had a credible plan to prevent a "disastrous decline" in service while facing spending and job cuts, office closures and the implications of Brexit. MPs believe it is possible that tax officials could experience a similar collapse to 2015/16, when members of the public were left waiting for around 4m hours for telephone calls to be answered following a reduction of 5,600 in staff numbers. They also questioned whether HMRC might be "painting too rosy a picture" of its success in reducing the gap between the amount of tax due and the total collected. The warnings come days after Philip Hammond pledged in the autumn statement that HMRC will retrieve £2bn lost to the exchequer via tax avoidance but was criticised for failing to pledge extra resources towards its revenue-raising department. Meg Hillier, the committee chair, said it was disconcerting that concerns were being raised about HMRC customer service so soon after the previous problems. "The lack of a convincing fall-back plan to safeguard service as HMRC undergoes significant change remains a looming threat to its ability to collect tax from individuals simply trying to pay their fair share," she said. "HMRC's senior management cannot afford to be complacent about the catastrophic collapse in customer service in 2014/15 and the first half of 2015/16, nor about what is at stake should their projections about demand for call centres prove wrong. "Contingency planning should not be an optional extra. By the spring, we will expect to see evidence that HMRC has agreed measures with the Treasury to ensure it is not left playing catch-up at taxpayers' expense." The tax authority aims to save £98m by 2021 by cutting the number of customer service staff by a third and encouraging more people to sort out their personal tax affairs online, the report said. Led by its executive chair, Edward Troup, the changes are supposed to involve a 16% overall reduction in staff, with others being moved into specialist work on tax avoidance and evasion. More than 130 tax offices – 90% of the total – will be closed as workers move to 13 regional centres. MPs said the tax authority is "staking a great deal" on the readiness of taxpayers to switch to digital to file their tax returns, and claimed it "lacks an adequate plan" to cope if demand at its call centres does not reduce as quickly as hoped. The committee called for greater transparency about the tax affairs of multinational corporations "to increase the pressure on them to pay their fair share of tax". In previous statements, HMRC has claimed to have cut the "tax gap" – the difference between how much tax should be collected by HMRC and how much is actually collected– from 8.3% in 2005/06 to 6.5% (£36bn) in 2014/15. But the report has questioned HMRC's method of calculation. "HMRC's measure of compliance yield also contains a high degree of estimation and projection, and it is not clear whether these estimates are realised in terms of extra tax being collected," the report said. Tax officials also told the committee that they expected Brexit to have an impact upon a number of its functions, including customs and excise duties, social security and the administration of VAT. Referring to leaving the EU, the report said: "HMRC noted that if demand did not reduce in the way it expected, it would have to ensure that adequate levels of staff were well in place to meet taxpayers' needs." On Thursday, the work and pensions committee castigated both Concentrix and HMRC for a series of disastrous errors that amounted to "a gross failure of customer service". The public accounts committee has restated their concern about the "unnecessary hardship and suffering" to tax credit claimants caused by HMRC's failed contract with the private US firm. Responding to the report, an HMRC spokesperson said the authority consistently answer 90% of calls first time in an average of less than five minutes, and has invested heavily in customer services, recruiting more than 3,000 new staff and a range of digital channels for customers. "Efforts to crack down on tax avoidance, evasion and fraud have secured £26.6bn over the last year. We've also led the way on improving global tax transparency and tackling tax avoidance by multinationals," he said. The Public and Commercial Services union head, Mark Serwotka, said the tax authority was continuing with cuts despite obvious concerns from a parliamentary committee and the public. "The committee again makes it clear that cutting too many staff in HMRC damaged the service provided to taxpayers, yet the department is absurdly pressing ahead with plans to close 90% of its UK offices and axe thousands more employees," he said. "There is now an overwhelming case for these plans to be halted to allow for a proper public debate and parliamentary scrutiny of the kind of revenue collection service we need and the staff and resources it will take."

A team of academics claims an unsophisticated type of cyber attack that exploits "flaws" in the Visa card payment system was probably used to defraud Tesco Bank customers of £2.5m last month. In an academic paper, the team at Newcastle University claimed that working out the card number, expiry date and security code of any Visa credit or debit card could take a criminal "as little as six seconds" and involved nothing more than guesswork. They said the so-called "distributed guessing attack" method they had identified was able to circumvent all the security features put in place to protect online payments from fraud, and exploited vulnerabilities at Visa – which has more than 500m cards in circulation in Europe alone – and hundreds of the world's biggest and most popular retail websites. Some sites have changed their online security settings in response to the findings. Visa said the research did not take into account the multiple layers of fraud prevention that exists within the payments system, "each of which must be met in order to make a transaction possible in the real world". The research paper, whose lead author is a 26-year-old PhD student, said the good news for people with MasterCard debit and credit cards was that this form of hacking did not work on MasterCards, because its systems were able to detect the attacks. It added that the minority of online retailers that used so-called 3D Secure technology to provide extra protection – such as the Verified by Visa, Mastercard SecureCode and American Express SafeKey systems – were also "safe" from this type of attack. The paper was published weeks after Tesco Bank suffered what was described as an unprecedented attack on its online accounts, which affected 9,000 customers and resulted in the theft of £2.5m. The type of hacking identified by the Newcastle team involves criminals using merchants' payment websites to "guess" people's card details. The criminals use software that automatically generates different variations of a card's security data – for example, the card number, expiry date and three-digit security code known as the CVV – and fires these off to hundreds or even thousands of websites around the world at the same time. The reply to the transaction will confirm whether or not the guess was right. Because Visa's network did not detect multiple invalid payment requests on the same card from different websites, "unlimited guesses" could be made by spreading the guesses over a large number of sites, even if individual merchants limited the number of attempts. This meant that "within seconds, hackers are able to get a 'hit' and verify all the necessary security data". Once they have all the details, the criminal can use these to buy goods online or, potentially, open a money transfer account and send cash to an anonymous recipient abroad. The Newcastle team used a set of software tools – including a website "bot" and automated scripts – and their own bank cards, including seven Visa ones, to carry out an experimental distributed guessing attack. They chose 400 of the world's biggest commercial websites for their investigation, including Google, Amazon, iTunes and PayPal, before later whittling this down to 389. Of these, 47 made use of 3D Secure systems, which meant they could not be attacked in this way. That left 342 that were vulnerable. The research paper stated that the experiment proved that this type of attack was practical and so a credible threat, and also that it was possible to run multiple bots at the same time on hundreds of payment sites "without triggering any alarms in the payment system". Mohammed Ali, a PhD student in Newcastle University's school of computing science and lead author on the paper, said: "Most hackers will have got hold of valid card numbers as a starting point, but even without that, it's relatively easy to generate variations of card numbers and automatically send them out across numerous websites to validate them." He added: "The next step is the expiry date. Banks typically issue cards that are valid for 60 months, so guessing the date takes at most 60 attempts. The CVV is your last barrier and theoretically only the cardholder has that piece of information – it isn't stored anywhere else. But guessing this three-digit number takes fewer than 1,000 attempts. Spread this out over 1,000 websites and one will come back verified within a couple of seconds. And there you have it: all the data you need to hack the account." Ali said MasterCard's centralised network was able to detect a guessing attack after fewer than 10 attempts, even when those payments were distributed across multiple networks. The team said this guessing attack method was likely to have been used in the Tesco cyber-attack, and was "frighteningly easy if you have a laptop and an internet connection ... The risk is greatest at this time of year, when so many of us are purchasing Christmas presents online." Their research has been published in the academic journal IEEE Security &amp; Privacy. In a statement, Visa said it was "committed to keeping fraud at low levels, and works closely with card issuers and acquirers to make it very difficult to obtain and use cardholder data illegally ... We provide issuers with the necessary data to make informed decisions on the risk of transactions. There are also steps that merchants and issuers can take to thwart brute force attempts". The spokesman said that in cases where someone's card details were used fraudulently the cardholder was protected from liability and added that where a merchant chose not to use its Verified by Visa system for a card-not-present transaction, they assumed the risk for fraud. "Visa welcomes industry and academic efforts to identify and address perceived vulnerabilities in the payment system." Tesco Bank said it refunded each customer account in full and no customer data was lost or stolen. "This incident has highlighted that all banks need to work together in the interests of all customers and the financial system," a spokesman said.

Buy to let landlords are scrambling to avoid the impact of tax changes that come into effect next year, a report has found. The Buy to Let Britain report found landlords were restructuring their portfolios to escape higher taxes on their rental income, which will be phased in from April 2017. Some landlords have set up limited companies, it said, while others have increased rents or transferred properties to family members. The report, compiled by mortgage lender Kent Reliance, also found that the average rent in Great Britain has hit a record high of £881 a month, and landlords indicated they intended to raise prices by an average of 5.4% – the equivalent of £571 a year for households. It also revealed strong house price growth has pushed the value of rented accommodation in the UK to £1.3tn, up by 16% in the last year to September. The buy-to-let tax changes, which were unsuccessfully opposed in court by landlords represented by Cherie Booth, were introduced in the 2015 budget to level the playing field for owner-occupiers and investors. At the time the then chancellor George Osborne said buy-to-let landlords had a "huge advantage" over homebuyers. "And the better off the landlord, the more tax relief they get," he added. Currently, landlords can offset their entire mortgage interest costs against the rent they get from a property before they declare an income, but over the next four years that will be changed so that by 2021 just 20% of the interest will be subject to tax relief. Kent Reliance said an increasing number of landlords were holding their properties in limited companies, which are not subject to the same taxes. In the first nine months of this year, 100,000 limited company loans were taken out by landlords buying properties, it said – double the number for all of 2015. In March, as purchases soared ahead of a new higher rate of stamp duty on second homes, 20,500 of the loans were taken out. The lender said demand for this type of arrangement was likely to grow "as the tax changes bite", and could account for two-thirds of buy-to-let loans in 2017. A survey of 900 landlords found that 11% had already incorporated, or had moved holdings to a lower-rate tax-paying spouse or partner. A further 25% were considering making one of those changes. The bad news for tenants is that landlords are also considering raising rents to make up for lost income. A third of those questioned said they expected to hike rents in the next six months, with two-thirds of them blaming the tax change. Andy Golding, chief executive of OneSavings Bank, which owns Kent Reliance, said: "The stamp duty levy clearly took its toll on the market, and combined with the forthcoming tax changes, landlords have felt at the mercy of a political agenda. But confidence is returning as landlords take action to limit the damage to their finances. The use of limited companies is soaring, and rents are increasing, even after one of the biggest surges in rental supply in recent history." Golding said the measures, which were designed to help aspiring owner-occupiers, would achieve the opposite. "We have warned all along that the tax changes will push up rents, and this is already starting to happen," he said. "Only through a substantive and long-term building programme across all tenures will we see an end to escalating house prices and rents." David Hollingworth of mortgage broker London &amp; Country said there were advantages to using a limited company to buy property, but landlords should consider the implications. "You cannot just transfer a property into a company – you have to sell it to the company and that could trigger other costs," he said. "While corporation tax is low, you do have to think about things like how you will get your income out of the company." Hollingworth said the structure was unlikely to help anyone with just one or two buy-to-let properties. The Residential Landlords Association (RLA) said its research had found that 40% of landlords had considered switching to limited company status, but that four in five had decided it was unsuitable. Andrew Goodacre, RLA chief executive, said such a move was positive for new properties only. He said: "Ultimately though, we need to encourage landlords to develop new properties whatever status. That is why the RLA believes the mortgage interest changes should apply only to new borrowing and that the stamp duty levy should not apply where a landlord invests in property that adds to the net supply of housing."

Britain's Muslim communities have "separatist" tendencies and a "deeply worrying" belief in conspiracy theories, according to one of the government's favourite centre-right thinktanks. The controversial Policy Exchange report however does acknowledge that 93% of British Muslims have a strong attachment to Britain and their attitudes to many issues such as the NHS, unemployment and immigration are broadly in line with the rest of the population. The report published on Friday comes out before the findings of a government-commissioned review, chaired by Dame Louise Casey, into integration and community cohesion in Britain are due to be published early next week. The Muslim Council of Britain (MCB) strongly criticised the thinktank's report, saying it seemed to pursue an agenda to cast British Muslims as separate, dangerous and in need of saving, while the thinktank had "provided ample fodder to countless headlines demonising Muslims". The findings of the Policy Exchange report, Unsettled Belonging, are based upon an ICM poll which is described as the most comprehensive to date of British Muslim opinion based on interviews with 3,000 people. Its findings say that Britain's Muslims "live on average somewhat more separately than other significant minorities" but 53% show an appetite to integrate more with non-Muslims in all aspects of life. However it also found that 31% believed the US government was behind the 9/11 terror attacks with a further 7% blaming the Jews and only 4% saying al-Qaida was responsible. The thinktank also highlighted findings that British Muslims were more likely to condemn acts of political violence and terrorism than the rest of the population but that one in four British Muslims claimed that "extremist views do not exist". When asked what they would do if they became aware someone close to them was "getting involved with people who support terrorism in Syria" only 52% said they would report them to the police. A foreword to the pamphlet by the Labour MP for Birmingham Perry Barr, Khalid Mahmood, said it was startling that so many British Muslims seemed ready to entertain wild and outlandish conspiracy theories about "dark forces" at work to "do down Muslims". He said that the poll found that organisations such as the MCB had very little support among British Muslims and were failing to reflect their views on issues such as Prevent. He suggested that the government needed to realise their views only represented "the sectional demands of those on the fringes of British Muslim life". David Goodhart, co-author of the report and head of the thinktank's integration and immigration unit, said: "British Muslims as a whole continue to live somewhat more separately than other large ethno-cultural minorities – in neighbourhoods and schools, in terms of women not working, and in terms of attitudes and religiosity. "However, the promising news from this survey is that when it comes to everyday life, British Muslims, and their concerns and interests, are increasingly part of the mainstream, and to a much greater extent than one would assume listening to many of the organisations that claim to speak for Muslims." The MCB responded by saying Policy Exchange had misused otherwise promising ICM poll results in its "decade-long" attempt to "delegitimise" its organisation. "There are some disturbing results in the poll that deserve further investigation. A large minority of Muslims seem to agree that conspiracy theories 'often contain elements of truth', in line with the broader UK population (40% v 37%). In addition, more British Muslims have conspiracy views about 9/11 in a proportion that is high and similar to results polling the US population on this issue," said an MCB statement. "As the Muslim Council of Britain, we will be meeting to discuss how to understand this problem properly so that action can be taken to challenge these worrying views."

Money looted from Nigeria in corrupt practices and laundered through the UK should be used to help save the lives of thousands of children at risk of starvation in the conflict-hit north-east of the country, a leading aid organisation says. More than $1.2 bn (£950m) is needed to save children from starvation and help families to try to piece together their lives at the end of a brutal armed conflict, according to Save the Children. It is appealing for UN agencies and donor governments to step up, warning that the region has high levels of child malnutrition and is teetering on the brink of famine. In a briefing issued as the Nigerian government issued its appeal for help to the UN on Friday, Save the Children proposed that some of the cash desperately needed by more than 2 million people uprooted by Boko Haram could come from the millions seized in the UK. "Large sums of illicit finance from Nigeria are laundered through banks and the property markets in the United Kingdom," it says. "Four years ago, when James Ibori, a former government of Nigeria's oil-rich Delta state, pleaded guilty to £50m in fraud and money laundering, the presiding judge described the theft as 'financial criminality on an eye-watering scale'." Funds have been seized by the UK authorities in a number of such cases. Following a memorandum of understanding signed in September, the money can be returned to Nigeria for projects to help the poorest in society. "It is difficult to think of any project more deserving of support against this criterion than the humanitarian effort in north-east Nigeria," said Save the Children. Nigeria's relief plan will go to a meeting of UN agencies on Monday which will decide on the priorities for global humanitarian relief for 2017. The government estimates that $1.2bn is needed in north-east Nigeria for next year. Those aid organisations working in the region, where the scale of the crisis is only just becoming apparent as people emerge from areas that have been held by insurgents, fear that the very visible needs in Syria and Yemen will take priority. But as the Guardian reported last weekend, tens of thousands of malnourished children are at risk of death in areas that were held by Boko Haram, where farmers have been unable to grow crops and aid agencies have been unable to enter. It may be the worst humanitarian crisis in sub-Saharan Africa, said the aid organisation, which talks of the stark threat facing children. "At least 2 million need assistance, along with 400,000 breastfeeding mothers and pregnant women. Up to 400,000 of these children face life-threatening malnutrition." Hundreds of children's graves have already been found in newly accessible areas, it added. Kevin Watkins, chief executive of Save the Children, urged the world to prevent what happened in Somalia in 2011 from happening again in north-east Nigeria. "The parallel with Somalia is very strong," he said. "All the pre-famine warnings were there in Somalia for 18 months. The money wasn't mobilised. After the emergency, every UN agency produced a report saying, 'We are not doing this again.' What are they doing now? "If they fail on this, it is absolutely unforgivable, given the evidence and the mistakes that were made in Somalia. They will be judged incredibly harshly, and rightly so."

