Even as Donald Trump and his allies ramped up their fundraising and political infrastructure in August, their combined monthly fundraising haul lagged $42 million behind that of Hillary Clinton’s forces, according to a POLITICO analysis of reports filed Tuesday with the Federal Election Commission. The Trump campaign, two supportive super PACs and the Republican National Committee pulled in a combined $70 million, relying largely on small donors, during the tumultuous month of August, when his campaign shook up its leadership in an attempt to reboot after a chaotic nominating convention in July. Story Continued Below By contrast, the Clinton campaign, an allied super PAC and the Democratic National Committee, leaning heavily on major donors, raised a total of $112 million in August, as her campaign rode a strong bounce from its tightly choreographed, star-studded convention. Trump’s forces entered September with almost $96 million in the bank, while Clinton’s started the month with $121.4 million, according to Politico’s analysis. The analysis does not include fundraising tallies for the joint fundraising committees the rival candidates created with their respective parties, nor does it include the fundraising hauls from some supportive super PACs. All of those committees disclose their finances on a quarterly basis, meaning they won’t be required to file detailed financial reports until Oct. 15. But the analysis provides revealing hints about the contrasting strategies employed by the presidential candidates and their allies. The joint fundraising committee that Trump created with the RNC appears to be sitting on a significant sum of cash — perhaps as much as $47 million at the end of last month — while distributing only $12 million to the RNC itself and $20 million to Trump’s campaign. That transfer to Trump accounted for nearly half his August total — the first time he’s received such a large portion of his cash that way. Clinton, on the other hand, received $31.4 million from her own joint fundraising vehicle, and the Democratic National Committee received $12 million. An additional $12 million appear to have gone to state parties but been rerouted to the DNC, repeating a pattern from previous months. (The DNC also transferred out some $14 million to various state parties in August.) Trump’s campaign, which had largely eschewed spending on the trappings of political tactics, showed early signs of implementing a more conventional operation under its new leadership. It spent serious money — $5.3 million — on paid media in August, most of which went through Rick Reed Media, though $718,000 went through Jamestown Associates, the firm of his then-new senior communications adviser Jason Miller. That was dwarfed by the $32.7 million that Clinton paid her media buyer, GMMB, in August. Trump spent almost $1 million on field consultants, up from $432,000 in July. And his campaign’s staff grew to 140 people, with a total payroll of $643,000, up from $392,000 for 84 people in July. But that still trailed Clinton’s 789-person, $3.3 million payroll. Trump more than doubled his spending on field consulting in August to $973,000. The campaign also paid for polling, something it had been reluctant to do, directing $128,500 to the firm of Kellyanne Conway, who took over as campaign manager late in the month. And it spent $250,000 on data services provided by Cambridge Analytica, a firm owned largely by the influential Mercer family, which played a pivotal role in Trump’s campaign shakeup and is spearheading one of the super PACs backing the campaign. Still, the campaign continued devoting serious cash to bankroll the former reality TV star’s traveling show: $2 million went for rally-related expenses including facility rentals, audio-visual services, and event staging and consulting. Then, of course, there was the spending on Trump branding, which included $420,00 on hats and $1.7 million on T-shirts and other merchandise. And the campaign spent $547,000 on services provided by Trump’s own companies, including $170,000 for rent at Trump Tower and $319,000 on TAG Air Inc. By contrast, Trump spent only $80,000 on strategy consulting, with the firm of fired campaign manager Corey Lewandowski receiving $20,000 of that. And the campaign’s largest expense continued to be online advertising and fundraising payments to the Austin-based digital firm of Trump’s digital director Brad Parscale, who is running the campaign’s online fundraising and advertising efforts, despite having no prior political experience. His firm reaped $11.1 million in August — up nearly $3 million from July and good for a third of all the campaign’s spending. Although the online fundraising effort overseen by Parscale helped produce an impressive small-dollar haul in which 65 percent of the campaign’s contributions came in amounts of less than $200, the payments to Giles-Parscale suggest the campaign has spent heavily on list rentals, email solicitations and online advertising to round up those small contributions. The percentage of cash that Clinton raised from small donors was half of Trump’s. About 31 percent of her cash came in checks of less than $200, which actually marked a slight improvement over her average across the cycle. Clinton and running mate Tim Kaine focused in August on big-dollar fundraisers in exclusive summer destinations. Likewise, the main super PAC supporting Clinton, Priorities USA, drew more than half of its $23.4 million August haul from its top five donors: Slim-Fast founder Daniel Abraham and Newsweb chairman Fred Eychaner ($3 million each), billionaire financier George Soros ($2.5 million), investor Donald Sussman and Laurene Powell Jobs’ Emerson Collective (both with $2 million). Trump received some good news this week about the fundraising of his own high-dollar super PACs. Las Vegas casino mogul Sheldon Adelson, who had been sitting out the cycle so far, and his wife, Miriam, reportedly committed $5 million to a pro-Trump super PAC effort, but the group to which he has pledged the cash hasn’t launched the effort and it won’t disclose its finances until next month. The other super PACs supporting Trump have continued to lag in fundraising. Make America Number 1, the pro-Trump super PAC run by the Mercer family, received $1 million from Cherna Moskowitz, a Miami philanthropist, and $50,000 from Erik Prince, who founded the defense contractor Blackwater. But it didn’t receive any other big checks and didn’t get a dime in August from the Mercer family, which had donated $2 million to the PAC in July. Another pro-Trump super PAC, Great America PAC, appears to have the campaign’s blessing after Eric Trump, the candidate’s son, attended one of its events. But it raised only $3.6 million in August, including $250,000 from RHS Investments, a Texas company that appears to be tied to banking executive Robert H. Seale, and $200,000 from Martin Harmon of Rocklin, Calif. The Committee to Restore America’s Greatness and Rebuilding America Now — other pro-Trump super PACs — won’t disclose their financials until next month because they report on a quarterly cycle. The same goes for pro-Clinton groups American Bridge and Correct the Record.
As the coal industry and the Obama administration brace for a potentially momentous legal showdown over climate-change policy at a federal appeals court this week, the industry is mounting part of its argument in an unusual venue: on the radio. For the past few weeks, the American Coalition for Clean Coal Electricity has been running radio ads focused squarely on Tuesday's oral arguments before a 10-judge, en banc sitting of the D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals. Story Continued Below "On September 27th the D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals has an important decision to make on EPA’s Power Plan. It’s a decision that affects every American’s ability to have affordable energy and jeopardizes every state’s ability to make their own energy policies and it will be a clear violation of the 10th Amendment to the Constitution," a serious-sounding announcer declares as ominous music plays in the background. "It is our duty to uphold the Constitution and say no to EPA’s Power Plan." A video posted online by the same pro-coal group uses similar language, suggesting a need to take action on Tuesday. “On September 27, it is our duty to uphold the Constitution and the people it is designed to protect," the video says. The ads and the video never explain precisely who's being called on to do "our duty," but the EPA plan to limit greenhouse gas emissions from power plants is not going before Congress this week nor is there some referendum. The only people who get to vote Tuesday (or soon thereafter) are 10 of the 11 active judges on the D.C. Circuit. (Chief Judge Merrick Garland has bowed out of hearing cases while his Supreme Court nomination is pending.) Legal ethics rules prohibit lawyers involved in a case from engaging in out-of-court communications with judges under most circumstances. Judges are usually prohibited from initiating or permitting out-of-court contact about a case and are supposed to put such communications on the record when they do occur. The theory behind the rules is that cases should be decided based on written briefs and arguments presented in the courtroom. The American Coalition for Clean Coal Energy is one of the parties challenging the Environmental Protection Agency power-plant rules in the series of cases set to be heard Tuesday during an extraordinary court session planned to stretch for more than three-and-a-half hours, not counting a lunch break. A spokeswoman for the group, Laura Sheehan, said she was not available for an interview Friday. She did not respond to emailed queries about the cost and scope of the ad campaign or the target audience. “The D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals’ decision is critically important as it will either put a halt to EPA’s out-of-control regulatory decision making or give it the green light to continue to run roughshod over states’ constitutional rights,” Sheehan said in a statement posted on the group's website. Prominent legal ethics experts said there's little doubt the ads are aimed at influencing the D.C. Circuit judges. "They're obviously aimed at intimidating the court into doing what is politically popular, letting the judges know there will be repercussions if they don't decide it the right way," said Richard Painter,a law professor at the University of Minnesota and a White House ethics lawyer under President George W. Bush. "They're not running these ads aimed at people affected by the administration's position on coal. They're aimed at the judges and their families and friends trying to put the heat on them....This is one more step in the direction of politicizing the courts." Painter said the ads would be improper if lawyers for the parties before the court were involved. "I don't think lawyers litigating the case would have anything to do with this. That would be highly unprofessional," he said. The ads and online video quote renowned Harvard Law Professor Laurence Tribe saying alarmingly that endorsing the administration's crackdown on greenhouse gas emissions would be like "burning the Constitution." The comments come from congressional testimony Tribe offered last year. The group's video actually shows fire appearing to consume the nation's founding document Tribe did not respond to emails asking if he was involved in producing the ads or approved of them. He's set to argue at Tuesday's court session on behalf of coal mining firm Peabody Energy and several others members of the coal-industry coalition running the ads. Some ethics lawyers said the ads are protected by the First Amendment, but may not be a good idea. "The trade group is engaging in free speech. But it risks annoying the judges," said Stephen Gillers, a law professor at New York University. "Assuming that risk is unwise because the judges won't be influenced. I bet the industry's lawyers are themselves chagrined by the campaign. The judges are expected to ignore what they may hear just as they are expected to ignore, [such as] an editorial, and decide based only on the record." Advertising advocating for a specific outcome in a pending court case is highly unusual, but not unprecedented. When the Supreme Court was considering the constitutionality of bans on gay marriage last year, a group of Christian pastors and activists took out a full-page Washington Post ad days before the decision, urging the court not to require states to recognize gay marriage. The court did so anyway, by 5-4 vote. In-person protests related to Supreme Court cases are common, but the court has managed to use its rules to push them off its grounds and onto the adjoining sidewalks. Last year, the D.C. Circuit upheld those rules. The Supreme Court has also upheld a state law that courthouse banned demonstrations near courthouses, even when aimed at judges rather than jurors. The lengths to which the coal industry is willing to go to try to influence the outcome of this week's arguments may reflect the unusually pivotal role the D.C. Circuit could play in the case—one that may wind up being more critical than the Supreme Court. That's because it seems possible, if not likely, that the shorthanded high court could split 4-4 in the case. If that happens, the D.C. Circuit ruling would stand. On February 9, the Supreme Court voted, 5-4, to halt implementation of the EPA power-plant rules until the D.C. Circuit resolves the case and the justices have a chance to decide whether to take up a virtually-certain petition to review that decision. Four days later, Justice Antonin Scalia was found dead in his room during a trip to a Texas ranch. The earlier vote on the stay application suggests it wouldn't be granted if the issue arose today and suggests—although it is far from certain— that the court could divide along ideological lines on the underlying case.
When it comes to picking fights with Republicans over Cuba, Barack Obama has apparently decided he's only a lame-duck, second-term president once. The president announced Tuesday that he has nominated Jeffrey DeLaurentis, the top U.S. diplomat currently serving in Cuba, to serve as America's official ambassador to the communist-led country. Story Continued Below The move is sure to draw howls of protest from some hard-core opponents of the Cuban government, including Sens. Marco Rubio of Florida and Ted Cruz of Texas, who have vowed to block any ambassador nomination for Cuba. Still, Obama's decision suggests he's willing to take on the risk of a dragged-out fight over a topic — Cuba-U.S. relations — that has increasing bipartisan support. The island nation restored diplomatic ties with the U.S. in July 2015 after more than 50 years of hostility, and Obama considers America's new relationship with Cuba one of his signature foreign policy achievements. DeLaurentis is a career member of the U.S. foreign service who has been the chief of mission at the U.S. embassy in Havana since it was re-established in 2015 and headed what was an American interests section there before that. He was widely believed to be the frontrunner for the ambassador's job should Obama select a nominee. "The appointment of an ambassador is a common sense step forward toward a more normal and productive relationship between our two countries," Obama said in a statement announcing his decision. Among those appaluding Obama's decision was Sen. Jeff Flake, an Arizona Republican who has long advocated for better U.S.-Cuba relations. "Americans traveling & doing business in #Cuba will be well-served by the prompt confirmation of Jeff DeLaurentis to serve as US ambassador," Flake tweeted. But although a growing number of Republicans have shown support for deepening ties to Cuba, it takes only a single senator to severely slow down a nomination process for an ambassador. Asked by POLITICO earlier this year whether he still held firm to his denouncement of the rapprochement with Cuba and his vow to block an ambassador confirmation, Rubio said yes. "A U.S. ambassador is not going to influence the Cuban government, which is a dictatorial, closed regime,” the senator, who is of Cuban descent, said as the one-year anniversary of Cuba-U.S. ties loomed. Rubio's office subsequently issued a statement assailing the nomination. "This nomination," Rubio said, "should go nowhere until the Castro regime makes significant and irreversible progress in the areas of human rights and political freedom for the Cuban people."
Child migrants suffered a major setback in the federal courts on Tuesday, but Congress and the White House also found themselves lectured to from the bench for failing to do more to help the juveniles, thousands of whom have been thrown into deportation hearings without defense counsel. At one level, the ruling by a three-judge panel of the 9th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals is a clear victory for the Justice Department. It effectively dooms a long-awaited federal district court trial, scheduled to begin in November in Seattle, on the children’s right to counsel. Story Continued Below But at a second level, Justice’s win had a hollow ring as two of the three judges wrote a concurring opinion that repeatedly invoked the words of former Attorney General Eric Holder that the government has a “moral obligation” to ensure the presence of counsel for the children. “What is missing here. Money and resolve — political solutions that fall outside the purview of the courts,” wrote Judge Margaret McKeown, a Democratic appointee, together with her Republican appointee colleague, Judge Milan Smith. “The stakes are too high,” they concluded. “To give meaning to ‘Equal Justice Under Law,’ the tag line engraved on the U.S. Supreme Court building, to ensure the fair and effective administration of our immigration system, and to protect the interests of children who must struggle through that system, the problem demands action now.” The underlying case arises from a federal lawsuit filed against the government in July 2014 by the American Civil Liberties Union and the Northwest Immigrant Rights Project. The backdrop was the record number of border crossings that spring and summer by unaccompanied children from Central America. In the ensuing turmoil, the Obama administration responded by ordering the immigration courts to quickly arraign the new arrivals, with or without legal counsel. The accelerated proceedings — dubbed rocket dockets — overwhelmed the fragile network of private attorneys typically available to the children. Judges seized the chance to issue removal orders on the spot, and in the first 13 months, nearly 2,800 juveniles — hundreds of whom were 14 or younger — received deportation orders after being afforded only a single hearing and no defense counsel. The crisis has since moved out of the headlines, but the total number of removal orders issued for the child migrants since July 2014 had already passed 12,300 by the end of May. These decisions have become a very real threat to the young migrants, especially those who arrived as teenagers and are now 18 or older. Filed in Seattle, the lawsuit landed before U.S. District Court Judge Thomas Zilly, who cautiously tried to define some middle ground that would at least extend added protections for the youngest defendants. When Justice challenged his jurisdictional authority to hear the case, Zilly issued a telltale decision in April 2015 that effectively split the baby. On the narrow statutory grounds, Zilly agreed with the administration. But on the larger constitutional question of the children’s due process rights, Zilly refused to dismiss the lawsuit outright and said the plaintiffs deserved a timely answer. It was this April 2015 decision by Zilly that brought the case to the 9th Circuit, where the administration argued that the district court had overstepped its jurisdiction and any due process claims of the children were subject to the limits imposed by Congress. “Whatever Congress provides them, is their due process,” a Justice attorney told the court bluntly in one exchange when the case was argued in July. That did not sit well with the panel, but at the same time, the judges faulted the plaintiffs trying to go around the narrow legal path set out by Congress for any such appeals. It is this legal path — governing deportation appeals — that is at the nub of the jurisdictional fight. As set out in statute, all such deportation appeals must first go to the Board of Immigration Appeals, which is part of the same immigration court system that has dealt so harshly with the children. Only after exhausting this remedy can a defendant next file a petition for review and get a hearing with the respective federal appeals court for his or her circuit. Advocates for the children argue that this poses a Catch-22 in that no child without an attorney can be expected to navigate such a complicated appeals process. The system becomes punitive, they say, and effectively denies due process, requiring the courts to intervene. In truth, Zilly, appointed to the federal bench by former President Ronald Reagan, has struggled openly with the very same legal dilemma from the outset of the lawsuit two years ago. He ultimately felt that the constitutional due process question had sufficient weight to demand a timely court hearing and allow him to move ahead for at least the youngest children. Time and again, he showed a special concern for those under 14 years old. So much so that in a recent filing, the plaintiffs argued for a summary judgment at least for this “subclass” of child migrants. The appeals panel clearly shared some of that concern but wanted a tidier path to get to an answer and around the federal statutes. Having failed to find one, Tuesday’s ruling wipes out what has been years of work by child advocates trying to get a court hearing on the right-to-counsel issue. “The 9th Circuit today held that the courthouse doors are effectively closed to thousands of children whose only opportunity to seek appointed counsel in their immigration proceedings is through this case,” said Ahilan Arulanantham, who has been the ACLU’s lead counsel on the case. “The court issued that ruling even as it simultaneously recognized that virtually all children cannot represent themselves in immigration proceedings.” “We disagree with this decision, and will continue the fight to ensure that the claims of these children to appointed counsel receive their day in court. In light of the 9th Circuit’s recognition of the moral imperative at stake, we again call on the Obama administration to exercise its power to cease its unjust practice of requiring children to represent themselves in immigration court.” Matt Adams, who has taken the lead in the case for the Northwest Immigrant Rights Project, was scathing in his frustration with the court’s ruling. “The court determined that a theoretical possibility for judicial review suffices even where as a practical matter, the thousands of unrepresented children will be ordered deported without ever having an opportunity to argue that they are need an attorney to get a fair hearing,” Adams said. “The court points to one case of an unrepresented child back in 2004 that reached its doors. ... But if there is only one case in 15 years, with thousands of other children who have been deported, this only demonstrates there is no meaningful opportunity.” Justice had no immediate public comment, but privately officials signaled little joy with the win. Indeed, the harsh treatment of the children in 2014 and 2015 remains a genuine embarrassment for the White House. Draft rules are under consideration to create a more uniform system nationally, under which immigration judges would give children more time to find lawyers. And before the president leaves office next year, there is pressure to have these completed and in place.
With the Hillary Clinton-Donald Trump debates upon us, the quadrennial question comes begging: Do these showdowns matter? The chances for impact seem ripe this year. The two most unpopular major-party candidates in the history of ABC News/Washington Post polls are facing off. Donald Trump's unorthodox campaign style and provocative positions have piqued public interest; the debates may be the single best opportunity for him to allay concerns about his qualifications, temperament and policy promises alike. Hillary Clinton, for her part, needs -– like Trump -– to ease questions about her trustworthiness, as well as to spark greater enthusiasm among her supporters. Can either candidate move the needle? It will be tough: A review of data since 1960 suggests that past debates have almost never directly and measurably changed the candidates' relative standings. That's admittedly a high standard, though, and at least some debates may have had more subtle impacts. Debates have been held in 11 presidential races since 1960. We find just one after which the lead in presidential preference changed hands by a significant margin: In 1980, when Ronald Reagan uttered his "are you better off?" line. He gained 7 points in a post-debate poll. Still, there are other cases in which debates (or post-debate evaluations) may have influenced campaign dynamics. Debates are, after all, an essential window on the candidates’ styles and grasp of the issues. They can seem to add or reverse momentum. And polls are only so precise. Consider 1960: After Richard Nixon’s pasty-faced performance, John F. Kennedy went from 46 percent support to 49 percent in Gallup data; Nixon, from 47 percent to 46 percent. Those changes were within the polls' margin of sampling error. Nonetheless, the numerical "lead" switched, and collective memory maintains that the debates spelled Nixon's narrow defeat. Nor did Gallup polls show significant movement immediately after the 1976 debate in which Gerald Ford said Poland was free (and news reports pounced on the misstatement); Jimmy Carter gained a single point, Ford lost 3. Still, even if not measurably, the gaffe may have halted what had been a slide in Carter's lead. Then 73-year-old Reagan's teasing jibe in 1984 about 56-year-old Walter Mondale's "youth and inexperience" didn't meaningfully change the numbers in ABC News/Washington Post polls, but perhaps helped put aside questions about Reagan's age and acuity. In 2000, Al Gore's wonk-heavy performance saw him go in at +2 and leave at -3, but again, that was within sampling error. There's also the question of missed opportunities, as in Mike Dukakis' bloodless answer, in 1988, to what he'd do if his wife were raped and murdered. He didn't seize on the chance to show a non-technocratic side. And ABC/Post polls did not meaningfully move. ABC News/Washington Post polls in 1996, 2004, 2008 and 2012 also showed no significant movement around the debates. In 1992 there was more movement, including a significant gain for Ross Perot, but never enough to change Bill Clinton’s advantage. In instant reactions, at least, polling has found that debates typically reinforce preconceived notions rather than change them. Most of each candidates' supporters say it's their candidate who won, and precious few say their minds were changed. But post-debate evaluations can shift. In 1992, right after the first debate, 24 percent of viewers said Perot had won. By the next night, amid positive reviews of Perot's performance, that grew to 37 percent among people who'd watched, heard or read about it. And Perot's support did advance, from 6 percent before the debates to 17 percent after them. That shift may have been real, but it also may have reflected the challenges of immediate post-debate reaction polls. Conducted in mere minutes, among individuals pre-recruited to participate, they're subject to considerable sampling and weighting limitations. Further, some ask who "won," others who "did the better job"; some accept "tie" as an answer and some don't. Instant reactions also bypass the role of considered judgment. Hard as it may be to believe in the Twitter Age, sometimes people actually need a little while to think about things. The clearest response to the debates this year may take some days to emerge.  Here's a rundown of the measurable debate effect (or lack thereof) in each election since 1960. There were no debates in 1964, 1968 or 1972. Click here for data tables associated with each election. 1960: Gallup had Nixon +1, but that was 12 days before the first debate; it had Kennedy +3 after it. Twelve days is a long time and 4 points is a small number. Gallup didn't poll between the remaining three debates, but showed Kennedy +4 after the last one. 1976: News reports jumped on Ford's misstatement of Soviet domination of Eastern Europe in the second debate. Carter's lead had been diminishing, and that did stop after this debate. But the measured change after the second debate was tiny -- Carter gained 1 point, Ford lost 3. 1980: This one looks to have mattered: Gallup's pre-debate poll had Carter +8; post-debate, Reagan +3. (John Anderson did not participate.) 1984: Mondale crept up, but Reagan stayed ahead by double digits nonetheless. 1988: We don't have an ABC poll done right before the first debate; in a Gallup poll it was George H. W. Bush +8. Our poll after the second debate showed no meaningful movement. 1992: Perot moved up 5 points in ABC News polling after the first debate and 4 points after the third debate. Before the debates he had 6 percent support; after the last debate he was up to 17 percent. Clinton moved up by 5 points after the second debate, Bush down by 6, then Clinton down by 6 after the third. But Clinton led throughout. 1996: The race looked perhaps slightly tighter after the second debate, but Clinton maintained a double-digit lead throughout. 2000: Gore went in +2 and came out -3 -– a change of lead, but within sampling error. And a week after the last debate it was back to a dead heat, 47-47 percent. 2004: There were some wiggles in the debate period –- a 6-point lead for George W. Bush before the first debate was a dead heat before the third -– but when all was said and done the race after the debates looked a lot like the race before them. 2008: The main shift in vote preference came before the first debate, as Obama seized the reins of economic discontent after the failure of Lehman Brothers in mid-September. McCain's +2 in early September, just after the GOP convention, proved to be his best. The race shifted to Obama +9 in an ABC/Post poll completed Sept. 22, four days before the first debate. Obama never trailed again. 2012: Obama was +2 ahead of the first debate in ABC/Post polls, within the margin of sampling error, +3 after the second debate and -1 after the final debate, all within sampling error.
Washington (CNN)President Barack Obama vetoed a bill Friday that would allow family members of 9/11 victims to sue Saudi Arabia, pitting him against Congress and both presidential candidates on an emotionally charged matter. The White House claimed the legislation could expose US diplomats and servicemen to litigation in other countries. Republican and Democratic leaders in Congress say they'll override Obama's veto next week. Obama has now issued 12 vetoes. If successful, Congress' override would be the first of Obama's presidency. Support for the "Justice Against Sponsors of Terrorism Act" ran high among lawmakers, who overwhelmingly passed the bill earlier this year after pressure from victims' groups. The bill would end foreign countries' immunity in the United States from lawsuits, allowing federal civil suits to go forward if the country is determined to have had a hand in a US terror attack. In his veto message, Obama wrote he had "deep sympathy for the families of the victims of the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, who have suffered grievously." But he maintained the legislation would seriously hurt US national security interests and cause harm to important alliances, saying it "would neither protect Americans from terrorist attacks nor improve the effectiveness of our response to such attacks." He warned that the law would hurt the effectiveness of the administration's action against terrorism by taking questions of foreign states' involvement in terrorism "out of the hands of national security and foreign policy professionals and placing them in the hands of private litigants and courts." Obama also said the move would open Americans abroad, especially those serving in the military, to prosecutions by foreign countries, since this would remove the reciprocal agreements that now protect both sides from such lawsuits. He also pointed to complaints that allied nations have made about the measure. This legislation, he said, "threatens to limit their cooperation on key national security issues, including counterterrorism initiatives, at a crucial time when we are trying to build coalitions, not create divisions." Demonstrating the difficult political position the White House is in, Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton, Obama's former secretary of state, expressed her support for the legislation Friday. "Clinton continues to support the efforts by Sen. (Chuck) Schumer and his colleagues in Congress to secure the ability of 9/11 families and other victims of terror to hold accountable those responsible," said Jesse Lehrich, a Clinton spokesman. "She would sign this legislation if it came to her desk." Following the veto, Republican presidential contender Donald Trump said in a statement the move "is shameful and will go down as one of the low points of his presidency." Trump, too, said he would sign the legislation as president. Schumer, a New York Democrat who was a lead supporter of the bill, called the veto "a disappointing decision that will be swiftly and soundly overturned in Congress." Co-sponsor Sen. John Cornyn, R-Texas, said, "I look forward to the opportunity for Congress to override the President's veto, provide these families with the chance to seek the justice they deserve and send a clear message that we will not tolerate those who finance terrorism in the United States." White House lobbying effort In recent days, some of the measure's supporters in Congress have expressed misgivings about the legislation, prompting a new effort by the administration to lobby against the bill. The White House indicated Friday that was still working to sway lawmakers against the bill, saying that some had indicated privately they had doubts about the measure's implications. "If we're focused on the substantive, long-term impact on our nation's national security, that's what's driving the position, that's what's driving the President's decision to veto this bill -- not because it's politically convenient, it's not; it's political inconvenient," Press Secretary Josh Earnest said Friday. " But when it comes to the stakes and the impact that this could have on our national security, the President is willing to take some political heat in order to try to do the right thing." The lobbying effort on Capitol Hill against the legislation has involved the administration but also representatives for the Saudi government, which denies any involvement in the 9/11 terror attacks. The alliance puts Obama in the unlikely position of defending the same position as the Kingdom, with which he's had longstanding disputes over counterterrorism strategies and human rights. It also puts the President at odds with family members of 9/11 victims, who protested outside the White House this week and spoke alongside lawmakers from New York and Connecticut on Capitol Hill. They, along with other proponents of the bill, say the language is written narrowly to prevent the types of repercussions the administration predicts. "We are outraged and dismayed at the President's veto of JASTA and the unconvincing and unsupportable reasons that he offers as explanation," read a statement from the 9/11 Families and Survivors. "No matter how much the Saudi lobbying and propaganda machine may argue otherwise, JASTA is a narrowly drawn statute that restores longstanding legal principles that have enjoyed bipartisan support for decades." Veto override plans Administration officials had been eying a Friday afternoon veto with the hopes of submitting it to lawmakers after Congress adjourned until November's election contests. But prolonged negotiations over a government funding bill and a package to combat Zika virus have delayed the recess, meaning lawmakers are still likely to be in Washington next week to cast an override vote. "Our assumption is that the veto will be overridden," Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell told reporters on Tuesday. House Speaker Paul Ryan followed suit Wednesday, saying, "I do think the votes are there for the override." But the Wisconsin Republican also voiced his own doubts about the legislation, saying the implications for lawsuits against Americans worried him. "I worry about legal matters," Ryan said. "I worry about trial lawyers trying to get rich off of this. And I do worry about the precedence. At the same time, these victims do need to have their day in court." He was one of several prominent lawmakers who have expressed buyers' remorse for the proposed law. A pair of Republican senators, Bob Corker of Tennessee and Lindsey Graham of South Carolina, have pushed for changes to make it more difficult for the families to pursue lawsuits but could also make it harder for the US to be sued for alleged wrongdoing. Opponents of the bill gained support Wednesday both from the European Union, which issued its opposition in the form of a "demarche" statement to the US Department of State, and from a bipartisan group of former national security officials, who penned an open letter to Obama. "The harm this legislation will cause the United States will be both dramatic and long-lasting," the letter read, citing arguments over weakening sovereign immunity. Its signatories included veterans of Republican and Democratic administrations, including Stephen Hadley, a national security adviser to President George W. Bush; Michael Mukasey, a US attorney general under Bush; William Cohen, a secretary of defense under President Bill Clinton; and Richard Clarke, a national security aide to Bush and Clinton. The letter also noted the law, if enacted, "will most certainly undermine our relationship with one of our most important allies, Saudi Arabia, and damage our relationship with the entire Middle East." CNN's Dan Merica and Ted Barrett contributed to this report.
The first general election debate between Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump averaged 84 million viewers across 13 channels, according to data from Nielsen, making it the most watched presidential debate in modern history. Until last night, the most-watched debate in history was the 1980 debate between Jimmy Carter and Ronald Reagan. That debate averaged just over 80 million viewers. With a few networks still to be counted by Nielsen, and the 80 million figure not including anyone who watched online, last night's debate will end up with more people watching than any prior presidential debate. In 2012, the first debate between Mitt Romney and Barack Obama averaged 70 million viewers. In 2008, the first debate between John McCain and Obama averaged 53 million viewers. On cable news, Fox News led the way with more than 11 million viewers. NBC led the broadcast networks with more than 18 million people tuning in. The ratings put the debate in rare company. Of TV programs that drew an average of more than 80 million viewers, most were NFL Super Bowl broadcasts, with the others were the finales of M.A.S.H. and Cheers. Of course, the debate aired on a dozen TV networks and streamed online, whereas the Super Bowl and M.A.S.H. only aired on one channel each. The numbers do not include anyone watching on PBS, Univision or non-rated TV channels like C-SPAN, nor does it include anyone that streamed the debate online. Data from Facebook, YouTube and other digital sources suggests that millions more people watched the debate live online. All told, Fox News averaged 11.4 million viewers, including 3.5 million in the key adults 25-54 demo. CNN averaged 9.8 million viewers, including 4.4 million in the demo, and MSNBC averaged 4.9 million viewers, including 1.6 million in the demo. NBC averaged 18.1 million viewers, ABC 13.5 million viewers, CBS 12.1 million viewers and the PBS NewsHour 2.96 million viewers. Among the business channels, Fox Business Network averaged 673,000 viewers, while CNBC averaged 520,000 viewers.
(CNN)Hillary Clinton's campaign manager said Wednesday that the Democratic nominee would implement a set of best practices to prevent police-involved shootings like the ones this week in Charlotte, North Carolina and Tulsa, Oklahoma. "There are two prongs to her approach," Robby Mook, Hillary for America campaign manager told CNN's Alisyn Camerota on "New Day." "The first is to have a set of national standards around how to manage the situations that doesn't exist right now and that could help through training to prevent situations like this." RELATED: Charlotte police shoot and kill man, sparking growing protest "There are no set of national best practices on how to manage situations," he continued. "These situations are handled by local policies currently. And what she is proposing is that we actually set up national standards so that localities have better policies to work with and train towards." Clinton spoke out Tuesday against "systematic racism" following the recent shooting of Terence Crutcher in Tulsa, Oklahoma. Crutcher was shot and killed last week after his car broke down. The 40-year-old black man raised his hands above his head just before Officer Betty Shelby fatally shot him. Crutcher was unarmed at the time. The Charlotte-Mecklenburg Police Department said Wednesday that "approximately 12 officers" were injured during protests after the fatal shooting of Keith Lamont Scott Tuesday by a police officer. Mook said the other part of Clinton's plans involves working to improve the relationship between police and minorities. "The second piece is to restore bonds between communities and law enforcement, so investing in community policing and making sure that local police have the resources to build the resources in the community to prevent something like this from happening," he said. Clinton told radio host Steve Harvey on Tuesday's "The Steve Harvey Morning Show" that she plans to speak "directly to white people" about implicit bias. Mook said Wednesday Clinton meant she would explain that different ethnic groups are often treated differently in America. "What she's saying is our entire country needs to do some real soul-searching here. It is clear that the criminal justice system is not treating everybody the same way," he said. "If you are African-American or from a minority group, you may not be being treated the same as a white person. And that's a problem." RELATED: YG seizes mantle of rap's most outspoken Donald Trump critic Clinton said Tuesday that while there are "good, honorable, cool-headed police officers" working across the country, "we can do better." "We have got to tackle systemic racism," Clinton said. "This horrible shooting again. How many times do we have to see this in our country?" "This is just unbearable," Clinton said. "And it needs to be intolerable." Clinton later tweeted on the shooting, writing, "Another unarmed Black man was shot in a police incident. This should be intolerable. We have so much work to do. #TerenceCrutcher -H." RELATED: Road to 270 In response to the Crutcher shooting, both the Department of Justice and state authorities have launched investigations into the officer-involved shooting. Danny C. Williams, US Attorney of the Northern District of Oklahoma, said prosecutors will attempt to determine whether a federal civil rights violation had occurred. Authorities refused to immediately answer additional questions due to the ongoing investigation. CNN's Max Blau and Jason Morris contributed to this report.
Donald Trump on Thursday pinned the blame for the turmoil in Charlotte, North Carolina, on President Barack Obama, suggesting that the violent protests there show a “wounded country” that “looks bad to the world.” Pausing for roughly 10 minutes during an energy speech in Pittsburgh to address the Charlotte unrest, Trump also presented himself as the man to heal America’s racial divide. Story Continued Below “Before going any further today, I want to address the turmoil unfolding right now in our country, and it seems to be a never-ending problem,” Trump said. “America desperately needs unity, and it needs the spirit of togetherness that has not really only got us through our toughest times, and we’ve had some tough times, but which has lifted us up in the past to our greatest achievements as a nation.” He called for a swift end to violence against citizens and law enforcement, insisting that such actions hurt law-abiding African-American families most, and proposed a national anti-crime agenda to address what he characterized as a “national crisis.” He also vowed to make American cities safer by appointing “the best prosecutors, investigators and federal law enforcement officers” and sympathized with police officers, who carry an “immense responsibility” but must be trained properly, respect the public and be held accountable for any wrongdoing. And he took a shot at Obama’s leadership, or lack thereof. “We all have to walk a mile in someone else’s shoes, see things through their eyes and then get to work fixing our very wounded country. I mean, it’s — we have some real problems, and we do have a wounded country,” Trump said. “Many Americans are watching the unrest in Charlotte unfolding right before their eyes on the TV screens. Others are witnessing the chaos and the violence firsthand. Our country looks bad to the world, especially when we are supposed to be the world’s leader. How can we lead when we can’t even control our own cities?” Trump, who emphasized that it will be the 45th president’s responsibility “to address this crisis and save African-American lives,” has made an attempt to gain support from African-Americans in recent weeks, albeit through a narrative of poorly educated, impoverished black people who live in crime-ridden inner cities and who, after years of Democratic policies he says has failed them, have nothing to lose by supporting his campaign. Trump's overtures to black voters — often made in front of overwhelmingly white audiences — have done little to dent Hillary Clinton's 80-point advantage among African- Americans. And his sometimes ham-fisted appeals have come along with statements that have done himself further damage: Only hours earlier, he recommended a controversial stop-and-frisk policy, a policing tactic that has been found to disproportionately targets minorities, to curb violence in Chicago, Obama's hometown, and made the unsubstantiated claim that “drugs are a very, very big factor” in what's happening in Charlotte. Still, Trump has tried to cast himself as a unifying figure. Earlier Thursday, during a phone interview with “Fox and Friends,” the Republican presidential nominee said there “just seems that there’s a lack of spirit between the white and the black.” “I mean, it’s a terrible thing that we’re witnessing,” he continued. “You’re seeing it. I'm seeing it, and you look at what went on last night in Charlotte — a great place — and you just see it.” Protests over the killing of Keith Lamont Scott, a black man who was fatally shot by police on Tuesday, turned violent on Wednesday night, leading North Carolina Gov. Pat McCrory to declare a state of emergency in Charlotte. By Thursday, Charlotte officials and Scott's family were arguing over whether he had been carrying a gun when he was shot. Charlotte-Mecklenburg Police Chief Kerr Putney told reporters that police believe Scott was armed, though he acknowledged that a video of his encounter does not prove that conclusively. Putney said the video would be shown to Scott's family but did not commit to releasing it to the public. At a press conference Thursday afternoon, attorneys for Scott’s family refused to commit to calling for the video to be made public or to addressing the media after viewing it. Charles Monnett, one of the family’s lawyers, said the family's decision would depend on whether the video "can somehow help us reach that truth." Justin Bamberg, another of the family’s attorney’s, said he had not seen any evidence that a gun was present at the scene where Scott was shot. Bamberg dismissed photos showing a gun at the scene by remarking that “pictures pop up online all the time. They come from different sources.” He said that as far as he was aware, Scott did not own a gun. Bamberg also confirmed that Scott’s wife was present when he was shot. “At the end of the day, my priority is the greater good of this family first. That has to be understood,” Bamberg said when asked why the family’s legal team would not commit to calling for the video to be made public. “Yes, we want transparency. We don't create the facts. We live with the facts. But you can't take the burden that is placed on law enforcement as sworn officers and public servants and put that on a deceased person for their family who is in mourning.” The Obama administration, meanwhile, urged calm -- but the president himself had not made a statement as of 5:00 p.m. ET on Thursday. Attorney General Loretta Lynch addressed the “difficulties” her home state faces but warned against any violent reactions. “I know that these are difficult times, and I know that the events of recent days are painfully unclear and they call out for answers,” she said. “But I also know that the answer will not be found in the violence of recent days. Let us seek all peaceful way forward.” White House press secretary Josh Earnest said that the vast majority of people had demonstrated peacefully. “Unfortunately, we've seen situations in which a small number of people take advantage of that peaceful public protest to engage in criminal activity and, in some cases, violence,” he said. “We've often heard from the families of those who were killed urging people with concerns to express those concerns peacefully and to not perpetuate the cycle of violence. Those have often been quite powerful calls and those are calls that the president has strongly supported.” Wednesday's violence erupted as residents, outraged over Scott's death and that of an unarmed black man in Tulsa, Oklahoma, last week, looted and vandalized cars and businesses in downtown Charlotte. According to reports, police in riot gear used tear gas to try to calm protesters, several of whom were injured, including one who was shot by another protester, police said. “I see it even going out. There’s such a lack of — there’s a lack of spirit,” Trump said. “There’s a lack of something. Something’s going on that’s bad, and what’s going on between police and others is getting worse.” The real estate mogul renewed his call for law and order, pitching it as the solution to the unrest in Charlotte and outrage nationwide over police-involved shootings of black men, who in many cases have been unarmed when they were fatally shot. “Well, it’s wow, here we go again,” Trump said. “It’s very sad. When you look at what’s going on, it’s very sad. It’s very divided, our country, and it’s getting worse. I’m not overly surprised to see it, but it’s happening.” Trump argued that a dialogue between police and the communities they serve won’t solve this problem, pointing to the ambush in Dallas this summer, when a black man killed five officers and injured a dozen more. “If you look at Dallas, there was a dialogue. They prided themselves on dialogue,” Trump said. “And they were constantly talking and meeting and having community groups and, you know, that was — that was a pretty rough situation, to put it mildly. A terrible, terrible situation. That sounds good. It sounds right, but there’s something deeper than that.” What’s necessary, Trump maintained, is a combination of law and order and leadership that can unify a divided nation, leadership he intimated is lacking from America’s current leader. “Well, it really has to be — you have to have law and order at the time, you have to have, you know, you have to have a certain spirit, a certain unity, and there’s no unity,” Trump said. “You look at the level of hatred, the, you know, the rocks being thrown and everything happening. It’s so sad to see. You know, this is the United States of America. I mean, it’s so sad to see. But there’s just no unity. There has to be a unity message that has to get out, and it starts with leadership.” But what Trump didn’t say explicitly, his surrogates did. Former House Speaker Newt Gingrich and former New York Mayor Rudy Giuliani appeared in separate Fox News segments in which they both slammed Obama’s lack of leadership. “First of all, it’s a tragedy that eight years after our first African-American president took office, eight years after we’ve had two African-American attorney generals, the gap and the hostility, if anything, is worse, and I think that’s a tragic failure of leadership,” Gingrich said. “But my guess is he was afraid it’d make him a black president in a narrowing sense,” he added. “He could have launched a program to try to rebuild and reopen and re-engineer hope in these communities. And instead, he became the person who talked about, you know, the Cambridge policeman was wrong, and, you know, Ferguson was wrong and why Florida was wrong.” Giuliani said Obama should have lectured Americans on constitutional law Wednesday. Referring to last Friday’s shooting death of Terence Crutcher, who was unarmed with his hands raised when he was fatally shot by a white police officer, the former New York mayor acknowledged that that incident was “a more difficult situation” than what transpired in Charlotte that belongs in the “ambiguous, troubling category.” “But even there, you gotta say to people, ‘Wait, let the investigation play out.’ The president of the United States should have said that yesterday,” Giuliani said. “The president of the United States should have given people a teeny bit of a lecture on constitutional law, that we presume people innocent, and that same presumption exists for police officers as everyone else.”
Shimon Peres, whose public career spanned the entire history of the state of Israel, reaching the highest of highs (the Oslo Accord) and the lowest of lows (the assassination of his close colleague Yitzhak Rabin) in the mid-1990s, has died. Peres, who suffered a stroke Sept. 13, was 93. The Jerusalem Post said he "suffered severe organ failure Tuesday." Story Continued Below Peres and Rabin shared a Nobel Peace Prize in 1994 with Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat “for their efforts to create peace in the Middle East.” Their attempt, backed by President Bill Clinton, at solving the seemingly intractable Israeli-Palestinian conflict was the biggest breakthrough in the region since the Israel-Egypt accords of 1978 and offered, for a time, hope for better days. Peres, who began his public life in Israel under founding Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion, was twice Israel’s prime minister, in 1984-86 and 1995-96; he was also unofficially the prime minister in 1977. The 1995-96 stint had a tragic air to it — it followed Rabin’s slaying by an Israeli radical and was marked by Palestinian terrorism that, coupled with the assassination, halted momentum toward peace with the Palestinians. Connected to every major leader in Israeli history, Peres served in important government positions over eight decades, finally ending up in 2007 as president. He also had deep connections with the American Jewish community and U.S. political leaders. In 2012, President Barack Obama presented him with the Presidential Medal of Freedom. “No individual has done so much over so many years to build our alliance and to bring our two nations closer,” Obama said. Added Obama: “Shimon Peres — born in a shtetl in what was then Poland, who rose to become president of Israel — he is a dreamer. And rightly so. For he knows what we must never forget: With faith in ourselves and courage in our hearts, no dream is too big, no vision is beyond our reach.” Peres was born Shimon Persky on Aug. 16, 1923, in Wiszniew, Poland (now part of Belarus). Among his relations: a Perske family in New York City that would yield Betty Jane Perske (born 1924), who achieved enduring fame as the actress Lauren Bacall. Under the sway of Theodor Herzl’s Zionist philosophy, his family emigrated to Palestine in 1934. “To us,” Peres wrote in "The Imaginary Voyage," his 2000 book about him, “Herzl was an exceptional person, a kind of prince in exile or a king without a crown who had pointed out the route his people should follow.” In 1942, the remaining Jews in Peres’ hometown, including his grandfather, were exterminated by the Nazis. Peres lived on a kibbutz and, in 1945, he married Sonia Gelman. In 1947, Peres joined the Haganah, which had been formed as a Zionist self-defense organization and was now at the forefront of Jewish efforts to prepare for the inevitable fight for statehood. The United Nations approved a resolution calling for the partition of Palestine into two states in November 1947, and Ben-Gurion proclaimed Israel’s independence in May 1948. War followed, and Israel emerged from it a nation. Ben-Gurion appointed Peres director of naval services in 1948. “David Ben-Gurion was a mythic figure, the founding father of Israel and a modern-day prophet, but he was also a real man who stormed through history on human legs,” wrote Peres in his 2011 biography of his mentor. “It was my great privilege to know him and work with him for many years.” Peres served the young nation in just about every way imaginable, including a stint representing the Defense Ministry in the United States. He served in the Knesset (parliament) from 1959, and also as leader or deputy leader of Defense, Immigrant Absorption, Finance, Information, and Transport and Communication. A hawk on defense, Peres was known for his efforts to improve Israeli forces. In July 1976, he was Rabin’s defense minister when Israel launched a daring raid to rescue hostages held at Entebbe Airport in Uganda. Rabin was soon hit by a financial scandal, and Peres unofficially replaced him until elections could be held. In May 1977, Peres led the Labor coalition to its first-ever defeat, losing to Menachem Begin’s Likud Party. It was a setback that was to be repeated: For all his accomplishments, Peres couldn’t win over Israel’s voters. “He comes across,” wrote Marcus Eliason for The Associated Press in 1980, “as a technocrat, as much at home with the silicon chip as with French literature. Technology fascinates him, be it the atomic bomb or the zip code.” After Begin defeated him again in 1981, Peres took on Begin’s successor, Yitzhak Shamir, in 1984. This time, neither coalition was able to secure a majority, so a unity government was formed, with Peres serving the first 25 months as prime minister and the next 25 as Shamir’s vice premier/foreign minister. As prime minister, Peres withdrew Israeli forces from Lebanon and improved relations with Morocco and Egypt. As foreign minister in 1987, he negotiated a secret peace deal with Jordan’s King Hussein that was designed to pave the way for Palestinian talks. That agreement was scuttled by Shamir, who then secured his hold on the prime minister’s job in 1988. In 1992, a revitalized Rabin was elected prime minister. Peres became his foreign minister, and secret talks with Palestinians began at an isolated farmhouse in Norway. The Associated Press later reported “only 10 people in Israel knew that one of the Middle East’s most enduring taboos had been broken: Israel was talking to the PLO.” A breakthrough came in August 1993, followed by a Sept. 13 ceremony on the White House lawn where Rabin and Arafat shook hands in front of Clinton. ”The signing of the Israel-PLO accord is more than a political milestone,” Peres wrote in Tikkun magazine. “It is a transformative event which touches every Jewish family — physically, emotionally, spiritually.” Some Jews feared the Oslo Accord would lead to the destruction of Israel; their objections were mirrored among those Arabs who adamantly rejected Israel’s right to exist. But things seemed to be on track as the deals were followed by further agreements, as well as a landmark treaty with Jordan. Then came Rabin’s assassination by radical Jewish right-winger Yigal Amir on Nov. 4, 1995, and Israeli society was turned upside down. According to the book "Murder in the Name of God" by Michael Karpin and Ina Friedman, Amir and his fellow plotters considered whether Peres should be killed along with Rabin. The decision, however, was made for Amir: As a giant peace rally in Tel Aviv ended, the two leaders left separately. Karpin and Friedman described the moment: “As Yigal Amir sat on the concrete flower pot in the parking area, Shimon Peres descended the steps beside him. Amir noticed there was only one bodyguard with him and no policemen. Yigal’s arm moved to act, but he held back. Peres’s bodyguard cast a suspicious glance at him. ‘For God’s sake, what’s that dark guy doing down there? Is he one of us?’ the bodyguard whispered into his tiny microphone.” Shortly thereafter, Rabin exited and was gunned down by Amir. As Israel went into a period of mourning, debate and pained soul-searching, Peres became prime minister again. “I shared with him days of worry and grief,” Peres said of Rabin in addressing a joint session of Congress in December 1995. “I shared with him hours of reflection and decision. We complemented each other in a determined pursuit of the only objective worthy of the task bestowed upon us by the people of Israel: to carve a new era of security in peace, to build bridges across an Arab-Israeli divide, an impossible divide. And he, the captain, is no more.” Months later, Peres was ousted. He had confidently called for new elections, only to see his standing in the polls badly damaged by a rise in Palestinian terror attacks. Buoyed by opposition to Oslo, Benjamin Netanyahu prevailed in elections in May 1996. As would-be peace partners, Netanyahu and Arafat were mismatched and distrustful. The promise of 1993 disintegrated. After the electoral rebuke, Peres remained on Israel’s public stage. In 1996, he founded the Peres Center for Peace, an organization designed to promote peace with Israel’s neighbors, as well as between Jews and Arabs within Israel. He served as president from 2007 until his retirement in July 2014. Even after his retirement, he remained an advocate for finding a peaceful solution. "The alternative to two states is a continued war," he told The Associated Press in November 2015, "and nobody can maintain a war forever. If you say we should live on our sword don't forget that there are other swords as well." In August 2016, at the age of 93, he announced he had joined Snapchat. "Today all the young people are on Snapchat, and I am happy to be there with them," Peres said in explaining that he always wanted to stay on the cutting edge of technology. In 1996, Peres and King Hussein were awarded the annual Liberty Medal in Philadelphia for their peace efforts. In 2008, Peres received an honorary knighthood from Queen Elizabeth II. In 2013, Clinton saluted him for his 90th birthday: “You are the world’s social Einstein. You have tried to put together a unified theory of meaning to unite politics and philosophy and psychology and history and science and technology. Every one of us who has been blessed enough to know you … has been made a little bigger, a little stronger and a little more optimistic that one day your theory will be real,” he told Peres in Jerusalem, according to Haaretz. “When I was a child, Israel was a legend more than a reality,” Peres said at that gala. “She emerged from a dream, and today she has surpassed that dream.” Peres’ wife, Sonia, died in 2011; the couple had three children.
(CNN)Hillary Clinton holds a solid 6-point lead over Donald Trump heading into the first presidential debate next Monday, according to a new national poll released Friday. The McClatchy-Marist poll found Clinton leading Trump 45% to 39% among likely voters in a four-way race. Libertarian Gary Johnson garnered 10% support, and Green Party candidate Jill Stein polled at 4%. A Wall Street Journal/NBC poll this week found Clinton leading by a similar margin, 43% to 37%. Clinton maintains a massive lead among black voters in the new poll, pacing Trump 93% to 3% despite high-profile efforts by the Trump campaign to improve its outreach to minority voters. Clinton also has a large advantage over Trump among Latinos, 74% to 16%, but her support shrinks to 60% when third-party options are included. Both candidates continue to struggle with low favorability numbers -- 40% of likely voters say they have a favorable opinion of Clinton, and 37% say the same about Trump. Trump has a slight edge on the question of who is "honest and trustworthy," as 44% of likely voters think he is, while 36% think that Clinton is. The two run about even when voters pick who "shares their values" and who "cares about people like them." And Clinton beats Trump handily on "know how to do the job" and temperament. With the candidates' health on the minds of voters following Clinton's pneumonia diagnosis earlier this month, respondents were asked who has more stamina to be president -- 53% said that Trump does, while just 39% said the same of Clinton. Voters gave Clinton the edge over Trump on a series of key issues. On terrorism (52% to 41%), immigration (54% to 41%), creating good jobs (49% to 43%) and trade (52% to 42%), Clinton is viewed as the better candidate. The McClatchy-Marist poll was conducted through September 15 to 20, and surveyed 758 likely voters. It has a margin of error of +/- 3.6 points. 
The Obama administration on Thursday terminated the federal recognition of the nation's largest accreditor of for-profit colleges — a rare move that could ultimately jeopardize the ability of hundreds of schools to access federal funding. The decision against the Accrediting Council for Independent Colleges and Schools amounts to what is effectively a death penalty. The sanction had been sought by prominent critics of for-profit colleges like Sen. Elizabeth Warren, who on Thursday called the accreditor a "negligent" organization that had "rubber-stamped shady institutions" for years. Story Continued Below The accreditor's seal of approval had allowed billions of dollars in taxpayer-funded Pell Grants and federal loans to flow to the now-defunct Corinthian Colleges chain of schools, which shut down last year amid allegations that it lured in prospective students using false, inflated job placement rates. ACICS was also the accreditor for ITT Tech, another troubled for-profit college that declared bankruptcy last week. The accreditor says that about 600,000 students across the country are enrolled at colleges that it approves. ACICS officials on Thursday pledged to appeal the decision directly to Education Secretary John B. King Jr. — a move that would temporarily put the termination on hold. There’s no timeline for when King must act on that appeal, but earlier this week he pledged to get it “resolved quickly.” Roger Williams, the interim president of ACICS, said in a statement that the group was “disappointed” in the decision but “confident” it could show “ongoing progress” toward coming into compliance with federal rules. If the Education Department stands by its decision, ACICS-accredited colleges would have 18 months to find a new accreditor, or else their students would lose access to federal money. Congress earlier this week passed legislation that allows GI Bill educational benefits to continue to flow to student veterans for up to 18 months after their school’s accreditor loses its federal recognition. Like other college accreditors, ACICS acts as a gatekeeper for federal money: Last year, it allowed 243 colleges to tap into $4.76 billion worth of Pell Grants and federal student loans. The Obama administration's termination decision was based upon earlier Education Department findings that ACICS failed to properly monitor and discipline the colleges it oversees. “ACICS’s track record does not inspire confidence that it can address all of the problems effectively,” wrote Emma Vadehra, King's chief of staff, who issued the ruling. “Many of the problems identified in the staff report are serious and long-standing.” ACICS has been a prime target of for-profit critics and some Senate Democrats in recent years. Sen. Patty Murray (D-Wash.), on Thursday praised the administration’s decision in a statement, saying that “far too many schools have maintained their institutional accreditation, even while defrauding and misleading students.” But Rep. John Kline (R-Minn.) blasted the Education Department’s decision as “an unprecedented action that could disrupt the education of hundreds of thousands of students, particularly low-income and minority students.” The for-profit industry's trade association argued that the department’s decision is yet another example of the unfair targeting of their industry by the Obama administration. "The U.S. Department of Education's decision today will have horrible ramifications for hundreds of thousands of students, thousands of dedicated faculty and staff, and hundreds of communities and employers that rely on institutions accredited by ACICS,” said Steve Gunderson, who leads the Career Education Colleges and Universities trade group. "No Administration has politicized accreditation like the current one.” Ben Miller, senior director of Postsecondary Education at the Center for American Progress, authored a report criticizing the record of ACICS that was frequently cited by a federal panel in making its recommendation to nix the accreditor. Miller praised Thursday's decision, calling it a "landmark step for protecting students and taxpayers." Terry Hartle, senior vice president at the American Council on Education, said schools without any red flags can probably find a new accreditor in one year to 18 months, but it could take two years or much longer for other schools to find a new home. “It’s a major step,” Hartle said. “The department has done it at least once before, but never with an accreditation agency of this size.” Kimberly Hefling contributed to this report.
Former Massachusetts governor and 1988 presidential candidate Michael Dukakis knows a little something about unpredictable election cycles and over-preparing for debates. He spoke to ABC’s Jonathan Karl and Rick Klein this week on the “Powerhouse Politics” podcast and the topic of Hillary Clinton's extensive debate preparation came up. She has reportedly spent the past couple of weeks surrounded by advisers and briefing books, leaving the campaign trail in favor of mock debates. Dukakis advised the Clinton campaign to spend less time preparing for debates on topics she already knows well, because the real winner of the election would be, in his opinion, the campaign with the strongest field organization. “This is not the first time you’ve done this,” Dukakis said of Clinton, noting that most political debaters have had years of practice. “And sure, it’s very important, but lots of other things are important in campaigns. Including your field organization and the people that are working for you.” He advised Clinton to focus more on dealing with Trump's unorthodox approach to debating. "You've got to be spontaneous, feel spontaneous. It's going to be interesting to see how she deals with the Trump style," he said. In his own campaign 30 years ago, Dukakis, who was the longest-serving governor of Massachusetts, had a 17-percentage-point lead over Republican presidential nominee George H.W. Bush after the Democratic National Convention. By the second presidential debate, held at UCLA, he came off to voters as unfeeling when responding to a question about the death penalty and his wife. CNN's Bernard Shaw asked, “Governor, if Kitty Dukakis were raped and murdered, would you favor an irrevocable death penalty for the killer?” When Dukakis responded instantly, “No, I don’t, Bernard. And I think you know that I’ve opposed the death penalty during all of my life,” reporters and voters were shocked. He cited the inefficacy of the death penalty, but the public saw his response as cold. He told Klein and Karl on "Powerhouse Politics" that he found the question fair, and didn't realize how he had done in the debates until someone else told him later. He cited his own over-preparation as the reason for this second debate flop. In this case, his logical and formulaic response did not prevail over the show of emotion that spectators were expecting. In the end, Clinton’s main challenge and focus should be on persuading voters to truly evaluate their opinion of Trump, he said. “This guy has no business being president of the United States," he added. This episode of ABC News' "Powerhouse Politics" podcast is available on iTunes, Stitcher, Google Play and TuneIn.
The Sunlight Foundation, a nonprofit and nonpartisan advocacy group that supports open government and tracks money in politics, announced Tuesday that it was cutting staff and suspending its data-driven projects and reporting tools. The organization, which launched in 2006 with the express purpose of tracking money in politics, said that it would end its tool building and database maintenance, which are often used by reporters writing about campaign finance and politics. Michael Klein, the Sunlight Foundation’s board chairman, wrote in a post Tuesday explaining the decision to scale back dramatically. “While we are enormously proud of what Sunlight has accomplished over the past decade, and has come to stand for, we are also aware of the changes time has wrought,” Klein wrote in the post. “We are aware that the robust maturation of technology over the past decade has — happily but substantially — reduced the urgency of Sunlight’s early role as a leading transparency innovator. In addition, the board had to recognize that Sunlight’s initiating objective— to build support for better legislation against and regulation of the power of money in politics— has been significantly limited by the US Supreme Court’s 5-4 Citizens United decision.” It’s unclear the number of people who were laid off from Sunlight Foundation Tuesday, or who could be laid off in the future. The organization as of Tuesday morning employed around 25 people. Several staffers were informed today that their positions had been eliminated, but management is still in the process of informing others. At least one staff writer, Libby Watson, announced on Twitter that she had been laid off. A spokesperson for Sunlight Foundation said that financial challenges played a role in the cuts and suspension of its tools. Sunlight Foundation, a 501(c)(3) nonprofit, is funded through donations. “It became increasingly harder to fund and maintain all of these different things,” the spokesperson said, referring to the various tools Sunlight Foundation has built over the years, tracking everything from deleted tweets of politicians to political fundraising. Another factor was the organization’s inability to find a permanent executive director with a vision for the organization’s future, Klein wrote. Sunlight Foundation co-founder, Ellen Miller, stepped down from her role as executive director in 2014, and the organization struggled to retain upper management since then. “The board has not found a candidate for executive director who persuaded us of both a compelling new strategic vision and of their capacity to lead Sunlight to its achievement,” Klein wrote. “Accordingly, we have determined to explore alliances with other organizations similarly motivated, perhaps merging with one of them, in an arrangement that advances and preserves Sunlight’s mission and identity with increased efficiency and effectiveness.” The hope is that Sunlight Foundation’s work can live on and be built upon at likeminded organizations devoted to government transparency and campaign finance. Those possible partnerships – or a potential merger with another organization, which Klein said the organization was exploring — will play a role in the fate of the employees at the nonprofit. Those potential partnerships are expected to be announced in the coming weeks. For the time being, Sunlight Foundation hopes to continue scaled-back operations for as long as possible.
The Axe Files, featuring David Axelrod, is a podcast distributed by CNN and produced at the University of Chicago Institute of Politics. The author works for David Axelrod. Kiev (CNN)He was one of the most effective legislators in Washington, an icon of Democratic politics. Now Barney Frank says the left has been outmaneuvered by the tea party and the populist right. "To my great regret, the tea party movement has had much more impact on American politics than Occupy Wall Street," Frank, former congressman from Massachusetts, said to David Axelrod on "The Axe Files" podcast, produced by the University of Chicago Institute of Politics and CNN. "Because the tea party people correctly understood that, for them, what they needed to do was to get control of the political machinery, to register people to vote, to vote in primaries, and influence public policy," Frank continued. "Occupy Wall Street decided that they would bring about great change by smoking pot and having drum circles, and it turns out voting in primaries is a better way to do it." The key to bringing about political change, Frank believes, is not allowing one's ideals to overwhelm the sense of moral duty inherent in public service. "I do believe that, clearly, idealism comes first. You don't belong trying to run other people's lives unless you're committed to ideals," Frank said. "But the more idealistic you are, the more morally you are obligated to be pragmatic." Clinton, Trump poised for historic debate battle The conversation with Frank was taped in Kiev around the Yalta European Strategy conference, at which Frank and Axelrod participated in a panel discussion on the American election. During his more than 30 years in Congress, Frank had been involved in some of Washington's most consequential policy debates, including the bipartisan federal bailout of the financial industry in 2008 and the subsequent Dodd-Frank financial reform and consumer protection legislation enacted in 2010. Frank, who retired from Congress in 2013, says he can't help but feel somewhat pessimistic when he reflects on the deterioration of bipartisanship in Washington and the legislative paralysis it has spawned. However, if Hillary Clinton is elected president, then Frank, a staunch supporter of her candidacy, is cautiously hopeful that our nation's political gridlock will lessen. "If Hillary Clinton wins, one of the benefits, I hope, will be that the Republicans will take their party back. That's all that needs to happen," Frank said. "You don't need huge changes. You just need conservatives who believe in governance arguing with liberals who believe in governance." To hear the whole conversation with Frank, which also covered the corrupt machine politics in his childhood home of Hudson County, New Jersey; why he blames Newt Gingrich for the excessive partisanship that has come to define Washington, D.C.; and why Clinton's email issue has been an anchor on her candidacy, click on http://podcast.cnn.com. To get "The Axe Files" podcast every week, subscribe at http://itunes.com/theaxefiles. 
"That means jobs in infrastructure, in advanced manufacturing ... and small business because most of the new jobs will come from small business" — Hillary Clinton It’s a favorite line of almost all politicians, and Hillary Clinton has used it before. But small businesses are not in fact the job creators. That role belongs to new businesses. One recent study used Census data to look at job creation in 2005. It found that startups created 3.5 million net new jobs—a million more than were created in the entire private sector. In other words, non-startup businesses were responsible that year for a 1 million job decline in employment.
Washington (CNN)Hillary Clinton's top aide was given a limited immunity deal by the FBI in the investigation into Clinton's private email server, according to congressional sources Friday. Cheryl Mills, Clinton's chief of staff and adviser at the State Department, was given the narrow immunity deal during the FBI's investigation into the former secretary of state's use of a private email server during her time in office. "This is beyond explanation," Rep. Jason Chaffetz said in a statement. "The FBI was handing out immunity agreements like candy. I've lost confidence in this investigation and I question the genuine effort in which it was carried out. Immunity deals should not be a requirement for cooperating with the FBI." A spokeswoman for Chaffetz, chairman of the House Oversight Committee, confirmed that Mills was being given immunity. But a Democratic congressional source said the extent of the deal was limited to a search of her and another aide's laptop. According to the source, the FBI requested the laptops of Clinton's attorneys, Mills and Heather Samuelson, after they conducted a 2014 review of what emails Clinton sent were work-related and which were personal. Work-related emails were turned over to the State Department and personal emails were deleted. In exchange for giving the laptops they used to the FBI, Mills and Samuelson were given a limited immunity agreement from the Department of Justice, the Democratic source said, that they would not face prosecution for any information that was found on those laptops. "The DOJ and FBI considered my clients to be witnesses and nothing more," said Beth Wilkinson, an attorney for Mills. "Indeed, the Justice Department assured us that they believed my clients did nothing wrong. At all points, my clients cooperated with the government's investigation, including voluntarily participating in interviews with the FBI and DOJ. "The letters released to the Hill today only covered the computers that my clients had used in performing their legal work. Because of the confusion surrounding the various agencies' positions on the after-the-fact classification decisions, I advised my clients to accept this letter from DOJ." A Clinton campaign spokesman said Friday's leak -- coming three days before the first presidential debate -- was politically motivated. "Three days before debate, House GOP selectively leaks details from inquiry that was closed months ago w/no charges," Brian Fallon tweeted. A 'criminal scheme' The FBI announced in July that it would not recommend any criminal charges in relation to its lengthy investigation of Clinton's email use. FBI Director James Comey made the announcement in an unprecedented statement to reporters, during which he also excoriated Clinton's staff for its carelessness, all while saying no criminal acts were prosecutable. First on CNN: FBI director defends Clinton email probe, document releases Since then, congressional Republicans have called Comey to testify and have demanded the FBI send its investigation materials for review. Comey is appearing again on Capitol Hill, testifying before the House Judiciary committee next Wednesday. He is expected to face more questions from Republicans about his handling of the Clinton email probe. Republican candidate Donald Trump seized on the news, with his spokesman saying it proves a "criminal scheme." "No one with judgment this bad should be allowed to serve as President of the United States or hold any public office," said spokesman Jason Miller. "In light of this development, Hillary Clinton must immediately come forward and promise the American people that none of these individuals will ever serve in any capacity in her administration." The Democratic source, however, said that the immunity agreement was limited and that Mills testified before Congress and spoke with the FBI without invoking her Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination. "Mills was not given immunity for any testimony or statements she gave to DOJ. She gave voluntary statements to DOJ as she had previously to the Benghazi Committee," the source said. The top Democrat on the Oversight panel, Rep. Elijah Cummings criticized Republicans' response to the issue. "It's beyond disappointing—but not surprising in light of the election—that Republicans are rushing to leak inaccurate information about this very limited agreement between Ms. Mills and the Justice Department," Cummings said in an statement, and pointed to praise Mills received from Republicans for her participating in a nine-hour interview on the issue. An IT staffer has also been given immunity in exchange for his testimony. Mills is a former legal adviser to Clinton's campaign, was her chief of staff at the State Department and has served on the board of the Clinton Foundation. Her time at the State Department has been controversial both in terms of her handling of sensitive information via Clinton's email server and in her connection to the Clinton Foundation. While chief of staff at State, Mills traveled to New York on what her lawyer says was a volunteer basis to interview job candidates for the foundation, according to a CNN investigation. Top House Republicans ask DOJ to investigate whether Clinton lied to Congress CNN's David Fitzpatrick contributed to this report.
A potential compromise is in the works that could result in more Hillary Clinton emails recovered by the FBI being made public before the election. Last week, a judge ordered the processing under the Freedom of Information Act of a relatively meager 1,050 pages of the FBI-found emails before Election Day. Government lawyers say the FBI turned over about 5,600 work-related Clinton emails to the State Department beginning in July, although some are duplicates of records already processed and released. During a court hearing in a separate FOIA lawsuit Monday, another judge pushed for a deal that could accelerate the release of those messages, perhaps three-fold, in advance of the Nov. 8 vote, in which Clinton is hoping to win the White House in a showdown with Donald Trump. Acting on a case brought by Vice News journalist Jason Leopold, U.S. District Court Judge Rudolph Contreras ordered the two sides to try to work out a compromise to devote more of State's resources to processing Clinton's emails in the coming weeks, rather than other records Leopold has requested. Contreras ordered both sides to report by Wednesday whether a deal can be reached to speed review of the FBI-found Clinton emails. Ryan James, an attorney for Leopold, said that if it was "not possible" for State to allocate more resources to the Clinton email disclosure, Leopold would be "willing to sacrifice" pages he's due of other Clinton-related records in order to get more of the emails released. About 2,200 pages of assorted records are scheduled for processing in the coming month in Leopold's case. Speaking of the FBI-recovered emails, James said: "We believe those records are more important." Initially, Justice Department attorney Robert Prince did not sound terribly receptive to the proposal. He that said the email-focused part of Leopold's suit against the State Department doesn't even encompass the full set of FBI-provided emails, and that Leopold previously agreed to limit the Clinton email-related portion of his suit to the roughly 54,000 pages of emails Clinton turned over on paper in December 2014. The Vice News reporter initially submitted a very broad request for almost every Clinton-related record at State, but later agreed to narrow it to Clinton emails, as well as other records on specific topics. But Contreras said it would be odd to penalize Leopold for not having foreseen that some emails would be obtained by the FBI. "No one knew these documents existed ... and these documents should have been in the 55,000," the judge said. Prince said the fact they weren't in the roughly 54,000 pages of emails Clinton turned over did not necessarily reflect any impropriety. And there might be valid reasons these emails weren't in that set, he argued. "Just because Secretary Clinton deleted an email does not mean anything untoward happened here," Prince said, noting that federal employees are generally not obliged to save all emails, even those that are-work related. "I'm not suggesting that," replied Contreras, who issued the original order that led to State's public release of the 54,000 Clinton emails — a process that was completed in February. However, the judge said he believed both sides could work out a compromise that would reallocate some of State's resources to the Clinton email project. "It seems to me that if the two of you actually spoke to each other, you could reach some agreement," Contreras said. "I'm not going to order that everything be produced by Election Day. That's just impossible." The judge called a recess in the hearing and ordered the two sides to confer about a possible arrangement. After a half-hour break, Prince returned to the courtroom shortly before noon to say that Justice Department and State Department lawyers handling the case were open to a reallocation of resources but needed approval from Eric Stein, a State Department FOIA official who could not immediately be reached. The potential deal was discussed again Monday afternoon during a separate hearing before U.S. District Court Judge Randolph Moss, who is overseeing a suit Leopold filed against the FBI for certain records related to the Clinton email probe. James, who appeared by phone at both hearings, referred at one point to a "tentative agreement" that he said would result in processing an additional 2,200 pages of Clinton emails for release by Oct. 31. That would be on top of the earlier order — issued in a case brought by the conservative group Judicial Watch — that State process 350 pages every two weeks, leading to releases on Oct. 7, Oct. 21 and Nov. 4. But Justice Department lawyer Jennie Kneedler said James was overstating how close the parties were to a deal. "It's under consideration. I wouldn't describe it as a tentative agreement," Kneedler said. She also suggested, as Prince did at the earlier hearing, that with various records at various stages of the review process, suspending work on one set of records and moving people to another might not yield as many records as quickly as James was suggesting. "As I'm sure your honor could appreciate, it's not a simple transfer for resources," Kneedler told Moss. Kneedler was unable to tell Moss where the FBI got the additional Clinton emails, although the Justice Department lawyer suggested some may have come from an email account longtime Clinton aide Huma Abedin had on Clinton's server. The hearing before Moss proceeded on the assumption that if State determines the Clinton emails are entirely personal, they won't even be processed for release. However, since the records were obtained by the FBI in a criminal investigation, they could be FBI records even if not considered part of State's official files. That could result in partial release of some messages that are not work-related, even if State isn't processing them right now. During the morning hearing, Leopold's lawyer mounted a last-minute bid to try to get any additional emails that may be released sent "directly" to the Vice News reporter through his attorney, apparently in lieu of them being made public on State's website. The request echoed a debate among transparency advocates about whether records the government discloses should be immediately released to all via the Internet, or sent to the requester some time before everyone else gets them. Contreras turned down James' request that Leopold have first dibs on any additional emails. "I'm happy with them posting it on the website. FOIA is about informing the public what their government is up to and that means everybody," the judge said. The issue did not arise before Moss, with all parties saying they expected any additional Clinton emails to be posted on State's website. UPDATE (Monday: 4 p.m.): This post has been updated with details of the afternoon hearing.
Donald Trump's campaign isn't alone in patronizing his own businesses: taxpayers are indirectly doing so, too. Federal Election Commission records show that the U.S. Secret Service has paid the Trump campaign about $1.6 million to cover the cost of flying its agents with the candidate on a plane owned and operated by one of his companies. Story Continued Below It’s standard practice for the agency — which is tasked with protecting presidential candidates as well as presidents and other federal officials — to reimburse presidential campaigns for the cost of traveling with the candidates. In fact, the Secret Service has reimbursed the Clinton campaign, too: $2.6 million so far this cycle. The difference with Trump is that one of his companies, TAG Air, Inc., owns the plane, so the government is effectively paying him. The Clinton campaign, by contrast, mostly has been chartering planes from a private company called Executive Fliteways in which the Clintons do not have any ownership interest. “The taxpayers are actually reimbursing Trump for the travel of the Secret Service agents," said Brett Kappel, a campaign finance lawyer at the law firm Akerman LLP. "It's just another example of how the Trump campaign has taken an unprecedentedly large amount of its money and spent it at Trump-owned facilities." Trump campaign spokeswoman Hope Hicks responded to questions about the Secret Service payments by saying “everything was done in accordance with FEC guidelines and regulations. Please direct further questions to USSS.” Secret Service spokeswoman Nicole Mainor said the FEC “specifically requires security personnel such as the Secret Service to reimburse campaigns for seats” on charter aircraft. A POLITICO analysis of FEC records found that, through the end of August, Trump’s campaign has spent at least $8.2 million at Trump's own businesses, including to hold events at his hotels, buy food from his restaurants and rent office space for its headquarters in his Manhattan office tower. But the biggest chunk of the expenses, almost $6 million, were to TAG Air, Inc. Trump, who once said “I could be the first presidential candidate to run and make money on it,” has attracted criticism for mixing business and politics to an unprecedented degree. He has made a point of highlighting his properties on the campaign trail, leading opponents to accuse him of using his presidential bid to promote his brand and line his pockets. The campaign in a statement on Thursday rejected that criticism as “misleading and flat out wrong,” pointing out that the amount the campaign spent at Trump's businesses is far less than the $54 million of his own money that Trump has pumped into the campaign. The statement explained the campaign’s payments to TAG Air and other Trump-owned companies by saying “the campaign has used known quantities as far as event space, air travel and accommodations, and has fulfilled all FEC requirements throughout the campaign.” The government's practice of reimbursing campaigns for costs incurred by their Secret Service details dates from an era when campaigns were lower-budget affairs, the logic being candidates shouldn't have to use their own resources on required security, according to Craig Engle, a political lawyer at Arent Fox who helped draft the provision as a staffer at the Federal Election Commission. "It's basically just calling it even," Engle said. "It's either Trump making a contribution to the U.S. government, or the U.S. government reimburses the Trump campaign for its expenses." The same rationale applies to journalists who travel with the presidential candidates. The journalists or their employers reimburse the campaigns for travel costs. So it’s conceivable that media outlets might end up paying the Trump campaign for the cost of staying in a Trump-owned hotel or flying on a Trump-owned plane. The Secret Service could also end up paying Trump's hotels to put up his agents when the candidate stays there. But those expenses don't appear in FEC reports because the government pays them directly. The agency paid the Trump campaign an additional $724,000 for air travel that was refunded, according to the FEC reports, which do not offer an explanation for the refund. Of course, Trump also travels on the campaign trail with his own robust private security detail. In August, Trump’s campaign spent $232,800 on security-related costs, including payments to private companies such as Xmark LLC, Black Tie Protection Services and KS Global Group, as well as local police in places he visited.
Cities across the country suffered an uptick in violent crime last year, including a nearly 11 percent jump in murders from the year before, according to new statistics compiled by the FBI. There were 1,197,704 violent crimes committed around the nation last year -- a 3.9 percent increase from 2014, according to the FBI's Uniform Crime Report. However, last year's statistics were still slightly lower than in 2011, and more than 16 percent below the 2006 level, the FBI said today. It's important to note that big jumps in violent crime in only a handful of U.S. cities can drive the national average up. Some cities, like Chicago and Los Angeles, saw more than 24,000 violent crimes each last year, while so many other cities and towns across the country experienced single-digit or no violent crimes at all. Overall, murders accounted for nearly 15,700 of last year's violent crimes, and nearly three-quarters of them were committed with firearms, according to the FBI report.     "The report shows that there was an overall increase in violent crime last year, making clear what each of us already knows: that we still have so much work to do," Attorney General Loretta Lynch said at a violent-reduction summit in Little Rock, Arkansas. "But the report also reminds us of the progress that we are making. It shows that in many communities, crime has remained stable or even decreased from the historic lows reported in 2014. And it is important to remember that while crime did increase overall last year, 2015 still represented the third-lowest year for violent crime in the past two decades." Lynch said the nation must not become "complacent" about violent crime. "The residents of communities where violence remains a fact of daily life care little whether overall crime rates are up and down," she said. "And in the raft of data and analysis that can so often define our work, we must never forget that all of our numbers reflect the lives of real people." She emphasized that "there is no single cause of violence, and solutions will vary from one community to another."
Washington, D.C. (CNN)The Pentagon is considering a proposal that could send an additional 500 troops to Iraq to help Iraqi and Kurdish forces take Mosul from ISIS in the coming weeks, a US defense official told CNN. The possibility of sending some number of additional forces has been reported for several weeks, including by CNN. The Wall Street Journal was the first to report the proposal centered around the possibility of up to 500 additional forces. No final decision has been made, the official said. If the proposal is approved, it is anticipated that would be the final wave of additional US forces for fighting ISIS, since Mosul remains the last major ISIS stronghold in Iraq, the official added. If the proposal is okayed, it will raise the ceiling on the number of US troops in Iraq from 4,647 to over 5,000. Several hundred additional troops move in and out of Iraq on temporary deployment orders. Currently, there are 4,470 there under the approved ceiling. The Pentagon is not precisely revealing what the troops might be called upon to do. Some number are expected to be military advisors and trainers for Iraqi and Kurdish forces, whiles others could be involved in logistics such as moving supplies and troops around the battlefield, the official said. Arizona Republican John McCain, chairman of the Armed Services Committee, criticized the move Thursday. "Indeed, we read this morning of plans for yet another incremental increase of 500 troops in Iraq, one more step down the road of gradual escalation," he said. 
NEW YORK — President Barack Obama called on nations to "welcome the stranger" on Tuesday during a much-touted gathering on refugees aimed at rallying support for the record 65 million people displaced around the world. He also managed to take a veiled shot at Donald Trump. Story Continued Below The U.S.-sponsored summit, which drew a number of private sector participants, was one of two major refugee-related gatherings this week on the margins of the annual U.N. General Assembly meeting. The events took place as New York-area authorities pursued and caught an Afghan-born bombing suspect, the hunt for whom fueled the debate in the U.S. presidential race over refugees. Trump has slammed Democratic rival Hillary Clinton for her openness to taking in refugees and other immigrants. (One of Trump's sons, in a tweet that provoked backlash on Monday, compared refugees to poisonous Skittles.) Clinton has defended her stance, while calling for proper vetting of all who enter the U.S. In a subtle rebuke of the Republican nominee's promise to build a wall along the U.S.-Mexico border, Obama framed the world's response to the refugee crisis as "a test of our common humanity — whether we give into suspicion and fear and build walls or whether we see ourselves in one another." The president also spoke of the cause of one of the biggest refugee crises today: the war in Syria. But he gave no indication he was willing to consider a greater U.S. military role to help end that conflict. "Wars like the savagery in Syria must be brought to an end," he said, adding that it must be "through political settlements and diplomacy, not simply by bombing." The White House unveiled a series of commitments from the international community in response to the call for action from Obama and other allies in the United Nations. They include some $650 million, including in-kind contributions, from more than 50 private-sector entities. The largest share was a $500 million investment pledge from billionaire George Soros, who wrote in The Wall Street Journal that he will pump money into "startups, established companies, social-impact initiatives and businesses founded by migrants and refugees themselves." Ahead of this week's summits, the Obama administration announced the United States will take in 110,000 refugees from around the world, including a "significant" number of Syrians, in the fiscal year that starts Oct. 1. That figure disappointed refugee advocates who'd hoped the administration would take it closer to 200,000 refugees. The president is, after all, urging other countries to double their intake, and a growing number of countries have stepped up to take refugees for the first time or expand their resettlement programs. In the fiscal year wrapping up this month, the U.S. will have accepted 85,000 refugees. Still, advocacy groups have expressed overall strong support for the U.S.-sponsored summit, saying it will achieve concrete results. Activists were less impressed with a U.N.-sponsored refugee summit held Monday, which kicked down the road until 2018 many difficult decisions about how the global community should handle migration crises.
Washington (CNN)Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton are deadlocked in North Carolina, according to a new poll released Tuesday. The poll from Elon University found Trump leading Clinton by 1 point among likely voters, 44% to 43%, a statistical tie, within the 3.86-point margin of error. Libertarian Gary Johnson drew 6% support, while another 6% said they were undecided. Clinton and Trump maintain large advantages in North Carolina with key constituencies -- Clinton receives the support of 98% of black voters, while Trump is backed by 65% of white voters. The gender divide is less severe, however, as Clinton leads Trump among women by 6 points while Trump's advantage among men is 10 points. Majorities said that both Trump and Clinton were worse than typical Republican and Democrat candidates for president, though more were likely to describe Clinton than Trump as "about the same as usual." The Elon poll also surveyed likely voters on their perceptions of the candidates' health -- a major focus in the presidential race after Clinton was diagnosed with a case of pneumonia two weeks ago. Seventy-seven percent of North Carolina voters said they think Trump is healthy enough to be president, but only 56% said the same about Clinton. Opinions were sharply divided along partisan lines. Additionally, just under half said that both Clinton and Trump had not provided enough medical information. With fewer than 50 days remaining in the race, 6% of North Carolina likely voters said they remain undecided, according to the poll. But when asked if they had to choose between Clinton, Trump and Johnson, 35% chose Clinton, compared to 18% for Trump and Johnson each. When Johnson voters were asked to choose between Clinton and Trump, slightly more said they prefer Trump, though nearly 4 in 10 continued to indicate no preference. North Carolina likely voters were also asked if they thought Russian President Vladimir Putin or President Barack Obama was a better leader, likely prompted by Trump's recent comments that Putin has been "far more" of a leader than Obama. Overall, 60% chose Obama, while 23% said Putin -- but a plurality (39%) of Republicans chose Putin, with about a quarter saying they "don't know." The Elon University poll of North Carolina surveyed 644 likely voters, with a margin of error of +/- 3.86 points. It was conducted from September 12-16. 
Sen. Ben Sasse is seeking answers from President Barack Obama about a pair of wire transfer payments from the U.S. to Iran that seemingly undercut the explanation he gave for a cash payment to the Islamic republic last January. Sasse’s letter comes on the heels of a POLITICO report in which the Treasury Department confirmed that the U.S. made two separate wire transfer payments, one in July 2015 and another in April 2016, to Iran. The 2015 wire transfer in particular contradicts the president’s explanation of a $400 million payment to Iran last January, which Obama said had to be delivered in cash “precisely because we are so strict in maintaining sanctions and we do not have a banking relationship with Iran that we couldn't send them a check and we could not wire the money.” Story Continued Below The Treasury Department spokesman declined to offer an explanation as to why the July 2015 wire transfer was possible under U.S. sanctions against Iran while the January 2016 payment was impossible. “These wire transfers, Mr. President, seemingly contradict what you have previously told the American people,” Sasse (R-Neb.) wrote in his letter to the president. In his letter to the president, Sasse asks Obama how many wire transfer payments to Iran the U.S. government has made any how many payments it has made in cash. He also asks, among other questions, to which sanctions was Obama referring when he said at his Aug. 4 press conference that a wire transfer payment to Iran would have been impossible.
Donald Trump's presidential transition operation has recruited GOP energy lobbyist Mike McKenna and vocal climate skeptic Myron Ebell to run teams focused on the Energy Department and EPA respectively, according to people familiar with the hires. David Bernhardt, the co-chair of the natural resources department at the firm Brownstein Hyatt Farber Schreck and a George W. Bush Interior Department official, is leading the transition's Interior Department team, sources said. Story Continued Below McKenna, is a well-connected energy lobbyist with ties to the industry-backed American Energy Alliance and Institute for Energy Research. McKenna has lobbied for the Dow Chemical Company, Southern Company and Koch Companies Public Sector, which terminated his contract in May, according to public records. According to his website, McKenna previously served as an "external relations specialist" at the Energy Department. Ebell is the director of the Center for Energy and Environment at the Competitive Enterprise Institute. He is a prominent skeptic of climate science and a regular critic of the Obama administration's environmental policies. But he has never worked at the EPA. Bernhardt, a veteran hand at Interior, served as deputy chief of staff and director of congressional and legislative affairs before becoming solicitor. His current lobbying clients, according to congressional disclosures, are the recreational company Active Network LLC and California's Westlands Water District. As POLITICO previously reported, veteran Capitol Hill aide Mike Catanzaro is helping to lead the transition's energy team. McKenna, Ebell and Bernhardt did not comment and the Trump campaign did not respond to a request for comment. E&E News first reported the hires.
Donald Trump will detail his plan to destroy the Islamic State during Monday night’s debate against Hillary Clinton — if asked, according to his campaign manager. Asked by Willie Geist during MSNBC’s “Morning Joe” whether Trump will offer specifics beyond his broad statement that he will “knock the hell out of ISIS,” Trump campaign manager Kellyanne Conway replied in the affirmative. Story Continued Below “He certainly has a plan. I’ve heard it,” Conway said. “This is his debate tonight, Willie, he’ll tell you if that question is asked. But there’s also — you know, people are just amazed that Hillary Clinton would put on her campaign website what her plan to defeat ISIS is. Is it that ISIS can’t read that plan?” Trump has vowed to “knock the hell out of ISIS” but has been mum on how he would do so, suggesting that he doesn’t want to tip his hand to the terrorist network. Pressed by Geist and Mika Brzezinski on whether voters deserve to know details about his plan before they cast their votes, or at least a sense that he has any “knowledge of the landscape,” Conway said, “Yes, and he’ll be happy to offer those specifics without telling the enemy exactly what we’re going to do.” “So just to put a button on it, we’ll get the ISIS plan tonight in the debate?” Geist asked. “You will get his view of how best to defeat the enemy without telling ISIS particularly, specifically what it’s going to be,” she said.
Washington (CNN)A spokesman for the State Department acknowledged in a recent interview there's "potential" for ISIS terrorists to infiltrate refugee camps in the Middle East, but stood by the rigor of US vetting standards for refugees. "I wouldn't debate the fact that there's the potential for ISIS terrorists to try to insert themselves," John Kirby said on "Fox and Friends" Wednesday. "And we've seen that in some of the refugee camps in Jordan and in Turkey where they'll try to insert themselves into the population." The acknowledgment comes amid criticism the Obama administration's refugee resettlement policy poses security risks to the US, a charge made often by Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump on the campaign trail. "Is it perfect?" Kirby asked of the vetting process. "Can it be perfect? Can it be foolproof? Well, probably not. No. But it is very, very serious." "I can tell you that the vetting is tough," he added. "It is very, very stringent." Kirby's statement also comes as the State Department is preparing to set new resettlement goals for 2017. Officials tell CNN the US next year plans to take in 110,000 refugees, up from 85,000 in the 2016 fiscal year, but it's unclear how many of these will be from Syria or the surrounding region. 
PITTSBURGH — Attempting to strike a unifying, presidential tone while commenting Thursday about urban unrest in Charlotte, Donald Trump veered temporarily off-script and attributed the violence — without offering any evidence — to drugs. "If you're not aware, drugs are a very, very big factor in what you're watching on television," he said. Story Continued Below Following a night of wall-to-wall cable coverage of the violent protests in response to another police shooting of an African-American man, the Republican presidential nominee aimed to square his law-and-order philosophy with his eleventh-hour outreach efforts to the country's African-American communities. Trump, who trails Hillary Clinton by approximately 80 percent points among African-American voters, explained that his promise to restore order to cities plagued by racial tensions is an effort to protect disproportionately affected minority communities. "There is no compassion in tolerating lawless conduct. Crime and violence is an attack on the poor, and will never be accepted in a Trump Administration," he said at the beginning of remarks to the Shale Insight Convention. "Our job is not to make life more comfortable for the violent disrupter, but to make life more comfortable for the African-American parent trying to raise their kids in peace, to walk their children to school and to get their children a great education. We have to cherish and protect those people." Trump's stated concern is of a piece with his recent visits to African-American churches in Detroit and Flint and his stumping in Ohio Wednesday with boxing promoter Don King, who vouched for the candidate's character. But his ad-libbed comment blaming drugs for these violent uprisings seemed to validate stereotypes about black communities — seemingly supporting the criticism that Trump's larger outreach effort to African-American voters is really an attempt to convince moderate Republican women that he isn't a racist. As he often does, Trump praised police officers for risking their lives but acknowledged, as he did on Wednesday, that their judgment in pressure situations is not infallible. "Police are entrusted with immense responsibility, and we must do everything we can to ensure they are properly trained, that they respect all members of the public, and that any wrongdoing is always vigorously addressed," Trump said. "But our men and women in blue also need our support, our thanks, and our gratitude. They are the line separating civilization from total chaos."
About the survey The CNN/KFF Poll was conducted by telephone August 9-September 5 among 1,614 adults, including 701 who were identified as working-class whites -- white non-Hispanic adults who do not hold a four-year degree and, if under age 25, are not currently enrolled in school. Results for all working-class white voters have a margin of sampling error of +/-5 percentage points; it is 6 points for results among white working-class voters who support Trump. Full poll results. 
(CNN)Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump offered vastly different proposals Wednesday to change police practices following fatal shootings of African-American men in Oklahoma and North Carolina. When asked how he would stop violence in the black community, Trump said he would take the controversial stop-and-frisk practice nationwide. "I think you have to," the Republican nominee said at a town hall with Fox News host and Trump supporter Sean Hannity. "We did it in New York, it worked incredibly well and you have to be proactive and, you know, you really help people sort of change their mind automatically." Civil liberties groups have blasted the practice as targeting minorities and some investigators have questioned its effectiveness. Trump touts stop-and-frisk practice amid black outreach Meanwhile, Clinton campaign manager Robby Mook said the Democratic nominee plans to develop national standards for police intended to "prevent situations like this." Speaking on CNN's "New Day," Mook said Clinton wants to "restore bonds between communities and law enforcement." That, he said, would involve "investing in community policing and making sure that local police have the resources to build the relationships in the community to prevent something like this from happening." The candidates -- just days away from their first in-person clash on the debate stage -- were also far apart on the underlying causes of the shootings. Clinton connected police shootings to "systemic racism" while Trump suggested the officer in Oklahoma "choked." Comments carry weight This is not the first time Trump or Clinton have addressed police shootings during this lengthy campaign season. But as the race nears its conclusion in less than two months, their comments carry even more weight. And the stakes are especially high since one of the shootings occurred in North Carolina, a critical swing state with a sizable African-American population that both campaigns are working hard to reach. Trump and Clinton hit the campaign trail following an evening of protests and occasional violence in Charlotte after police killed Keith Lamont Scott in an apartment complex parking lot as officers looked for another man named in a warrant they were trying to serve. That followed the fatal shooting of Terence Crutcher in Tulsa, Oklahoma, last week after his car was found abandoned in the middle of the road. Trump 'very troubled' by Oklahoma fatal police shooting Clinton addressed the shootings in a speech in Orlando, Florida, on Wednesday afternoon. "There is still much we don't know yet about what happened in both incidents. But we do know that we have two more names to add to a list of African-Americans killed by police officers in these encounters," Clinton said. "It's unbearable. And it needs to become intolerable." She said she's spoken with law enforcement leaders "who are as deeply concerned as I am, and as deeply committed as I am to reform." And, she said, she's spoken with mothers whose children have been killed, "and young people who feel that, as far as their country's concerned, their lives seem disposable." "We've got to do better. And I know we can. And if I'm elected president, we will. And we will do it exactly together, which is the only way it can be done," Clinton said. Trump tweeted calls for unity following the violence in Charlotte. His comment during the Fox town hall that the female officer involved in the Tulsa shooting might have "choked" was notable considering he typically emphasizes support for law enforcement officers. But Trump said he'd seen the widely circulated video of the incident in Tulsa. "That man went to the car, hands up -- put his hands on the car," Trump said. "To me it looked like he did everything you're supposed to do. And he looked like a really good man." Christie vs. Clinton Meanwhile, one of Trump's top supporters -- New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie -- lambasted Clinton for her response on conservative talk radio host Laura Ingraham's show. In a radio interview Tuesday, Clinton had cited the need to address "systemic racism" and "implicit bias" in police forces -- while praising "honorable, cool-headed police officers." 2016: Last call for working class whites? Christie labeled those remarks a "disgrace" Wednesday. "She's a disgrace. She's a disgrace and those comments are a disgrace," Christie said Wednesday on "The Laura Ingraham Show." "It's typical of Hillary Clinton. She knows nothing but the mouth never stops." Trump, however, has also displayed a tendency to speak about events before all the facts are made clear. He notably called the explosion in New York City over the weekend a "bomb" 30 minutes after the incident, despite a lack of official confirmation. African-American outreach The shootings come as Trump and Clinton confront unique challenges with African-American voters. Clinton's weakness is among millennial voters across the board -- many of whom have told pollsters they are gravitating toward Libertarian Gary Johnson and Green Party nominee Jill Stein. Trump, meanwhile, is attempting to chip into Clinton's commanding lead among African-American voters overall while also appealing to white voters who tend to support the GOP but have been turned off by his rhetoric. That effort hit turbulence Wednesday when Trump campaigned alongside long-time boxing promoter Don King Wednesday in Ohio. King, who is black, used the N-word while introducing Trump, arguing that African-Americans cannot achieve success while emulating whites because they will remain "negroes." "If you're poor, you are a poor negro -- I would use the n-word -- but if you're rich, you are a rich negro. If you are intelligent, intellectual, you are intellectual negro. If you are a dancing and sliding and gliding n***** -- I mean negro -- you are a dancing and sliding and gliding negro," King said, laughing along with the crowd after the slip-up. "You're going to be a negro 'til you die." The political history of Don King Trump also caused controversy Tuesday night when he told a nearly all-white crowd in North Carolina that "we're going to rebuild our inner cities because our African-American communities are absolutely in the worst shape that they've ever been in before. Ever. Ever. Ever." His remark -- ignoring the nation's deeply flawed history of slavery, Jim Crow laws, segregation and more -- drew a stern rebuke Wednesday from Rep. John Lewis, a Georgia Democrat and hero of the civil rights movement. "Is he saying that the conditions are worse than slavery? Is he saying that the conditions are worse than the signs that I that saw when I was growing up that said 'white men,' 'colored men,' 'white women,' 'colored women?'" Lewis said. "Where is he coming from?" 
Washington (CNN)President Barack Obama ignored his own "no hats" edict Monday when he partook in a traditional American Indian ceremony in Washington. Appearing at the White House's Tribal Nations conference, Obama was wrapped in a wool blanket and crowned with a straw hat as a show of honor. Brian Cladoosby, president of the National Congress of American Indians, said the blanket was called "Rhythm of the Land." He said there was a blanket set aside for first lady Michelle Obama as well. As members from different tribes played drums and shakers, Obama smiled and faced an audience comprised of representatives from the 567 federally recognized tribes that were invited to attend. He removed the hat after 20 seconds or so as the ceremony proceeded. "What an amazing honor and what a kind gesture for the honor song and the blanket and the hat," Obama said afterward, calling the event "very moving" and a reflection of the friendships he's developed among tribal communities. An embroidered inscription on the blanket gave Obama's Crow namesake, "Black Eagle," and a description: "Awe Kooda Bilaxpak Kuxshish," or "One Who Helps People Throughout the Land." A label identified the blanket as a product of the Pendleton Woolen Mills line. "I have to say that I am very glad that you also have a blanket for Michelle so she doesn't steal mine," he said. "She would, too!" Obama used his remarks to highlight his efforts toward improving conditions on reservations, including bolstering schools and advancing medical care. The President has typically been wary of donning any headwear besides a baseball cap -- a political lesson he imparted during an appearance at the White House in 2013. "Here's the general rule: You don't put stuff on your head if you're president. That's politics 101," he said when presented with a football helmet from the US Naval Academy. "You never look good wearing something on your head." 
Republican vice presidential candidate Mike Pence called the outrage surrounding a social media post from his running mate’s son “remarkable,” especially when compared to Hillary Clinton’s proposals on immigration and national security. Donald Trump Jr. posted an image to Twitter on Monday night with a bowl of Skittles and the message “If I had a bowl of skittles and I told you that just three would kill you. Would you take a handful? That’s our Syrian refugee problem.” Along with the image, Trump Jr. wrote “This image says it all. Let's end the politically correct agenda that doesn't put America first. #trump2016.” Story Continued Below The message from the son of the Republican presidential nominee almost immediately drew criticisms of racism. The Skittles metaphor is similar to one that white supremacists have used in the past, but Pence dismissed the criticism in an interview Tuesday with MSNBC’s Kelly O’Donnell. “It is remarkable to me to see the level of outrage about a metaphor used by Don Jr. when Hillary Clinton is calling for a 550 percent increase in the Syrian refugee program,” Pence said. “All the while our FBI and public safety officials tell us we can't know for sure who those people are coming into this country.” Trump campaign senior communications adviser Jason Miller echoed that comparison in a statement Tuesday afternoon, calling Trump Jr. "a tremendous asset to the campaign." "America has become less safe under Hillary Clinton and Barack Obama, and Clinton's planned 550 percent increase in Syrian refugees is a dangerous proposal that will put American lives at risk," Miller's statement read. "Speaking the truth might upset those who would rather be politically correct than safe, but the American people want a change, and only Donald Trump will do what's needed to protect us."
Kenansville, North Carolina (CNN)Donald Trump thinks black communities in the US are "absolutely in the worst shape that they've ever been in before." Trump made the comment as he rallied supporters here on Tuesday and made his usual "what do you have to lose" pitch to African-American voters -- few of whom attended his rally in this rural part of this battleground state. "We're going to rebuild our inner cities because our African-American communities are absolutely in the worst shape that they've ever been in before. Ever. Ever. Ever," Trump said to approving nods from the nearly all-white crowd. "You take a look at the inner cities, you get no education, you get no jobs, you get shot walking down the street. They're worse -- I mean, honestly, places like Afghanistan are safer than some of our inner cities," he continued. "And I think it's resonating." His comments came despite the fact that African-Americans in the US have faced dramatically worse circumstances throughout history -- from slavery to Jim Crow laws. President Barack Obama, the first black US president, took on similar assertions by Trump last Saturday while speaking Congressional Black Caucus gala. "You may have heard Hillary's opponent in this election say that there's never been a worse time to be a black person. I mean, he missed that whole civics lesson about slavery or Jim Crow," Obama had said. "But we've got a museum for him to visit, so he can tune in. We will educate him." In harsh rebuke of Trump, Obama referred to the businessman as "somebody who has fought against civil rights and fought against equality and who has shown no regard for working people most of his life." On Trump's quest to win over African-American voters, Obama quipped: "Well, we do have challenges, but we're not stupid." The Republican nominee has made a concerted effort to reach out to black voters over the last month, including visiting a predominantly black church in Detroit, and visiting the water plant and a church in the majority-black city of Flint, Michigan. But his visit to Flint was marred in controversy after the church's pastor interrupted Trump to keep him from leveling political attacks. He was also met with hecklers there who called out his record as a landlord in New York, where he faced a civil rights lawsuit from the Justice Department in 1973 -- which Trump settled -- alleging he discriminated against black tenants. Critics have also panned Trump's outreach to African-Americans for painting the lives of black Americans in broad-brushed and bleak terms. Trump has argued that black voters should flock to his candidacy because he will "fix it" and has slammed his Democratic rival Hillary Clinton for seeing black Americans as votes, not as people -- even though she has a history of championing civil rights issues and more than 9-in-10 African-Americans support Clinton, according to recent polling. Trump's support with African-Americans stands in the low single digits according to recent national polls. Despite his words aimed at drawing black voters to his campaign, Trump on Tuesday did not address the most police recent shooting of an unarmed African-African American man. Terence Crutcher, a 40-year-old black man, was shot by police Friday night in Tulsa, Oklahoma. Clinton addressed the shooting earlier Tueaday on "The Steve Harvey Morning Show," calling it "unbearable" and arguing for the need to "tackle systemic racism." 
(CNN)Drawing enormous support from the state's non-white voters, Hillary Clinton holds a 5-point edge over Donald Trump in Florida, according to a new poll from Monmouth University out Tuesday. The poll found Clinton leading Trump among likely voters in the crucial battleground, 46%-41%. Libertarian Party nominee Gary Johnson and Green Party nominee Jill Stein, both of whom will be on Florida's ballot, drew 6% and 1%, respectively. Monmouth's poll produced another unfavorable finding for Trump: 54% of Florida voters believe the GOP nominee's recent turnabout on President Barack Obama's origins was made for political reasons. Only 24% think Trump believes that Obama is a natural-born citizen. After years of promoting conspiracy theories regarding the first black President's birthplace, Trump changed course last week. He still has plenty of work to do on that front in Florida. According to the poll, Clinton leads Trump among Hispanic, black and Asian voters in the state, 69%-16%. Those three blocs comprise one-third of Florida's electorate. Clinton's 5-point advantage is wider than other recent polls out of the state, including a CNN/ORC survey released last week that found Trump up by 3, within the poll's 3.5 percentage point margin of error. But it's smaller than her lead in the previous Monmouth poll in Florida last month, which showed Clinton up by 9. That margin was also larger than other Florida polls conducted at the time. The latest Monmouth poll was conducted September 16-19 using phone interviews with 400 likely Florida voters. It has a margin of error of 4.9%. 
(CNN)Former House Speaker John Boehner announced Tuesday he is joining a major lobbying shop as an adviser. The former House speaker will serve as a "strategic adviser" at Squire Patton Boggs, an international law firm with clients that include Fortune 100 companies and national governments. The firm has ties to Boehner's native Ohio, with its headquarters in Cleveland. "I left the private sector and got into public service decades ago because I wanted to help remove government barriers to economic growth and job creation, and that's still the mission that drives me," Boehner said in a statement. In a press release on Tuesday, the firm said that Boehner "will not lobby" but will instead "serve as a strategic adviser to clients in the US and abroad, and will focus on global business development." It's the second new gig in as many weeks for Boehner, who abruptly resigned from Congress a year ago this month. A heavy smoker, Boehner joined the tobacco company Reynolds American last week as a director. 
11/19/16, 3:14 PM CET BY Chris Spillane So is anti-establishment message of Nigel Farage, the Labour leader said. 11/19/16, 1:55 PM CET BY Sarah Wheaton Alumni of the Obama White House spent days mourning Trump’s win. Now they’re ready to fight. 11/19/16, 11:37 AM CET BY Chris Spillane Dick Schoof: ‘Chance of attack in the Netherlands is real.’ 11/19/16, 10:38 AM CET BY Chris Spillane Government could focus on starting the process of leaving the bloc sooner. 11/19/16, 10:13 AM CET BY Benjamin Oreskes Diplomats say the president-elect already has a playbook to undermine the global body. 11/19/16, 10:01 AM CET BY Michael Crowley and Nahal Toosi Flynn, Bannon represent ‘Islamophobic’ thinking of the type rejected by Bush and Obama, critics say. 11/19/16, 5:25 AM CET BY Michael Kruse The blue-collar workers who put Donald Trump in the White House are ready for him to deliver. How much time will they give him? 11/19/16, 5:20 AM CET BY Ryan Heath, Tara Palmeri, Harry Cooper and Quentin Ariès  11/18/16, 9:09 PM CET BY Harry Cooper A Polish political party’s links to a pan-European group raise questions about funding. 11/18/16, 6:31 PM CET BY Tom McTague Signs that Britain’s political class is coming to terms with June’s EU referendum. 11/18/16, 6:26 PM CET BY Hortense Goulard Conservative MEP denounced Juncker’s efforts to drum up support for Schulz as ‘outrageous.’ 11/18/16, 5:31 PM CET BY Ivo Oliveira Drawing the top stories around the globe. 11/18/16, 4:55 PM CET BY Cynthia Kroet Italians are likely to reject prime minister’s reform package in next month’s vote. 11/18/16, 4:48 PM CET BY Elana Schor, Kyle Cheney and Louis Nelson The president-elect starts building out his administration with loyalists. 11/18/16, 4:01 PM CET BY Nicholas Vinocur Left-wingers hope that by backing Alain Juppé, they will see off two political enemies. 11/18/16, 3:15 PM CET BY Cynthia Kroet Jens Stoltenberg did not mention the total number or reasons for the requests. 11/18/16, 3:02 PM CET BY Florian Eder and Janosch Delcker Wird Martin Schulz die SPD in den Bundestagswahlkampf führen? Oder schafft er es, doch noch einmal EU-Parlamentspräsident zu werden? Er muss sich bald entscheiden. 11/18/16, 2:34 PM CET BY Anthony Skinner Syrian refugees are pawns in Turkish president’s pursuit of power. 11/18/16, 2:33 PM CET BY Charlie Cooper Shadow Brexit secretary ‘seriously pissed off’ at colleague’s comments. 11/18/16, 2:33 PM CET BY Cynthia Kroet German chancellor is ‘championing the interests of Europe,’ Witold Waszczykowski said. 11/18/16, 12:58 PM CET BY Cynthia Kroet Nikola Gruevski stepped down in January over a wire tapping scandal. 11/18/16, 12:48 PM CET BY Barbara Surk Jens Stoltenberg said he had a ‘good talk’ with the president-elect. 11/18/16, 12:35 PM CET BY Esther King Majority of those who failed to gain international asylum come from the Balkan states. 11/18/16, 11:48 AM CET BY Esther King Immigration is what keeps the country running, says pro-EU Lord. 11/18/16, 10:57 AM CET BY Esther King Conditions at offshore detention center for refugees are ‘cruel, inhuman and degrading,’ said François Crépeau. 11/18/16, 9:36 AM CET BY Esther King Foreign Minister Linas Linkevičius warned that Vladimir Putin could use transition period in Baltics, Syria. 11/18/16, 8:55 AM CET BY MADELINE CONWAY Former ambassador to the UN says there are ways of supporting the opposition that does not involve the use of American military force. 11/18/16, 8:39 AM CET BY Cristiano Lima Her presence is likely to raise fresh concerns about potential conflicts of interest. 11/18/16, 8:35 AM CET BY Bryan Bender The retired lieutenant general’s hardline views on Islam — as well as laudatory statements about Russia — have made him a lightning rod, as did his strident attacks on Hillary Clinton during the campaign. 11/18/16, 5:33 AM CET BY Nicholas Vinocur The center-right’s first ever presidential primary looked all over. Now it’s wide open. 11/18/16, 5:25 AM CET BY Tim King The Günther Oettinger controversies are tainting this European Commission by intimate association. 11/18/16, 12:17 AM CET BY Nahal Toosi Much of Europe is alarmed over what Trump’s presidency could augur. 11/17/16, 11:52 PM CET BY Shane Goldmacher and Andrew Restuccia ‘We feel way ahead of schedule and never in a rush to do the wrong thing,’ said campaign manager Kellyanne Conway. 11/17/16, 9:42 PM CET BY Jacopo Barigazzi Maltese interior minister not impressed with Bratislava’s migration plan. 11/17/16, 9:33 PM CET BY Edward-Isaac Dovere In Berlin, the president warned his successor that his divisive campaign style won’t wear well in the Oval Office. 11/17/16, 8:24 PM CET BY Janosch Delcker US President hopes Trump won’t ‘simply take a Realpolitik approach.’ 11/17/16, 8:21 PM CET BY Hortense Goulard European Parliament president will only accept foreign minister role if he is also the SPD candidate for the top job. 11/17/16, 8:18 PM CET BY Konstantin Richter Germans, of all people, are now called on to be bulwarks of democracy. 11/17/16, 8:06 PM CET BY Paul Dallison and Esther King Euroskeptic party stands accused of breaking rules on spending EU funds. 11/17/16, 7:16 PM CET BY Brent Griffiths  11/17/16, 6:31 PM CET BY Maïa de La Baume Brussels faults Ankara for ‘neglecting and undermining’ democracy and the rule of law. 11/17/16, 6:27 PM CET BY Louis Nelson  11/17/16, 5:47 PM CET BY Cynthia Kroet Jean-Marie Le Pen should receive €15,000 because he was prevented from carrying out his duties. 11/17/16, 4:57 PM CET BY Carter Stoddard Net debt has ballooned to £338 million, and currency fluctuations are partly to blame. 11/17/16, 4:34 PM CET BY Laurens Cerulus In finally passing her surveillance bill, Britain’s PM just made Brexit even more complicated. 11/17/16, 4:13 PM CET BY Hortense Goulard French prime minister called for more European integration amid rising nationalism. 11/17/16, 3:23 PM CET BY Cynthia Kroet Former European Council president joins forces with Flemish singer. 11/17/16, 2:53 PM CET BY Paul Dallison Corey Lewandowski said president-elect will work closely with Theresa May, with no need for UKIP leader as a go-between. 11/17/16, 2:37 PM CET BY Cynthia Kroet Freedom Party leader’s comments on Moroccans living in the Netherlands were ‘unnecessarily offensive.’ 11/17/16, 2:11 PM CET BY Esther King Nigel Farage’s party stands accused of breaking rules on spending EU funds. Special Report: US election By Joseph J. Schatz and Benjamin Oreskes 9/22/16, 5:33 AM CET Updated 9/23/16, 9:15 AM CET Hillary Clinton with Barack Obama at the Democratic convention | Mandel Ngan/AFP via Getty Images When Hillary Clinton resigned as U.S. secretary of state in 2013, Beijing wasn’t sorry to see her go. In her four years in office, the former first lady and senator had gained a reputation in China as a source of hostility in an administration that had otherwise tried to be accommodating. In particular, Clinton rankled Beijing by rallying China’s neighbors against its maneuvers in the South China Sea. Shortly after she was succeeded by John Kerry, China’s state-controlled Global Times wrote that “for the Chinese people, the hard line of former US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton has been unforgettable.” To fans of Clinton’s tough-minded approach to foreign policy, the description was a badge of honor — and an example of how her approach to the world will differ from U.S. President Barack Obama’s if she is elected in November. “If you ask the Chinese or the Japanese or the Australians, they’ll tell you Clinton is the realist, the balance-of-power person,” said Michael Green, who served as senior director for Asia on George W. Bush’s National Security Council. Green, now senior vice president for Asia at the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Washington, briefed Clinton and her team twice on Asian affairs and came away impressed. He is also one of 50 Republican foreign policy experts who signed a letter this summer denouncing the party’s nominee, Donald Trump. Clinton has long described her Iraq vote as a mistake, but she has since taken a series of other stands that have bolstered a reputation for hawkishness. A Clinton White House would undoubtedly provide U.S. foreign policy with a dose of continuity — especially when compared to the wild-card uncertainty of a Trump presidency. But the former top diplomat would also bring an alternative approach to statecraft. And she would also face a different set of domestic and geopolitical limitations, particularly when it comes to trade and the relationship between the U.S. and Europe. Where Obama is cerebral and deliberative, the narrative goes, Clinton does her homework but is quicker to make decisions. Where Obama points out the United States’ historic failings and missteps, Clinton, a child of the Cold War and an advocate of NATO expansion, is firmly in the “American exceptionalism” camp. “I believe we are still Lincoln’s ‘last, best hope of Earth,’” she said in an August 31 speech in Ohio. “We’re still Reagan’s ‘shining city on a hill.’ We’re still Robert Kennedy’s ‘great, unselfish, compassionate country.’” At a time when most Americans seem averse to putting boots on the ground just about anywhere, Clinton’s team has described her approach as “more muscular” than Obama’s — with its reliance on drones and special forces operations — and perhaps better suited to the current international environment. And, of course, there’s the 2002 vote in Congress authorizing military action in Iraq. Her “yes” vote probably cost her the party’s nomination in 2008. Clinton has long described her Iraq vote as a mistake, but she has since taken a series of other stands that have bolstered a reputation for hawkishness. She argued against a drastic drawdown of U.S. troops in Afghanistan and supported an intervention in Libya, decisions that put her at odds with many in her party. Clinton has pledged to keep U.S. ground troops out of Syria. Chinese officials are thought to be wary of a Clinton presidency. Her adversarial approach to Beijing dates back to 1995, when, as first lady, she famously said that “women’s rights are human rights” at the United Nations Fourth World Conference on Women in Beijing. And during her tenure as secretary of state, her team pushed back during bilateral negotiations when Beijing sought to expand the number of issues it deemed to be Chinese “core interests,” along the lines of Tibet and Taiwan. Also On Politico Ryan Heath Also On Politico Ryan Heath Also On Politico Matthew Karnitschnig Also On Politico Janosch Delcker Also On Politico Julia Gillard It is important to note, however, that many of Clinton’s top officials are likely to be holdovers from the current or previous administrations, making sharp breaks in policy unlikely. Her top foreign policy aide and likely national security advisor is Jake Sullivan, who played a key role in the U.S. opening up to Myanmar and advised on the Iran nuclear deal implemented after Clinton left office. Former U.S. Ambassador to Russia Michael McFaul has served as a high-profile surrogate when it comes to Russia, and observers expect him to play a role in a Clinton administration. On Asia, former Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs Kurt Campbell, an architect of the Obama administration’s so-called Asia pivot, is likely to play a large role in a Clinton presidency. Many expect to see former Under Secretary of Defense for Policy Michelle Flournoy, who worked on Russia and Ukraine, in a top job. The biggest difference between Obama and Clinton is likely to be less about military deployments or diplomatic showdowns than about economic policy. Historically, Clinton has been a proponent of free trade. But in the last year, the anti-trade sentiment that helped boost the candidacies of Trump, and Clinton’s primary opponent, U.S. Senator Bernie Sanders, has pushed her to the left on the issue. That could leave her far more constrained than her predecessors, including her husband and Obama, when it comes to trade deals. She’s already disavowed the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), the free-trade agreement for which she helped lay the groundwork during her time in Foggy Bottom. And her statements on the campaign trail call into question whether she would rush to strike a deal on the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP), which she described as an “economic NATO” in 2012. As with all presidents, however, Clinton’s foreign policy would less likely be governed by grand strategy than by the geopolitical landscape and unfolding events. And the world, to put it lightly, looks different than it did when Clinton last held office. “It’s not the Europe of the Clinton era of the 1990s and it’s not even the Europe of the beginning of the Obama administration” — Fiona Hill, director at the Brookings Institution The war in Syria and the rise of the Islamic State have dramatically destabilized the Middle East. China’s president, Xi Jinping, is re-asserting the country’s dominance in East Asia. North Korea is widely believed to be on the verge of developing a nuclear weapon that could threaten the continental United States. Russian President Vladimir Putin has annexed Crimea and is intent on being a player, or at least a spoiler, in Syria — and perhaps in the U.S. elections themselves. But nowhere has the landscape been more drastically altered than Europe. Obama’s detached nature, combined with controversies over the U.S. spying on its allies, left many Europeans disappointed. But since then, much has changed, as a spate of terrorist attacks, a worrying refugee crisis and the decision by the United Kingdom to leave the European Union upended the status quo. “It’s not the Europe of the Clinton era of the 1990s and it’s not even the Europe of the beginning of the Obama administration,” said Fiona Hill, the director of the Center on the United States and Europe at the Brookings Institution and a former national intelligence officer on the National Intelligence Council. The question, experts say, is whether Clinton would see the EU as an ally, or as a problem to be managed. Patrick Cronin, a senior advisor at the Center for a New American Security and a top official at the U.S. Agency for International Development under George W. Bush, expects a greater emphasis by her on personal relationships with EU leaders than Obama. “She’ll be stronger on the transatlantic relationship than Obama was initially,” said Cronin. Added Hill, “Clinton is coming in at a moment where she’s going to have to be much more of a leader with respect to Europe.”  © 2016 POLITICO SPRL Log in to access content and manage your profile. If you do not have a login you can register here.
Washington (CNN)The Senate will vote Wednesday to override President Barack Obama's veto of a bill to give victims and families of the 9/11 terrorist attacks the legal right to sue Saudi Arabia for any purported role in the plot, Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell said Monday. The measure will need a two-thirds vote of the chamber to succeed -- which is expected -- before going to the House for a similar override vote later this week. It would be the first time in Obama's nearly eight years in office that one of his vetoes will be overturned. The President opposes the bill because he says it could open the door to lawsuits against the US for actions taken by military service members, diplomats and others. Obama expressed sympathy for the 9/11 families in his veto message Friday, but said he vetoed the bill because the law would hurt the effectiveness of the administration's action against terrorism by taking questions of foreign states' involvement in terrorism "out of the hands of national security and foreign policy professionals and placing them in the hands of private litigants and courts." In recent days, several senators who allowed the bill to pass without objection expressed misgivings for their decisions and said they wanted to find a way to address the White House's concerns about sovereign immunity. "I have tremendous empathy for the victims," said Sen. Bob Corker, R-Tennessee, the chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee said two weeks ago. "At the same time I have concerns about the precedent this bill will set and what it may mean to American service men and women and others. Let's face it -- our alleged drone attacks have killed civilians in Pakistan. Our alleged drone attacks have killed civilians in Afghanistan. And I think once you start opening the door for these types of activities it can be very problematic." Despite those second thoughts, there was never much traction among lawmakers to prevent the override. Heavy lobbying by the Saudi government, which opposed the bill, was met by a more powerful force -- the emotional appeal of the 9/11 families who fanned out on Capitol Hill in recent weeks to prevent the bill from stalling. Once both chambers override the veto, the bill becomes law regardless of Obama's opposition. CNN's Kevin Liptak contributed to this report.
Their distaste for Donald Trump was no secret. But they saw no point in publicizing it. From Miami to Houston, Crawford to Kennebunkport, members of the Republican Party’s first family remained quiet for months, avoiding cameras and questions about presidential politics and focusing their few fundraiser appearances on assisting the GOP candidates who would be forced to share the November ballot with a nominee they detest. Story Continued Below But given the Bush clan’s proximity to public life, and their progeny’s desire to one day return the family to power, it was only a matter of time before they could hold their tongues no longer. Over a 24-hour span that began with Jeb Bush's surprising and sardonic cameo in Sunday's Emmy Awards broadcast and Monday night’s reports that his father, former President George H.W. Bush, had told a family friend privately that he intended to support Hillary Clinton, the Bushes returned to the headlines, and are giving Trump just the establishment foil he so capably exploits. "He probably loves that former President Bush isn't backing him because it underlines his whole case against the establishment," one former Jeb Bush campaign staffer said. "I bet he's highlighting it in his stump speech before long." George W. Bush, who is headed to Washington this weekend to headline a fundraiser for Senate Republicans and attend the opening of the National Museum of African American History and Culture, has shared in private settings for months his fear that he will be “the last Republican president.” And while Bush family loyalists say they do not know whether he is joking, they are certain he cannot support Trump. “When you have a Republican nominee who supported John Kerry in 2004 and implied that President Bush was responsible for 9/11 and has repeated the worst lies of the Michael Moore liberal Democrats, how in the world would the Bushes support that?” said one longtime GOP operative close to the Bush family. George H.W. Bush, at 92 years of age, is the freest to disavow allegiance to the party’s nominee. Although sources close to the former president indicate he would have preferred his vote remain confidential, he harbors a deep disgust for Trump, who mocked and insulted his son throughout the primary and whose life of shameless self-promotion and a coarse approach to politics are an affront to the cultivated gentility and pragmatic, big-tent conservatism he and his sons personify. “Forty-one instilled a duty and service mentality in the DNA of his boys,” said Slater Bayliss, an alumnus of Jeb Bush’s administration in Tallahassee and a supporter of his 2016 campaign. “I don’t think Jeb ran for president because it was best for him, but thought he could make a difference with a positive, policy-focused agenda. The fact that we would expect a guy who was a Republican president to support every future Republican presidential candidate is silly, especially when you have one like Donald Trump.” For George H.W. Bush and George W. Bush, who has demurred on questions about how he’ll vote in the presidential race and focused on assisting down-ballot Republicans, there is also the consideration of the bond they share with the Clintons as members of an exclusive presidential fraternity and the disaster relief work they have collaborated on as ex-presidents. “There is a mutual regard that exists, despite their obvious political differences, between the families,” one source close to the Bush family said. “And also a mutual disregard, a shared disgust for Trump as someone so far outside of that club.” Those close to the family also doubt that any of the Bush women will privately cast a vote for Trump. Barbara Bush campaigned for Jeb in New Hampshire and lamented Trump’s foul language and desecration of the political norms her family always abided by. Laura Bush and her daughter Jenna Bush Hager have similarly expressed worries about Trump’s effect on the political discourse and pleaded the Fifth when asked whether they’d be voting for Trump. Jeb Bush, who prosecuted the case against Trump to little avail throughout the primary, has said publicly that he doesn’t plan to cast a ballot for Trump or Clinton — a reasonable position for someone who may hold out hopes of another presidential run or a position in a GOP administration down the road, should Trump lose in November and allow the party to reset itself for 2020. “I don’t know if it’s part of his thinking or not, but it would be a tough sell to the party to accept him if he’s on the record as having cast a vote for a Democratic nominee.” Interestingly enough, Jeb Bush’s son George P. Bush is the only family member publicly backing Trump. After watching the GOP nominee disparage, dismiss and eventually defeat his father, the Texas land commissioner, a telegenic Latino who has made no secret of his own ambitions for higher office, fell in line behind the party’s nominee, even though he acknowledged it being a “bitter pill to swallow.” “Donald Trump’s candidacy has divided Republican families around the country, and it sounds like this one’s no different,” said one Republican bundler who is close to the Bush family. The elder Bush’s admission that he plans to vote for Clinton occurred during a board meeting for the former president’s Thousand Points of Light Foundation. Kathleen Hartington Kennedy Townsend, the former Maryland lieutenant governor and daughter of the late Robert F. Kennedy, asked Bush about his choice during a receiving line and got a frank answer — which she then posted to her Facebook page, prompting news reports Monday and Tuesday, confirming that Bush indeed plans to vote for Clinton. Several sources close to the former president expressed frustration Tuesday with the notion that Townsend would publicize what she heard while visiting a 92-year-old man’s living room, calling it a breach of privacy. But the former president himself issued no statement denying the reports of what he said. Even before news of Bush’s backing, Clinton’s campaign was running a television ad highlighting a number of Republicans criticizing Trump. And she has already won endorsements from many Republicans who worked in one or both Bush administrations. But just as early forecasts of a possible Bush-Clinton matchup were met with frustration and fatigue in the run-up to this year’s campaign cycle, confirmation this week of some sort of alliance between the families may only serve to harden the electorate’s obvious antipathy to dynastic, establishment politics. “The reality is, if all of this meant something, Donald Trump would not be the nominee,” said Bruce Haynes, a GOP consultant in Washington. “In Raleigh and Des Moines, people don’t give a damn about what the Bushes say or do. If anything, they see the establishment politicians closing ranks around Clinton and are more emboldened to do the opposite.”
President Barack Obama has never had a great relationship with Saudi Arabia. Now, he’s the last man standing between the wealthy desert kingdom and billions of dollars in potential liabilities. Story Continued Below Obama has cast the Saudis as "so-called" allies; bemoaned the terrorist-inspiring version of Islam they practice; and even suggested the oil-rich Arab state learn to "share" the Middle East with rival Iran. The Saudis, meanwhile, consider Obama naive, sparring with him over the Iran nuclear deal and questioning his hands-off approach to Syria’s bloody civil war. Despite these differences, Obama has promised to veto a bill that Congress passed unanimously allowing families of 9/11 victims to sue Saudi Arabia over alleged links to the 2001 terrorist attacks. That Obama and Riyadh find themselves on the same side against Congress underscores the bizarre evolution of U.S.-Saudi ties over the past eight years. An alliance once unquestioned in Washington now faces an extraordinary level of criticism, but the two countries still need each other enough that a breakup is simply not in the cards. "This is clearly a relationship in transition," said Jon Alterman, an analyst with the Center for Strategic and International Studies. "Nobody really has a sense of what they’re trying to transition it to." Just how tricky is the relationship? Two more examples: Obama is supporting the Saudis in their fight against Iran-backed rebels in Yemen, even though U.S. officials worry the fight there is distracting from the more important battle against the Islamic State. And many of the same U.S. lawmakers happy to make it easier to sue the Saudis just this week green-lit a $1.15 billion arms sale to the country. "Does no one sense the irony?” asked Republican Sen. Rand Paul of Kentucky, one of a handful of lawmakers who tried to block the weapons deal in the Senate. The back and forth in Washington is "schizophrenic behavior" that has deeply frustrated leaders in the Middle East for years, said a former senior U.S. official deeply familiar with the Arab world. Congress passed the lawsuit bill under intense pressure from families of victims and just ahead of the 15th anniversary of the Sept. 11 attacks. The Saudis, through direct contacts as well as a powerful set of lobbyists, have tried hard to stop it, waging a major PR effort that included releasing a white paper detailing the kingdom's efforts to stop terrorists. The Saudis deny any government role in the attacks and note that the U.S. has never found proof of it, either. The Saudis also have warned they will sell off billions of dollars in U.S. assets to protect themselves against lawsuits. Administration officials downplay the idea that Obama will veto the bill merely to protect Saudi Arabia. Normally, U.S. citizens aren't allowed to sue foreign governments under the concept of sovereign immunity. Obama's concern, officials say, thus goes well beyond the Saudis; he's worried that the bill erodes the sovereign immunity principle and could lead other countries to allow the U.S. to be sued over its actions abroad. "To pass a piece of legislation that would open up our diplomats and our service members and even American businesses to potential lawsuits in courts all around the world is foolish," White House spokesman Josh Earnest said in a recent press briefing. The perception in many quarters, however, is that Obama is coming to the aid of a country with much to hide. Fifteen of the 19 hijackers on Sept. 11, 2001, were Saudi nationals. And the recent declassification of roughly 30 pages from a 2002 congressional probe into the 9/11 attacks raised more questions about Saudi government ties to Islamist extremists. "We are disappointed that the president is not standing with us," said Mindy Kleinberg, who lost her husband in the attacks and was meeting with lawmakers Thursday to push for a veto override. "We have been waiting a very long time for justice, and we feel that this bill will go a long way toward accountability." Whatever his motivation, Obama's decision to veto the bill is unlikely to do much to ease Saudi suspicions. The Saudis' wariness of Obama has its roots in his comments in 2002, well before he ran for president, referring to the monarchy in Riyadh as a so-called ally. It grew after Obama sided against Egyptian strongman Hosni Mubarak during the 2011 Arab Spring movements, leading Saudi royals to question whether America would have their backs in a domestic political crisis of their own. It deepened in 2013, after Obama decided not to stage a military strike against Syrian President Bashar Assad, who is despised by the Saudis, even after Assad apparently crossed Obama's "red line" by using chemical weapons. And it reached a new peak in 2015 after Obama struck a nuclear deal with Iran, a Shiite theocracy that Sunni-majority Saudi Arabia views as a growing threat in the Middle East. Still, Obama, cognizant of the need for the U.S. to maintain alliances with stable countries in the Middle East, has otherwise tried hard to allay Saudi concerns. He cut short a trip to India to rush to see the newly crowned Saudi king, Salman, in January 2015, after the previous monarch died. He also has pushed for new weapons and other security agreements with the Saudis, in part to assuage Saudi concerns about the Iran nuclear deal. But earlier this year, in comments to the Atlantic magazine that infuriated the Saudis, Obama appeared to reverse decades of U.S. policy that tilted heavily toward Riyadh and against Tehran. “The competition between the Saudis and the Iranians — which has helped to feed proxy wars and chaos in Syria and Iraq and Yemen — requires us to say to our friends as well as to the Iranians that they need to find an effective way to share the neighborhood and institute some sort of cold peace,” Obama said. Prince Turki Al-Faisal, the former head of Saudi intelligence, wrote in an extraordinary open letter soon afterward that Obama had "thrown us a curve ball" and criticizing the president for saying America’s Gulf allies were “free riders” wholly dependent on the U.S. for their security. And in April, weeks after the Atlantic piece was published, Saudi Arabia appeared to snub Obama when he visited Riyadh for a summit by sending a lower-level official to greet him at the airport and not broadcasting his arrival on state TV. The readouts from those meetings in Riyadh also suggested the president hadn't done much to assuage Saudi concerns, with the two sides saying they'd "discussed" and "exchanged views" more than agreeing on anything. The president also hosted Saudi Arabia’s deputy crown prince, Mohammed Bin Salman, when he visited Washington this summer on a trip aimed at improving the kingdom’s image in Washington. Obama made sure to praise the prince's plan to transform the Saudi economy, dubbed Vision 2030. He also tried to reassure the Saudi royal that the U.S. will back the Saudis against interference by Iran, which remains an official enemy of the United States. But some constants in the U.S.-Saudi relationship have turned into variables, meaning that even after Obama leaves office in just a few months, the alliance could prove rocky. The low price of oil, for example, is forcing the kingdom to rethink its economy; the U.S. also relies more now on its own energy reserves, reducing America’s addiction to Saudi oil. Some observers also point to cultural changes in deeply conservative Saudi Arabia — women, though still facing severe segregation, make up a growing share of the workforce; young people are more exposed than ever to the Internet and the outside world; and thousands of Saudis educated in the U.S. are now capitalizing on that experience in their country. By all accounts, the U.S. and Saudi Arabia still maintain a strong security relationship, and U.S. officials privately say the Saudis are helpful partners in the fight against terrorist groups such as Al Qaeda, which the Saudi monarchy views as a threat to its own rule. U.S. officials also say the Saudis have taken steps in recent years to silence the most radical of their Islamist preachers and change their school curricula to be more tolerant. "The close cooperation on countering violent extremists like [the Islamic State], the continued Saudi preference for American arms, the important role that Saudi Arabia plays in international energy markets and the $70 billion dollars worth of annual trade between the two countries are enough to sustain this relationship for the foreseeable future," said Fahad Nazer, a former political analyst with the Saudi Embassy in Washington who now does similar work for JTG Inc. In many ways, what Obama thinks about the Saudis matters less and less as his time in the Oval Office draws to an end. But while the Saudis will be happy to see him leave, there's great uncertainty in Riyadh about how the next president will deal with them. Both Democrat Hillary Clinton and Republican Donald Trump have voiced grave concerns about Saudi Arabia's track record of producing Islamic extremists; Clinton has said she supports the 9/11 lawsuit bill. But while Clinton would likely be a more predictable partner, the Saudis see Trump — who has called for a ban on Muslims entering the United States — as a wild card. For now, however, the Saudis are nervously watching Congress to see exactly how unhappy lawmakers are with them. Already, some members of Congress are hinting that they are not comfortable with the 9/11 legislation after all, and that they may consider voting to uphold Obama's veto. Their hesitation comes as a growing number of foreign countries and blocs, including the European Union, voice opposition to the bill. The original bill passed on voice vote in both Houses, making a veto override especially sensitive because members will have to go on the record. And with the presidential election looming, the politics are even more fraught than normal. “Saudi Arabia has never been an especially popular actor in Washington — a powerful one, but not popular," the former senior U.S. official said. "And now, nobody in Congress wants to stick their neck out for the Saudis two-and-a-half months before the presidential election.”
Hillary Clinton’s nationwide lead over Donald Trump has tightened to single digits with just three days to go before the first presidential debate between the two candidates. A new McClatchy-Marist poll released Friday puts the former secretary of state 7 percentage points ahead of the Manhattan billionaire in a head-to-head matchup among likely voters, 48 percent to 41 percent. That lead is down significantly from the 15-point advantage she held in an earlier McClatchy-Marist poll that surveyed registered voters nationwide in early August. Story Continued Below In a four-way race that also includes Libertarian Gary Johnson and the Green Party’s Jill Stein, Clinton leads Trump by 6 points, 45 percent to 39 percent. Johnson, a former governor of New Mexico, polled at 10 percent and Stein polled at 4 percent. Respondents preferred Clinton on the issue of immigration by a 51-41 margin and on trade by a 52-42 spread. Asked which candidate would better address the issue of terrorism, respondents favored Clinton, 52 percent to 41 percent. Fifty-seven percent of those reached said Clinton has the experience to serve in the White House, compared to just 30 percent who said the same of Trump. Likely voters reached by the poll also gave her the edge on the question of temperament, preferring her by a 50-38 margin. While recent nationwide polls have favored Clinton of late, it is Trump who has received mostly good news in swing state polling. Surveys released in recent days have shown him ahead in North Carolina, Iowa, Nevada and Ohio, while another put him and Clinton in a statistical tie in Florida. Winning in battleground states like those are crucial for Trump, who faces a relatively narrow electoral path to the White House relative to Clinton. The McClatchy-Marist poll was conducted from Sept. 15-20, reaching 1,298 adults via landlines and cell phones. Of those 1,298 respondents, 758 were considered likely voters based on a probability turnout model. The margin of error for all respondents was plus-or-minus 2.7 percentage points and the margin of error for likely voters was plus-or-minus 3.6 points.
(CNN)Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump will each arrive at Monday night's debate in Hempstead, New York with an ample contingent of campaign aides and surrogates. But the two candidates will also bring a handful of individuals carefully chosen to emphasize a campaign message. The guests include a 9/11 survivor, a pair of military generals and a billionaire who enjoys trash talk nearly as much as Trump. Below is each candidate's guest list, as confirmed by their campaigns: Clinton: Mark Cuban: The brash owner of the NBA's Dallas Mavericks, has emerged as one of Clinton's fieriest attack dogs, repeatedly taunting Trump both on Twitter and the campaign trail. Cuban was at it again last week, tweeting that he would be in the front row at Monday night's debate, which he dubbed "the 'Humbling at Hofstra.'" Trump fired back, threatening to bring get Gennifer Flowers a seat next to Cuban. Flowers, who in the 1970s had an affair with future President Bill Clinton, told The New York Times that she would be in attendance, but the Trump campaign insisted that it had not invited her. Lauren Manning: An injured survivor of 9/11 who met Clinton while she recovered from the attacks. Manning also spoke at the Democratic National Convention in Philadelphia this summer. Obama to watch potential successors debate Maxine Outerbridge: Described by the Clinton campaign as a "single mom and a domestic violence survivor" who credits the Children's Health Insurance Program, which Clinton helped create as first lady, for her success. Anastasia Somoza: Born with cerebral palsy, Somoza first met Clinton as a nine-year-old. She introduced the Democratic nominee before a speech in Orlando, and appears in a new Clinton campaign ad. Aleatha Williams: A Bronx native, Williams has maintained a relationship with Clinton since the Democratic nominee was first lady. Trump Bobby Knight: The legendary former college basketball coach endorsed Trump in April ahead of the Indiana primary. Knight, a three-time national champion as head coach at Indiana University known for his volcanic temper, has referred to the Republican presidential nominee as "Saint Donald." Mark Geist: A Marine Corps veteran and security contractor, Geist survived the 2012 attack on the US consulate in Benghazi, Libya. He appeared in an NRA ad earlier this summer titled, "Stop Clinton, Vote Trump." Team Trump: No Gennifer Flowers at debate Karen Vaughn: Vaughn, whose Navy SEAL son died in Afghanistan, was a rare ally for Trump in August, when the candidate sparred with a Gold Star family. Gen. Mike Flynn: An early supporter of Trump, the retired three-star general has also served as an informal adviser to GOP nominee. Gen. Keith Kellogg: A former Army lieutenant general, Kellogg is a national security adviser to Trump. He and Flynn teamed up last week to write a rebuttal to former Defense Secretary Robert Gates, who said that Trump is "beyond repair" on national security. CNN's Jim Acosta and Dan Merica contributed reporting.
(CNN)Donald Trump Jr., the candidate's eldest child, emerged early on as one of his father's most ferocious advocates and polished surrogates. But the shine is coming off after a series of damaging missteps -- the latest coming when he likened Syrian refugees to Skittles candy. Trump Jr.'s lightly filtered Twitter account has at times appeared to be a clearinghouse for particularly unsavory media and commentary. On Tuesday, for instance, he retweeted a Breitbart story titled, "Europe's Rape Epidemic: Western Women Will Be Sacrificed At The Altar Of Mass Migration." Here are a few the son's latest stumbles: Compared Syrian refugees to Skittles "If I had a bowl of skittles and I told you just three would kill you. Would you take a handful? That's our Syrian refugee problem." At least, that's how Donald Jr., among others, would describe it. While many Trump supporters offered their support, the tweet provoked a broader backlash. Mars Candy eventually chimed in to distance themselves from the message. "Skittles are candy; refugees are people," the company said in a statement. "It's an inappropriate analogy. We respectfully refrain from further comment, as that could be misinterpreted as marketing." READ: What corporate America can learn from Skittles' response to Donald Trump Jr. The moral question aside, Washington Post reporter Philip Bump pointed out a math problem. According to a recent Cato Institute report, the odds "that an American would be killed in a terrorist attack committed by a refugee was 1 in 3.64 billion a year." As Bump explains, the tweet could -- with the framing only slightly altered -- be interpreted as an argument for letting in more refugees. Still, the campaign insists Trump Jr. has been "a tremendous asset" all the way through. "Speaking the truth might upset those who would rather be politically correct than safe," Trump campaign spokesman Jason Miller told CNN in an email. "But the American people want a change, and only Donald Trump will do what's needed to protect us." Gave a new reason why Trump hasn't shared his taxes Donald Trump is on track to be the first modern presidential candidate withhold his tax information. The candidate and the campaign have for months said their reason for keeping a lid on the returns was an ongoing audit. But in an interview last week with the Pittsburgh Tribune-Review, Trump Jr. gave a very different explanation. The decision was made, he said, because Trump has "got a 12,000-page tax return that would create ... financial auditors out of every person in the country," and have them "asking questions that would distract from (his father's) main message." While there is no law preventing Trump from making the returns public, audit or not, Trump Jr.'s comment reflected what critics have been saying for months: that this is and always has been a political calculation. 'Gas chamber' reference Complaining about media coverage is part of almost every campaign's playbook. References to "the gas chamber" are not. During an interview with Philadelphia-based conservative talk radio host Chris Stigall, he first described the press as the Clinton campaign's "number one surrogate." But then, this: "They've let her slide on every indiscrepancy (sic), on every lie, on every DNC game trying to get Bernie Sanders out of the thing. I mean, if Republicans were doing that, they'd be warming up the gas chamber right now. It's a very different system -- there's nothing fair about it." The campaign denied that Trump Jr. was making a Holocaust reference -- the Nazis used gas chambers as a tool of their World War II-era genocide -- and that the comment, a bit of hyperbole, was really about capital punishment more generally. "The liberal, dishonest media is so quick to attack one of the Trumps that they never let the truth get in the way of a good smear," Trump spokesman Jason Miller said in a statement. The Anti-Defamation League, a prominent Jewish advocacy group, was less sure. "Trivialization of the Holocaust and gas chambers is NEVER okay," they tweeted at Trump Jr. Clinton's campaign was especially biting, turning its response into an attack on Trump the candidate, with chairman John Podesta saying the son's language is "probably pretty consistent with the type of rhetoric he heard around the house growing up." Posting image of alt-right mascot 'Pepe the Frog' with Trump As Clinton was feeling the fallout from her "basket of deplorables" comment -- in which she initially suggested that half of Trump's supporters fit in a group composed of the "racist, sexist, homophobic, xenophobic, Islamaphobic, you name it" -- Trump Jr. made headlines with a controversial Instagram post. The photoshop composition featured his father leading a band of "deplorables," with political allies and the cartoon "Pepe the Frog" by his side. What Trump Jr. later said he did not know, was that "Pepe" has been appropriated as a mascot and preferred meme of the white supremacist alt-right movement. Asked about the post by ABC News on Sunday, Trump Jr. pleaded ignorance. "I've never even heard of Pepe the Frog," he said. "I had no idea there was any connotation there." Promotes anti-Clinton conspiracies His father's feed might get more attention, but Trump Jr. is just as active -- and sometimes more controversial. He often retweets the actor James Woods, who frequently shares suspect anti-Clinton media. "What is wrong with her?" Woods asked in a recent tweet, shared by Trump Jr., that quoted another user who wrote: "BREAKING!!! Collapsing Hillary Clinton Heavily Sedated as she responds to Donald Trump comment & #Chelsea !! #Valium" After a recent NBC News forum, Trump Jr. retweeted a post from right wing radio host John Cardillo, who was among the conspiracy theorists saying Clinton had been wearing an earpiece during the event. "Well look at that," Cardillo wrote. "Last night #CrookedHillary gets caught with #HillarysEarPiece. Today a new ear covering hairdo." Shared some choice thoughts on a 'herd of mothers' A look back at Trump Jr. in the pre-campaign days yielded some tasteless commentary on motherhood and a family employee. "Ever notice that if u get a herd of mothers together they aren't physically capable of talking about anything but birth pregnancy & diapers?" he asked in July 2011. About a year later, he offered this gem on the devotion of a particular employee, who Trump Jr. said skipped a family wedding to be at work. "At dinner w our greenskeeper who missed his sister's wedding 2 work (luv loyalty 2 us) "No big deal hopefully she'll have another someday";)" Trump Jr. tweeted. 
The Senate cleared the way today for a massive arms deal with Saudi Arabia to proceed, after voting against a resolution that would have blocked the transfer of $1.15 billion worth of military equipment to be sold from the U.S. to Saudi Arabia. The bipartisan resolution was introduced in the Senate earlier this month amidst increased reports of civilian casualties in Yemen at the hands of the Saudi-led coalition. Sens. Chris Murphy, D-Conn., Rand Paul, R-Ky., Al Franken, D-Minn., and Mike Lee, R-Utah, who introduced the resolution, argued in part that by arming Saudi Arabia, the U.S. was complacent in these civilian deaths in Yemen.       Amnesty International said in a statement Monday that a U.S.-made bomb was used in a Saudi airstrike on a Doctors Without Borders hospital in northern Yemen that killed 11 and injured 19. While the humanitarian group expressed disappointment at today's vote, they praised the increased "voice of dissent" in Congress regarding U.S. arms sales to Saudi. "Today’s vote is the latest example of the growing voice of dissent in Congress when it comes to the United States’ selling arms to Saudi Arabia,” Sunjeev Bery, Amnesty International USA Advocacy Director for the Middle East and North Africa, said in a statement today. “U.S. officials know that the Saudi government continues dropping bombs on civilian communities and yet the Obama Administration continues selling it weapons. This arms deal is bad for the people of Yemen, bad for the region and bad for U.S. foreign policy. President Obama should cancel it immediately,” Berry added.   On the Senate floor today, Sen. Chris Murphy argued that the situation in Yemen, in addition to being an "ongoing humanitarian disaster," has also provided an opportunity for al-Qaeda and ISIS to "grow by leaps and bounds." "But the scope of this disaster for the purposes of U.S. national security interests is not just the radicalization of the Yemeni people against the United States, it's not just the thousands of people that have been killed, but the fact that this war has given, has given ground, an opportunity, for al-Qaeda and ISIS to grow, grow by leaps and bounds," Murphy said this morning, prior to the vote, on the Senate floor. Following the results of the vote, Murphy said he was pleased about the message that the vote sent, regardless of the results. "Never before have so many Senators gone on record supporting a rethink of the US-Saudi relationship. Didn't win, but a strong message," Murphy said on Twitter, adding, "Lots of Senators who voted for the sale mentioned to me how good it felt to be openly debating foreign policy in the Senate again." Sen. Rand Paul echoed Murphy's sentiments in a tweet, saying, "Today we didn't just debate Obama's $1.15 billion Saudi arms deal, we debated constitutional principles and war."
Party People is a new podcast from CNN where a pair of conservative CNN contributors talk to influential voices about the future of conservatism and the Republican party. Washington (CNN)Hopes by Donald Trump's campaign that it can mobilize enough white voters to win in November is a case of self-delusion, according to GOP pollster Whit Ayres. "That's a wonderful example of how we can delude ourselves into thinking that nothing really has to change," Ayres recently told CNN's "Party People" podcast hosts Kevin Madden and Mary Katherine Ham. The North Star Opinion Research political consultant pointed to an estimated 4.2 million white voters who participated in the 2008 elections but did not vote in 2012, when the GOP nominee lost by 5 million votes nationally. "So if every single one of them had turned out and voted for Mitt Romney, he still would have lost. Moreover, most of those white voters who didn't turn out were in deep red states -- places like West Virginia and Arkansas and Oklahoma -- where the presidential campaign was never competitive and they saw no reason to go and vote." "You don't get bonus Electoral College points for that," Ham added. RELATED: 2016: Last call for working class whites? Ayres, who worked with Sens. Marco Rubio and Lindsey Graham as well as Tennessee Gov. Bill Haslam, warned that Republicans are working with a "worn-out business model." "We need to adapt to the new America -- not by changing our principles -- but by applying those principles to a new kind of voter," Ayres said. He suggested the party can broaden their electorate by targeting Hispanic voters, citing the last Republican president as a role model. "George W. Bush set a great example for Republican candidates, as do many Republicans in Texas who seem far more comfortable with Hispanic voters and Hispanic culture," Ayres said, adding, "George Bush spoke a version of Spanish, kind of like he spoke a version of English." Ayres said the Bush campaign "reached out aggressively," making sure his operation advertised in Spanish-language media. RELATED: The anatomy of a white, working-class Trump voter "Despite what some Republicans say, a Republican candidate can do very well -- but you've got to try," Ayres said. "Just like any other group, you've got to reach out. You've got to go after them aggressively, and you've got to ask for their votes, and Republican candidates with conservative principles can do very well in the Hispanic community." To hear what Ayres thinks GOP Senate candidates are doing right in distancing themselves from Trump and what he thinks will happen in Monday's debate, listen to CNN's "Party People," a new podcast from CNN where a pair of conservative CNN contributors talk to influential voices about the future of conservative politics and the Republican party. Get CNN's "Party People" podcast at CNN, Stitcher, TuneInRadio or iTunes. RELATED: GOP policy guru: Trump can't 'fake his way through 90 minutes' 
Karen Dunn is polite, precise and barely more than five feet tall -- but after Barack Obama’s dreadful first debate against Mitt Romney in 2012, she got up in the face of the leader of the free world. “You need to punch him in the mouth!” said Dunn. Story Continued Below And Obama did – delivering a powerful, campaign-stabilizing performance at Hofstra University on Long Island, the location of Monday’s critical showdown between Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump, a debate that is likely to be the most watched political event in history. It’s not clear if Dunn and her partner Ron Klain – the two most experienced debate prep specialists in Democratic politics – are giving Hillary Clinton the same advice. But they are overseeing an orderly and intensely secretive process designed to armor a battle-scarred debater for an unpredictable face-off that presents great dangers – but also an opportunity for Clinton to reverse the fall narrative of a Trump surge. Clinton’s team of lawyers are facing the greatest challenge of their professional lives – and that’s saying a lot, considering that Klain, Joe Biden’s former chief of staff, was tapped by Obama to solve the Ebola crisis. They know that Trump – a quick-study political novice participating in the first one-on-one debate of his life – is a wild card who can turn weeks of pouring over briefing books into mockery with a single, brilliant and bullying punch. “The fear is that she’ll get lost in the moment, and no one is better at seizing the moment than Trump,” said a longtime adviser to both Clintons. Indeed, that’s what’s worrying Clinton’s inner circle – that victory will come down to something like tone, which she has always struggled with, vacillating between cold and severe to thoughtful and wry. But the traditional, substantive sessions now underway are key to settling the candidate’s head, longtime aides said. "The prep matters because it gives her the confidence to know she is armed,” said one longtime Clinton ally. “She will feel more comfortable if she's prepared the way she likes to prepare.” Clinton, for all her knowledge, polling and top-tier coaching, has always been defined not by what she’s said on the debate stage but by how she’s dealt with what her opponents have said about her. These debate moments have represented many of the biggest pivot points in Clinton’s career – from her deft parrying of Rick Lazio in 2000 to her collapse under Obama’s fire at the disastrous Nov. 2007 debate in Philadelphia that demolished her frontrunner status. With Clinton, a conventional politician trapped in the reality TV world of 2016, it’s all about the reaction shot – and the Dunn-Klain team is laboring mightily to make sure she gets it right. No secret on the Clinton campaign has been more closely guarded than the identity of the person who is impersonating Trump in the closed-door sessions staged at Clinton’s Manhattan office and at her home in Chappaqua. Clinton’s advisers, in conversations over the last month, have repeatedly emphasized that the mock debate session, while important, is less vital than the informal law school sessions where Clinton hashes out her reactions and attacks. “It’s a moot court set-up,” said a Clinton insider. “She’s doing less of the usual mock debate sessions, with 100 people standing around, this time.” Another added that her preparation this year “is more style than substance. They’re trying to prepare her for the different Trumps that might show up.” On Saturday, the New York Times reported that longtime Clinton aide Phillippe Reines had been playing the role of Trump in mock sessions. Several Democrats who have spoken to the participants told POLITICO that another person playing the role of interlocutor has been campaign chairman John Podesta, a sharp-tongued veteran operator known less for bluster than behind-the-curtain scheme-spinning. The buttoned-down, courtly Klain has also stood in parrying questions with Clinton, according to people close to the situation – but both men have been less concerned with imitating Trump than preparing Clinton for the substance of the attacks, two keen attorneys framing Clinton’s reactions in the precise, disciplined language their lawyerly candidate thrives on. “It’s an unconventional year, and he’s an unconventional candidate, so maybe preparation doesn’t matter,” said David Axelrod, a former top strategist to President Obama. “But in my experience, the candidate who comes on the stage, and can anticipate the rhythm of the thing, and knows what they want to do, has a huge advantage.” Insiders said Clinton's debate group has tried to frame every minute on the stage as a referendum on the issue of trust -- to convince voters with doubts about Clinton to contrast those concerns with how they feel about Trump handling the nuclear codes. But there is still fear of the unknown that is the other half of the equation on stage with her. “You’re just not sure who is going to show up, so you have to do it, you have to assume he may be aggressive, or he may lay back,” communications director Jennifer Palmieri said. “That’s hard to game out.” Clinton’s experience and confidence can make her an intimidating person to prep -- when you count her own three dozen on-stage debates there is arguably no one in American politics with more prime-time experience. Her coaches, however, are also longtime debate aficionados -- campaign consultants Joel Benenson, Jim Margolis and Mandy Grunwald all sit in on prep, as does Palmieri, longtime attorney Bob Barnett, senior policy adviser Jake Sullivan, Podesta, occasionally Bill Clinton, younger policy aides who have helped compile the thick green binders of prep materials, and others. Klain and Dunn, who report directly to Sullivan, not only offer an overarching strategy, but act as speechwriters -- line-writers, really -- paring down language and crafting practiced lines. “I have a tendency to want to give a deep dissertation on an issue or a problem,” said Sen. Cory Booker, who Dunn has prepped for Senate debates. “Karen knew she had to break me of the habit, but do it in a way that still allowed me to feel like I wasn’t dumbing things down. She really studied me. She already knew the language I was using out there.” Like Clinton, Booker said he was hesitant to disgorge pre-packaged lines. But the forceful Dunn pressed him, just as she goaded Obama. “She didn’t call them ‘lines,’” he said. “She called them ‘moments.’” Dunn has even force fed some catchphrases to the notoriously message-resistant Clinton. In the primary debate in New Hampshire last February, which coincided with opening weekend of the new Star Wars movie, Dunn penned Clinton’s sign-off: “thank you, good night, and may the force be with you.” Clinton loves the self-education aspect of the process. But she has long despised the confrontational aspects of the mock debate dry runs, even when she’s not on the stand -- she never participated in her husband’s debate preps, a noticeable absence when she served as a top campaign adviser in every other aspect of his presidential campaigns. During a tense prep session after Bernie Sanders’ stunning and slim win in the Mar. 8 Michigan primary, for instance, Clinton was so fed up with the criticisms being lobbed at her she decided to just do the job herself. When D.C. attorney Bob Barnett, who was playing Sanders, began peppering her with attacks in a drab hotel conference room, a clearly agitated Clinton shut the session down and declared, “How about I play Bernie?” Over the next hour or so, Clinton – to the surprise of her staff – staged a credible and unvarnished version of Sanders’ attacks on her economic plans and close ties to Wall Street, according to two people with knowledge of the exchange. For a time, Sullivan took the role of the former secretary of state and framed several new responses that later became a staple of Clinton’s debate routine. “It turned out to be one of the most productive sessions we had,” said a Clinton ally. Dunn and Klain have been through the fire before – Klain was responsible for the strategy that helped John Kerry win his first debate against George W. Bush by attacking him for not catching Osama Bin Laden. And many of Obama’s top advisers, including his wife, Michelle, credit the Klain-Dunn team for his fall 2012 turnaround. Klain, known for his minutely drafted action memos, started ginning up an attack plan for the president before the first debate in Denver was even over. But it was the incongruous image of Dunn surrounded by Obama’s male-dominated staff that woke up the president with her “punch him in the mouth!” summons, a quote that, for many people, stuck. Unlike the rest of Clinton’s debate coaches, Dunn and Klain have day jobs. Dunn, who represents Uber, Apple and Oracle in her day job as a partner at Boies, Schiller & Flexner LPP, is a top litigator (and also Huma Abedin’s personal attorney). Klain works at Revolution, LLC, a private investment firm. But there hasn't been a Democratic presidential debate without one of them involved in decades. But coaches don't play. For Clinton, success against Trump on Monday night may have more to do with how she silently projects authority when under attack. “If Trump can be positioned to bully her, that will probably be his biggest failing,” said another longtime Clinton insider. “And her pushing him back politely, so there’s a difference between his level and her level, that will be her biggest strength.” In the end, it might not be anything Clinton says that matters. Many longtime aides credited the power of her reaction shot – a comically disapproving maternal glare honed from her years as a first lady enduring another long spiel by somebody else -- as one of her most valuable weapons in communicating gravitas and strength in the face of Trump’s expected insults. If you want an insight into the attitude Clinton’s aides want her to portray, check out the latest episode of “Between Two Ferns.” Clinton’s appearance on the web comedy sketch show, which posted Thursday, shows the Democrat at her silent best -- it was quickly hailed by critics as one of her most successful interviews, and the candidate who struggles with articulating a coherent positive message didn't even say much. She sat with a bemused expression on her face while comedian Zach Galifianakis lobbed the absurd at her, asking with a deadpan whether she would have to take a leave of absence from the White House if she got pregnant, and if she was "down with TPP." One of Clinton's finest moments in the primary debates was her non-reaction to Lincoln Chafee questioning her “ethical standards” because of her email use. When asked by moderator Anderson Cooper if she wanted to respond, Clinton smiled and shook her head. “No,” was her terse response, and the audience roared.
Peaceful protesters crowded Charlotte's first city council meeting since the cop shooting of Keith Lamont Scott, with over 50 people speaking out against police violence. But none of them stood out Monday quite as much as a young girl. Zianna Oliphant, her hair done up in braids and tears streaking her face, brought into focus the stress police shootings place on children, as well as the pain the black community of Charlotte has suffered in the wake of Scott's death last week. “I’ve been born and raised in Charlotte. And I never felt this way until now and I can’t stand how we’re treated,” the grade-school girl said, wiping away tears.   She expressed the hardship that children face when a parent dies. Scott himself, who was African-American, had seven children. “It’s a shame that we have to go to their graveyard and bury them. And we have tears. We shouldn’t have tears. We need our fathers and mothers to be by our side,” she said. Zianna, as well as the protesters in the room who chanted "no justice, no peace" after she spoke, helped to underscore the degree to which communal wounds have been slow to heal in North Carolina’s most populous city since the shooting. Protests started on the streets of Charlotte after news of Scott's shooting broke last Tuesday and, occasionally, became violent as they continued deeper into the week.   The scene grew especially tense Wednesday night when police clad in riot gear fired tear gas and rubber bullets at demonstrators. Some people in the crowds threw bottles and rocks at officers and passing cars, blocked an interstate highway, surrounded and jumped on vehicles, looted businesses and stormed the entrance of a Hyatt hotel, injuring two of its employees. At the city council meeting, Charlotte Mayor Jennifer Roberts called for decorum at several points during public remarks. At several points, protesters yelled criticism of her and Police Chief Kerr Putney. After the meeting wrapped up, The Charlotte Observer reported, more than 20 protesters moved to the lobby of the Government Center. “Release. Release. The whole damn tape,” the protesters chanted, according to the newspaper.   Ray Dotch, Scott's brother-in-law, Monday called for the release of the entire video of his shooting in an interview with ABC News. Chief Putney has released body and dashboard camera videos of the fatal police shooting of Scott, answering to demands made by community leaders, protesters and politicians. But it is not entirely clear from those videos or from the one taken by Scott's wife, Rakeiya Scott, that the victim had a gun on his person, as the police allege. It is also not entirely clear that he brandished it in such a way that would have posed a threat to the officers who approached him.
Donald Trump said Hillary Clinton has spent her “entire adult life” fighting the Islamic State and will never be able to defeat the terrorist group. Clinton retorted that Trump "has no plan" to fight the radical group, and put him on the defensive over his past support for the Iraq War. Story Continued Below The foreign policy section of Monday's debate touched on Russia, Iran, and nuclear weapons—but no subject animated the candidates like their exchanges about the terrorist militia's rise and which candidate is better-equipped to crush it. Repeating a pattern throughout the debate, Trump made his case with bold, and questionable, claims, while Clinton defended her position with less memorable but more factual assertions. With polls showing high voter anxiety over terrorism, Trump took the first shot on the subject early in the debate, with a charge that Clinton's web site had posted details of her war plan. "You're telling the enemy everything you want to do," Trump said. "No wonder you've been fighting ISIS your entire adult life." That was a head-scratching claim, given that Clinton is 68 and the Syria-based group, also known as ISIS, has only existed in its current form since 2014. (A predecessor group was founded in 2004.) But Clinton ignored Trump's puzzling assertion. "At least I have a plan to fight ISIS," she quipped. Clinton later added that while Trump has claimed he has a "secret plan" to fight ISIS, "the only secret is that he has no plan." Clinton took more seriously his charge—supported by many national security experts—that the 2011 U.S. troop withdrawal from Iraq had enabled ISIS's creation. "They wouldn't even have been formed if you left some troops behind, like 10,000, or maybe something more than that," Trump said. President Barack Obama oversaw the exit of U.S. troops, which he celebrated at the time. Clinton was then serving as Obama's Secretary of State. But she countered that it was the George W. Bush administration which failed to reach an agreement with Iraq's government that would have allowed U.S. forces to remain in the country on terms acceptable to Washington. "George W. Bush made the agreement about when American troops would leave Iraq, not Barack Obama," Clinton said. "And the only way that American troops could have stayed in Iraq was to get an agreement from the Iraqi government that would have protected our troops—and the Iraqi government would not give that." Experts have debated that point for years, with some claiming that Obama never really wanted such an agreement and didn't try as hard as he could have to secure one. Yet some some former Obama officials—including the U.S. ambassador to Iraq at the time of the withdrawal, James Jeffrey— say that Clinton argued internally for maintaining a troop presence in the country beyond 2011. ISIS evolved from the group al Qaeda in Iraq (AQI), founded in the wake of the 2003 U.S. invasion of that country. The group was nearly wiped out by the U.S. military but regained strength after the American withdrawal, and as it joined the fight in Syria's civil war. In 2014, AQI cut ties to al Qaeda and renamed itself the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, and is often called the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria, or ISIS. There is almost no expert support for Trump's longtime insistence, which he repeated Monday, that the U.S. should have seized Iraq's oil fields as a form of war booty, and that doing so would have allowed the U.S. to prevent ISIS's rise. "Had we taken the oil—and we should have taken the oil—ISIS would not have been able to form either, because the oil was their primary source of income," Trump said. Trump has argued for years that the U.S. should commandeer Iraq's oil, though he has not addressed basic questions like how many troops it would take and how the oil would be transported from a country sure to be hostile to the seizure of its most valuable commodity. Nor did Trump ever describe the plan in the past as a way to prevent militants from flourishing, even as many national security experts were doing so. Clinton, who cast a Senate vote to authorize the U.S. invasion of Iraq in 2002, sought to turn Trump's talk of Iraq history back against him by citing his well documented comments in favor of the U.S. invasion before it happened. "Donald supported the invasion of Iraq," she said. "I did not support the war in Iraq. That is a mainstream media nonsense put out by her," Trump said. Trump proceeded to claim he had "numerous conversations" with Fox News host Sean Hannity, in which he opposed the war, but of which there is no public record. The debate's moderator, Lester Holt, endorsed Clinton's version of events. "The record shows otherwise," he told an irritated Trump. As he often has before, Trump again cited an August 2004 interview with Esquire as evidence of his opposition to the war. "They did an article in a major magazine, shortly after the war started, I think in ‘04, but they did an article which had me totally against the war in Iraq," Trump said. But by that time, more than a thousand American troops had died in Iraq, photos documenting the Abu Ghraib prison abuse scandal had emerged, and public support for the occupation was falling fast. Clinton reiterated her pledge to "intensify" airstrikes against ISIS, enlist technology companies to track down on the group's Internet activities, and support Arab and Kurdish fighters on the ground in Iraq and Syria—largely steps the Obama administration is already taking. Clinton did not repeat her past talk of establishing a "no-fly zone" in northern Syria. Clinton also raised the subject of Russia, pressing her campaign's recent charge that Trump is suspiciously respectful of Russian president Vladimir Putin and that he holds Kremlin-friendly views of NATO and Ukraine. "There's no doubt now that Russia has used cyber attacks against all kinds of organizations in our country, and I am deeply concerned about this. I know Donald is very praiseworthy of Vladimir Putin. But Putin is playing a very tough, long game here," Clinton said. Defying the strong consensus view of U.S. intelligence officials, Trump cast doubt on Russia's alleged role in the recent hack and exposure of Democratic National Committee emails. "I don't think anybody knows it was Russia who broke into the DNC. She's saying Russia, Russia, Russia. Maybe it was. I mean, it could be Russia, but It could also be China, but it could also be lots of other people," Trump said. "It also could be someone sitting on their bed that weighs 400 pounds, OK?"
(CNN)Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump complained after Monday night's debate that his microphone wasn't working -- and he questioned whether that was happening on purpose. "And they also had, gave me a defective mic. Did you notice that? My mic was defective within the room," he told a group of reporters afterward. "No, but I wonder, was that on purpose? Was that on purpose? But I had a mic that wasn't worked properly, with, working properly within the room." Trump kept up his complaints about the microphone the morning after the debate, and continued to suggest that it had been tampered with. "I had a problem with a microphone that didn't work. I don't know if you saw that in the room. my microphone was terrible. I wonder was it set up that way on purpose. My microphone in the room, they couldn't hear me, you know, it was going on and off. Which isn't exactly great. I wonder if it was set up that way, but it was terrible. When I tested, it was beautiful, like an hour before, I said what a great mic." Trump went on, "It was going on and off and it was much lower than hers. I don't want to believe in conspiracy theories, of course, but it was much lower than hers and it was crackling and she didn't have that problem. That to me was a bad problem, you have a bum mic, that's not exactly good." This isn't the first time Trump has attacked a faulty microphone. In January at a rally in Florida, he complained several times about his microphone. "Stupid mic keeps popping," he said at the time. 
Hillary Clinton got a major boost in August from some of her richest and most loyal supporters, with 11 seven-figure checks to fuel a spending surge from the main super PAC supporting her candidacy. Priorities USA Action raised $23.4 million in August, more than half of which came from its top five donors, according to its monthly report filed Tuesday with the Federal Election Commission. It was the super PAC's best fundraising month by far, more than doubling July's take. Story Continued Below Slim-Fast founder Daniel Abraham and Newsweb chairman Fred Eychaner each gave $3 million. Billionaire financier George Soros kicked in $2.5 million, and investor Donald Sussman and Laurene Powell Jobs' Emerson Collective both added $2 million. Sussman's latest gift brings his tally for the cycle to $13 million, the most of any of Clinton's benefactors. Working for Working Americans, the Service Employees International Union Committee On Political Education, the National Air Traffic Controllers Association PAC, investor Henry Laufer and his wife, Marsha, all gave $1 million. The super PAC took advantage of the influx to step up its spending, dropping $20.6 million and ending the month with $41.5 million on hand, according to the report. It paid BuzzFeed $1 million for digital ads, $405,400 to Global Strategy Group for research and consultant travel, $247,600 to Ralston Lapp Media for video production and media consulting, and $234,400 to Shorr Johnson Magnus for the same. The report showed a $28,000 payment to CrowdStrike, the cybersecurity firm that has also been serving the Democratic National Committee in the aftermath of its email hack. The PAC spent $15,600 at the Ritz Carlton Philadelphia, where top donors and fundraisers stayed during the Democratic National Convention. Priorities USA transferred $6.5 million to five other political groups: Immigrant Voters Win PAC, Latino Victory Fund, Planned Parenthood Action Fund, VoteVets and Women Vote.
Hillary Clinton campaign manager Robby Mook drew the ire of the hosts of MSNBC's "Morning Joe” on Wednesday when he repeatedly refused to be drawn out on Clinton’s views on Syria, with an exasperated Joe Scarborough at one point asking, “We love you, buddy, but what are you here for if you can't answer basic questions?” Mook deferred to Clinton when asked about the former secretary of state's biggest regret with respect to the handling of the situation in Syria. Noting, as panelist Willie Geist had, that Clinton was already out of office in 2013 when Syrian President Bashar Assad crossed the White House's "red line" by using chemical weapons on his own people, Mook also acknowledged that Clinton was in office when the conflict began in 2011. Story Continued Below "Well, right, but, you know, she — I think she's well regarded for her leadership as secretary of state. She came out of that office with a 70 percent approval rating. She, in contrast to Donald Trump, has released a clear and decisive plan to defeat ISIS. Donald Trump has said that he thinks he knows more about it than the generals and refuses to tell us what his secret plan is," Mook continued. Pressed about the red line, Mook declined to respond as to whether Clinton was "disappointed" about President Barack Obama's lack of action. "I think you'd have to ask her about that question, how she would characterize it," Mook responded, to which Geist said, "Well, you're here to speak for her, Robby. You haven't discussed that at all?" Laughing, Mook remarked, "Look, what matters is what she is going to do as president. As I said, she has a clear plan to defeat ISIS. Donald Trump does not. It's a secret. He won't tell anybody what it is and he says he knows more than the generals. I think the choice is clear." Asked what Clinton would do on Day One in Syria, Mook rehashed Clinton's talking points and directed viewers to the campaign website. Panelist Mike Barnicle, while acknowledging that Mook is not the candidate herself, posed a hypothetical debate question for Clinton at next Monday's debate, asking what the former secretary of state would do to provide aid to the people of eastern Aleppo after the bombing of a relief convoy, differently from the Obama administration. "Again, I think you're going to have to ask her that question. That's a matter of policy, and I'm going to leave it for her to determine that," Mook said. Scarborough then snapped, "We love you, buddy, but what are you here for if you can't answer basic questions? I mean, I don't know if there's a — I mean, we may be tiptoeing into Gary Johnson territory here if you don't know the answer to that basic of a question. ... then why do we have you here?" (The Libertarian presidential nominee stumbled on the same show earlier this month when he asked, "What is Aleppo?" in response to a question about the conflict.) "I think — look, you're asking new policy questions. You would have to ask the secretary for that," Mook said. "My job's not to set policy." "New?" Scarborough responded incredulously. "Aleppo's been around for — Syria's been around for some time. The red line being drawn has been around for some time. I'm not being difficult here at all. These are basic questions." "And I'm not being difficult either. I'm simply saying that she has laid out a plan to defeat ISIS, and if there are new questions pertaining to Aleppo, I'm going to need to let her answer those, and she will answer those in the debate, and we look forward to her having the opportunity to do that," Mook said. "And as I said, Donald Trump has been able — unable, rather, to release a plan, and we hope that he will reveal what his plans are in the debate." As the interview drew to a close, Geist asked Mook about Clinton's current thinking on no-fly zones in Syria, given her past support. "I'm going to let her statements speak for themselves," Mook said, smiling and laughing. Geist followed up, "Robby, aren't you here representing her point of view?" "I am, indeed, and I'm gonna let her language speak for itself," Mook said, to which Geist responded that the Clinton aide was saying that Trump would not clarify his policy at the same time he would not address questions about his own candidate's. "You are quoting Secretary Clinton's plans as she's laid them out. I'm going to let them speak for themselves," Mook repeated. "Donald Trump has not laid out a single plan." Moments after concluding the interview, Scarborough remarked to the panel, "So what's going on? I don't understand that. I'm completely flummoxed by that interview." "I mean, first of all, are they pleased, and openness with the press," he said, referring to Mook's comments earlier in the same interview to that effect. "I heard after the pneumonia deal they all were chastened and changing their relationship and trying to be more open with the press. Won't respond into Aleppo. Won't respond to the no-fly zone. What's going on here? Better not to come on." Brad Woodhouse, president of the pro-Clinton super PAC Correct the Record, ripped into the show for its line of questioning. Woodhouse retweeted the Los Angeles Times' Mike Memoli, who asked, "How much time does @Morning_Joe crew think a campaign manager is spending on Syria policy 50 days out?" "No s---. That was ridiculous and uncalled for. Book the policy director for that and the campaign manager to talk about how to get to 270," Woodhouse added.
A spokesperson for the New York Police Department said “detectives are looking into” a report that former congressman Anthony Weiner traded sexually explicit messages with a girl who identified herself as a 15-year-old high school student. The exchange was first reported by the Daily Mail yesterday, which withheld the name of the girl because she is a minor. Story Continued Below Later Thursday, CNN reported that U.S. Attorney Preet Bharara's office has subpoenaed Weiner for his cell phone and other records. Weiner yesterday referred reporters to a statement he had given the Daily Mail, saying he regretted his online conversations but pointing to a letter the girl wrote calling the incident “a hoax.” The girl later recanted that characterization, and shared with the Daily Mail a series of images and messages she said she traded with Weiner up until July. Weiner’s 2013 mayoral campaign was rocked by revelations that he had traded sexually explicit messages with a woman after he had resigned from office in 2011. Weiner's resignation was prompted by an exchange with another woman that he accidentally posted to his public Twitter feed. Mayor Bill de Blasio today said today the situation is "horrible." "I've known Anthony over the years, but I know Huma much better, having served side by side with her during the 2000 Senate campaign," said de Blasio, who managed Hillary Clinton's campaign for the U.S. Senate that year. "I think the world of Huma. I just feel horrible for her and her son that they're going through this. It's not a secret, Anthony obviously has a real problem that needs treatment, and all I can say is I hope he will pursue the treatment he needs and stick with it until his issues are addressed." Yesterday, Governor Andrew Cuomo said if the report is true, it is "sick" and potentially "criminal."
An oil industry executive who has spoken out against animal rights is a leading contender for Interior secretary should Donald Trump win the White House, two sources familiar with the campaign’s deliberations told POLITICO on Monday — a prospect that drew immediate condemnation from environmental activists. Forrest Lucas, the 74-year-old co-founder of oil products company Lucas Oil, is well-known in his native Indiana, where in 2006 he won the naming rights to Lucas Oil Stadium, the home of the Indianapolis Colts football team, for a reported $121.5 million over 20 years. He and his wife have given a combined $50,000 to the gubernatorial campaigns of Trump's running mate, Mike Pence, according to Indiana state records. Story Continued Below Lucas’ company, California-based Lucas Oil, is a fast-growing manufacturer of automotive oils, lubricants and other additives used in everything from cars to heavy-duty trucks. One person briefed by the Trump campaign said Lucas is a “front-runner” for the Interior secretary job. The person, who was granted anonymity to talk about private discussions, added that Trump wants a “more business-friendly and business experience-heavy cabinet.” But environmentalists quickly excoriated the idea of an oil industry executive leading the department that oversees national parks and wildlife refuges, along with decisions about offshore drilling, fracking regulations and protections for endangered species. "Putting an oil executive in charge of our public lands and precious coasts in places like North Carolina, Virginia and Florida is a virtual guarantee that Trump's promise to throw open season on drilling in our special places will come true if he's elected," said Khalid Pitts, the Sierra Club's national political director. David Turnbull, the campaigns director at anti-fossil-fuels group Oil Change USA, worried that Trump's Cabinet could be full of people with ties to the oil industry. They include Harold Hamm, the CEO of Oklahoma oil company Continental Resources, who has emerged as a possible pick for Trump's energy secretary. "Catering to an industry dead-set on continued expansion of oil and gas drilling is not only totally out of step with climate science, but it's also out of step with the majority of Americans who are calling for a swift transition to clean energy and robust action on climate change," Turnbull said in an email. It would be nearly unprecedented for major oil executive to get the top job in the Interior Department. Current Secretary Sally Jewell was an engineer for Mobil Oil early in her career and often touts her experience fracking wells, although she is best known as a conservationist and former outdoor retail executive. Lucas’ nomination would be a coup for the oil and gas industry, which has battled President Barack Obama’s Interior Department for years over everything from Endangered Species Act listings to access to federal lands for drilling. Trump has cultivated close ties to the oil industry, which was once skeptical of his campaign for president. "In a lot of ways, having an oil and gas friendly person in the Interior Department is more important to the oil and gas industry than having someone friendly at the Energy Department," one industry official said. Nominating Lucas would also break with the long-standing tradition of Interior secretaries coming from Western states. It would also likely draw rebukes from animal rights groups. Lucas, who owns a ranch and serves on Trump’s agriculture advisory committee, is one of the biggest donors to groups that attack the Humane Society and People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals, and defend animal agriculture, hunting, meat consumption, rodeos and circuses. Another source with knowledge of the transition operation said Lucas was on a short list of about five names that are under consideration for the post, which has started to attract considerable interest from prominent “anti-conservation zealots.” Donald Trump Jr., an avid hunter, has also publicly expressed interest in the job. Earlier this year, Lucas financed and produced a feature film called “The Dog Lover,” which portrays dog breeders and puppy mills as being unfairly targeted by animal rights groups. The movie was backed by Protect the Harvest, a nonprofit founded and chaired by Lucas, that says it’s “Keeping America Free, Fed & Fun!” In 2014, Lucas gave $250,000 to the Protect the Harvest PAC, records show. Roger Ebert's website called the movie “shamelessly manipulative” and “a pretty bald piece of anti-[Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals] and/or PETA propaganda,” noting that the movie ends with a call to moviegoers to look into animal welfare groups before donating to them. Animal rights supporters were quick to point out Monday that Lucas had put up hundreds of thousands of dollars into fighting an "anti-puppy mill" ballot measure in Missouri that was approved by voters in 2010. "Forrest Lucas is a peevish advocate of trophy hunting, puppy mills and big agribusiness, and has never met a case of animal exploitation he wouldn’t defend," said Michael Markarian, president of the Humane Society Legislative Fund, which backed the measure in Missouri. Lucas’ wife, Charlotte, who co-founded Lucas Oil, came under fire in 2014 for a Facebook post that criticized Muslims and atheists. "I'm sick and tired of minorities running our country!” she wrote, according to news reports at the time. She later apologized. Lucas has donated more than $150,000 to a slew of Republican candidates and causes since 2006, but records do not show any donations to Trump. In an interview last year, Lucas did not sound particularly enthused about the New York City real estate mogul. Asked if he would be comfortable with Trump getting the GOP nomination, Lucas responded: “It would be like when Obama got elected. I’d say, ‘I don’t really like it, but I have no choice and I’ll have to make the best of it.’” A Trump campaign spokeswoman did not respond to a request for comment. Lucas could not immediately be reached and his office did not immediately respond to a request for comment. Elana Schor contributed to this report.
Washington (CNN)Republicans are preparing for the penalty phase of the 2016 election. The next Republican civil war came into greater focus over the weekend when party chairman Reince Priebus threw a thinly veiled warning at former GOP 2016ers who haven't yet endorsed Donald Trump: "Get on board" or face penalties if you ever seek the presidency again. The nudge -- aimed at Republicans such as John Kasich, Ted Cruz and Jeb Bush -- was no off-the-cuff expression of frustration. Several Republican party chairs in early voting states told CNN that Priebus has spent days talking about enforcing the pledge that all 17 GOP candidates signed at the outset of the 2016 primary to support the eventual nominee. Find out all you need to know for the 2016 election on "The Daily DC" podcast "I can't tell you how many people have asked me, 'What are you going to do about these candidates that are not keeping their promise?'" Iowa GOP chairman Jeff Kaufmann told CNN Monday. He said the Iowa state GOP receives 10 to 20 calls per week from rank-and-file Republicans wondering what, specifically, the party will do to force Kasich, Cruz and Bush to stick to their pledges and back Trump. "If I'm hearing it here from a state of 3 million, it must a megaphone there in DC," said Kaufmann, who has spoken with Priebus and other Republican officials about enforcing the pledge. "There's no wiggle room in terms of what that promise was, and it should be honored." A representative for Priebus didn't comment on the conversations. But his call for penalties wasn't widely embraced -- with the No. 2 House Republican breaking with Priebus Tuesday morning. "There's a better way to unite people. I'm not a big believer that punishment unites people," House Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy told reporters at a weekly session in the Capitol. The California Republican added, "If Hillary (Clinton) can't unite Republicans, I don't think anything can." Premature conversation? Of course, talk of penalties on candidates who might run in 2020 could be all for naught if Trump wins. The race between Trump and Clinton has narrowed dramatically in recent weeks, though the Democratic nominee still has more paths to the White House. But the episode underscores the frenzy that could consume the GOP if Trump loses the race and the party searches for a new direction. The anatomy of a white, working-class Trump voter "We're watching the trailer for the GOP civil war, out in theaters November 9," said a top Republican strategist, who asked not to be named to avoid openly feuding with Priebus. The penalty talk spilled into the open Sunday, when Priebus told John Dickerson on CBS' "Face the Nation" that members of the 2016 Republican presidential field who haven't yet abided by their pledge to back the eventual nominee and endorsed Trump need to "get on board." And for those who don't, he said future presidential bids won't "be that easy." "If a private entity puts forward a process and has agreement with the participants in that process, and those participants don't follow through with the promises that they made in that process," Priebus said, "what should a private party do about that if those same people come around in four or eight years?" Kasich's camp quickly zipped off a response accusing Priebus of putting party over principles. Kasich strategist John Weaver said the Ohio governor "will not be bullied by a Kenosha political operative that is unable to stand up for core principles or beliefs." Cruz brushed Priebus off Tuesday evening. "These are serious times. I think the last thing we need to worrying about is bickering between Republicans," he said. "My focus is on defeating Hillary Clinton and helping preserve a Senate Republican majority." The RNC's leverage Penalties, several Republicans said, would likely come from the national party in the form of restrictions on access to the Republican National Committee's data and voter files -- and potentially bans from primary debates. Individual states, though, likely couldn't keep candidates off their ballots. Still, Republicans cautioned that talk of penalizing pledge-breakers is aimed at nudging Kasich, Cruz, Bush and others to support Trump in 2016 -- not to handicap the party's presidential candidates in the future. Some said it's not even clear the RNC would have authority to impose the crackdown Priebus discussed. "Reince has simply posed a question to which there is no good answer yet -- and I'm not sure that the question deserves an answer. That's to be determined," said Matt Moore, the South Carolina GOP chairman. RNC spokeswoman Lindsay Walters declined to address the possibility of penalizing future presidential candidates who didn't abide by their pledges to support Trump. "We are focused on winning back the White House and maintaining our majorities in the House and Senate," Walters said in an email. Donald Trump opens the personal insult vault (again) While some party honchos like Kaufmann backed Priebus' warning shot, others -- including Ohio GOP chairman Matt Borges -- bristled. "No. This is not what we are all about as a party. Besides, let's stay focused on 2016 for the next 50 days," Borges tweeted Sunday night. Top Mitt Romney 2012 strategist Stuart Stevens tweeted: "So idea is most popular recent Republican governors of battleground states should run as independents? Great plan." RNC's handling of Trump The RNC's handling of Trump under Priebus will be on trial as the party picks a new chair -- or extends the Wisconsin operative's tenure -- shortly after the election. Then comes a swing-state governor's race in Virginia, followed by the midterm elections, where Trump's brand of populism could butt against more orthodox conservatives. And in 2020, the early stages of the Republican primary would be defined by how the candidates treated Trump. It would be the clearest differentiator of like-minded conservatives like Mike Pence, the Indiana governor who became Trump's running mate and chief defender, and Cruz, the Texas senator who was booed off stage for refusing to endorse Trump at his own nominating convention. "Assuming Trump loses, there'll be a really pitched battle for the heart and soul of the party," said Weaver, the Kasich strategist who wrote the scathing rebuttal to Priebus on Sunday. "You're going to have off-year elections, you're going to have midterms -- some of that will impact the defining of the party, clearly. But you won't have any new definition of it until there's a new nominee," Weaver said. "There's a broader debate ultimately about what the party stands for and where the country should go." Adelson to spend at least $45 million on 2016 races in boost for GOP Many Republicans still fault Priebus for failing to criticize Trump forcefully enough in late 2015, when he proposed a clearly unconstitutional ban of all Muslims from entering the United States, and believe the party could have done more to slow Trump's rise. They point out a particular irony: The party that insisted it couldn't intercede in the 2016 nominating contest is now threatening to use its leverage to undercut individual candidates in future races. Saul Anuzis, a former Michigan GOP chairman who helmed Cruz's state effort in the primary, defended pledge-breaking candidates, arguing that "circumstances change" -- a reference to the pledge's creation as a tool to keep Trump from launching an independent campaign. He said he doesn't see how Priebus could impose penalties on future presidential candidates. "There's no provisions in the RNC rules that allow anybody to punish anybody," Anuzis said. "The idea of doing that, I think, is extremely difficult, because you normally are looking toward the future, not the past." CNN's Deirdre Walsh and Manu Raju contributed to this report.
Bruce Springsteen called Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump a “moron” in an excerpt from an interview with Rolling Stone magazine published Friday. “The republic is under siege by a moron, basically. The whole thing is tragic. Without overstating it, it's a tragedy for our democracy,” the rocker said, when asked what he makes of the “Trump phenomenon”. Story Continued Below Springsteen criticized Trump’s rhetoric, saying, “The ideas he's moving to the mainstream are all very dangerous ideas — white nationalism and the alt-right movement. The outrageous things that he's done — not immediately disavowing David Duke?” Springsteen said that the things Trump has said and done would have ended any previous candidate’s campaign “immediately." “I believe that there's a price being paid for not addressing the real cost of the deindustrialization and globalization [in the U.S.],” he said, adding, “Trump's thing is simple answers to very complex problems. Fallacious answers to very complex problems. And that can be very appealing.” Springsteen also offered strong words of support for Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton, saying, “I like Hillary. I think she would be a very, very good president.” When asked whether he’s given up on trying to impact the race, he said, “I don't know. I think you have a limited amount of impact as an entertainer, performer or musician.” However, he said he would consider getting involved with the election, adding, “I did it at the time because I felt the country was in crisis, which it certainly is right now.”
Washington (CNN)The military assesses that the shell fired on a joint US-Iraqi base Tuesday was indeed a chemical weapon, according to Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Gen. Joseph Dunford. "We assess it to be a sulfur mustard blister agent," Dunford told the Senate Armed Services Committee Thursday. It is the first time the military has confirmed its assessment on the record since CNN reported the development Wednesday. A US military official told CNN, however, that the first field test for chemical agent was positive and the second test was negative. The substance was sent to a coalition-operated Iraq-based lab, and tests there were inconclusive. The official said the sample will now be sent to another lab for additional testing. RELATED: ISIS suspected of mustard attack against US and Iraqi troops Dunford described ISIS as only having a "rudimentary" capability to deliver the chemical, saying the weapon "wasn't particularly effective, but it is a concerning development." The general went on to say that the US-led counter-ISIS coalition has conducted "over 30" airstrikes against suspected ISIS chemical weapons facilities during the past year. Committee Chairman John McCain said that the situation was "concerning, particularly on those people who don't have protective equipment." The Arizona Republican was referring to civilians and other local forces that have been subjected to ISIS chemical attacks in the past. The more than three-hour-long testimony also featured a few heated exchanges between members of the committee and witnesses Dunford and Defense Secretary Ash Carter over the defense budget and whether a no-fly zone could be implemented in Syria. Dunford acknowledged that the administration is "in deliberation" about the prospect of arming Kurdish forces in Syria, saying that doing so would "increase the prospects of our success in Raqqa." He noted, though, that US ally Turkey's opposition to American support for the Kurds makes the situation "difficult." Dunford had harsh words for Russia, calling it "potentially the most significant threat to our national interests." "A combination of their behavior as well as their military capability ... would cause me to believe that they pose the most significant challenge potentially, the most significant threat to our national interests," he said, referring to their incursions in Georgia and Ukraine. He also said Russia was responsible for the recent airstrike that targeted a UN aid convoy in Syria while noting that both Syrian and Russian aircraft had been in the vicinity of the area at the time of the attack. "It was either the Russians or the regime," Dunford said, adding, "There's no doubt in my mind that the Russians are responsible. I just don't know whose aircraft actually dropped the bombs." Carter concurred, saying, "The Russians are responsible for this strike whether they conducted it or not" due to their association with the Syrian regime. Their comments come as the prospects of the US-Russia negotiated ceasefire in Syria, which would include Russian-American military cooperation in fighting the terror groups ISIS and al Nusra, appears poised to collapse. McCain slammed the accord, calling it "deeply problematic even if implemented." He also took a swipe at top US diplomat John Kerry, saying, "President (Barack) Obama sent his intrepid but delusional secretary of state to tilt yet again at the windmill of cooperating with Vladimir Putin." 
NEW YORK — The United States and Russia ended any pretenses Thursday of their cease-fire for Syria remaining in force after days of increased violence and the Syrian military's announcement of a new offensive in Aleppo. "We can't go out to the world and say we have an agreement when we don't," Secretary of State John Kerry said after meeting the top diplomats from Russia and more than a dozen European and Middle Eastern countries. Story Continued Below Kerry's statement, after three days of private and public diplomacy on the sidelines of the U.N. General Assembly, provided an ominous endnote to a week diplomats had hoped would be a major capstone toward peace. Instead, Kerry and Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov, who negotiated the truce two weeks ago, went their separate ways as violence in Syria flared anew and the relationship between the two key foreign powers in the conflict appeared to reach a new low. No one spoke of being able to quickly resuscitate the cease-fire. While Kerry and Lavrov were set to hold more talks Friday, even confidence-building measures seem beyond their reach at this point. As the diplomats huddled in a New York hotel, Syria's military command said it would restart operations in the northern city of Aleppo, scene of some of the most bitter fighting in recent months. According to one official present in the gathering, Kerry was informed of the news when his chief of staff showed him a headline on his BlackBerry. A furious Kerry then told the entire room, Lavrov included, that "even while we are meeting here, they are doing this," said the official, who wasn't authorized to speak publicly on the matter and demanded anonymity. Lavrov told Russian media that consultations would continue to "guarantee" the cease-fire. But even as Kerry vowed to press on with all efforts to find a peaceful solution to the war between Syrian President Bashar Assad's Russian-backed government and U.S.-backed rebels, he acknowledged the current strategy wasn't working. "We can't be the only ones trying to hold this door open," Kerry told reporters. "Russia and the regime must do their part or this will have no chance." He called for the immediate grounding of planes and helicopters that have launched airstrikes, including a Russian one earlier this week that the U.S. says hit an aid convoy, killing 20 civilians. Russia has denied responsibility, while raising a range of ulterior scenarios for how the caravan might have been struck. "Absent a major gesture like this, we don't believe there is a point to making more promises or issuing more plans or announcing something that can't be reached," Kerry said, describing a "moment of truth" for Syria, Russia and all those trying to halt the bloodshed. The meeting came after Assad told the AP in an interview in Damascus that the United States was to blame for the deal's failure. He cited U.S. inability to control "terrorist" groups and a weekend attack that killed dozens of Syrian soldiers. The U.S. apologized for what it described as a mistake. Lavrov had sought a three-day pause in fighting to revive the cease-fire. But U.S. officials said there was no point returning to a situation in which rebels would be pressed to hold fire, while the Syrian and Russian military's could violate the agreement.
HEMPSTEAD, N.Y. — Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump are counting down the hours to their first debate, a heavily hyped and critical encounter that comes as a fresh batch of polls show the race narrowing to a virtual dead heat. The showdown is expected to be a study in contrasts: Clinton, the longtime politician and consummate preparer who has pored over briefing materials in recent weeks, versus Trump, a first-time political candidate who, if aides are to be believed, has eschewed many elements of traditional debate preparation ahead of what could be the most watched political event in U.S history. Story Continued Below The two candidates arrive at Hofstra University in an increasingly taut race, as Clinton’s once-comfortable lead in August has evaporated into a knife’s edge contest well within the margin of error in the most crucial swing states. “A wheel-to-wheel race,” Trump’s running mate, Indiana Gov. Mike Pence, called it in a radio interview with Hugh Hewitt earlier on Monday. Trump and Clinton face two fundamentally different questions headed into Monday night. For Trump: Can the celebrity candidate best known only a few short years ago as the star of “The Apprentice” demonstrate the gravitas necessary for voters to envision him in the Oval Office? For Clinton: Can a woman who has been in the public spotlight for more than two decades — as first lady, senator and secretary of state — ease the electorate’s lingering questions about her trustworthiness? “This debate will have a huge impact,” predicted Judd Gregg, a Republican who played Al Gore and John Kerry in President George W. Bush’s mock debate preparations. Because Trump and Clinton enter the debate with historically high unfavorability ratings, Gregg said, “I think the person who wins this debate is the candidate who is able to increase their likeability and, at the same time, is able to have Americans see them as a leader who will take the country in a positive direction.” TV networks are expecting record audiences with countdown clocks ticking down the hours and minutes in recent days. Clinton’s campaign has prepared for two different Trumps to show up at Hofstra, her aides have said. The first is the insult-throwing bombastic showman who rampaged through Republican primaries. The second is the more controlled and sober candidate who has appeared on the campaign trail of late, someone who might even make a magnanimous gesture toward Clinton on the debate stage. Trump has stayed more disciplined with the help of teleprompters at his rallies and by not subjecting himself to tough questioning in recent weeks, bypassing formal press conferences for 60 days and, for the most part, avoiding extensive interviews with outlets other than Fox News. Neither of those are options on Monday night. But Mari Maseng Will, a longtime GOP debate coach, said Trump has been so outlandish on the campaign trail for the past 15 months that the typical bar for what counts as misbehaving on the debate stage is unusually high for him. “A sigh wouldn’t do it,” she said, referring to Gore’s now-infamous exasperation with Bush in the 2000 debates. “The only thing he could do to turn away people… would be mean,” she said. “That’s a killer in American politics, even for him.” Trump successfully navigated 11 Republican primary debates, but he never had to face one of his opponents one-on-one. Indeed, the smallest crowd he competed against was three other candidates, meaning he will have to fill nearly double the amount of time he ever has before on Monday. That could prove a challenge for a candidate who has mastered the quick sound bite and quip but lacks the depth of knowledge on policy that Clinton has. The debate will last for 90 minutes with no bathroom or commercial breaks. In the hours leading up to the debate, the Clinton and Trump camps sparred less about each other and more about the role of moderator Lester Holt, an NBC anchor. Clinton backers urged Holt to fact-check Trump, whose misrepresentations on the campaign trail have far outnumbered Clinton’s. “We are concerned that Donald Trump may lie, he may throw misinformation out there, and that Hillary will have to spend all of her time trying to correct the record rather than talking about the things she wants to accomplish,” Clinton campaign manager Robby Mook said on CBS on Monday Kellyanne Conway, Trump’s campaign manager, complained about Clinton’s “very public and very coordinated attempt to game the refs.” But such pre-game spin and expectations-management end at 9 p.m. eastern. Then the bright lights will shine on Clinton and Trump alone.
Donald Trump doubled down on his call for implementation of stop-and-frisk Thursday — but only in Chicago. The Republican presidential nominee suggested the controversial stop-and-frisk policy to mitigate violent crime in America’s inner cities during an interview with Fox News’ Sean Hannity broadcast Wednesday evening. Story Continued Below On Thursday, he clarified that he was only referring to enacting it in Chicago, where he said more than 3,000 shootings have taken place this year. “I was really referring to Chicago with stop-and-frisk,” he told “Fox and Friends” during a phone interview Thursday morning. “They asked me about Chicago and I was talking about stop-and-frisk for Chicago.” But while Trump scaled down where stop-and-frisk should be deployed, the self-proclaimed law-and-order candidate hardly softened his stance on the policing practice that studies have shown is biased. He cited New York, where a federal court ruled the practice unconstitutional in 2013 because it disproportionately impacts people of color (though an appeals court overturned the ruling, and the city eventually settled), as evidence that it works. “I mean, the numbers were unbelievably changed,” he said of crime statistics before and after New York implemented stop-and-frisk. “I don’t mean just a little bit. It was massively changed, and it became a safe city. It went from an unsafe city to a safe city.” Trump highlighted Chicago as a city that’s “out of control” right now but where stop-and-frisk is a necessity that can save the city from itself, suggesting it’s more dangerous to be there than in war-torn nations like Afghanistan. “I think Chicago needs stop-and-frisk,” Trump said. “Now, people can criticize me for that or people can say whatever they want, but they asked me about Chicago, and I think stop-and-frisk, with good, strong, you know, good, strong law and order. But you have to do something. It can’t continue the way it’s going.” David Axelrod, a former senior adviser to President Barack Obama, blasted Trump’s “problematic” rhetoric — even if he was only referring to Chicago. “That’s like taking a can of kerosene and pouring it over a fire,” he said of Trump’s call for stop-and-frisk during an interview with CNN. “It wasn’t what was needed.” Trump shared his denotation of the term, first explaining that “there are different levels” to stop-and-frisk. “Basically, they will, if they see poss… — you know, they’re proactive, and if they see a person possibly with a gun or they think may have a gun, they will see the person, and they’ll look and they’ll take the gun away,” Trump said. “They’ll stop, they’ll frisk, and they’ll take the gun away, and they won’t have anything to shoot with. I mean, how it’s not being used in Chicago is, to be honest with you, it’s quite unbelievable. And, you know, the police, the local police, they know who has a gun, who shouldn’t be having a gun. They understand that.” Trump’s definition, however, excluded any racial bias — at a time when the nation is already reeling from a series of fatal shootings of black men at the hands of police officers just days apart, marked by unrest in Charlotte, North Carolina, where Gov. Pat McCrory declared a state of emergency Wednesday evening. Former New York Mayor Rudy Giuliani, a Trump surrogate, hailed the practice as a strategy that reduced crime and is the solution to reducing gun violence. “Because it takes the gun right out of your hand,” said Giuliani, who added that no one is taking guns away in New York or Chicago “because bad guys don’t go register” guns. “You know, ‘Fat Tony’ Salerno doesn’t go get a gun permit. Neither does the hood on the street go get a permit,” he continued. “You know why? There’s probably a warrant for his arrest and he’s gonna go to jail. So he doesn’t get a permit.” Trump contended that “you can’t let the system go the way it’s going,” adding that “some people” think stop-and-frisk is “a great idea, and some people probably don’t like it” — New York Mayor Bill de Blasio is of the latter group. De Blasio condemned stop-and-frisk, insisting that it “created a real wedge between police and community and created division.” De Blasio credited “a systematic strategic approach to policing,” not stop-and-frisk, for reduced crime in New York. “You know, Donald Trump talks about stop-and-frisk like he knows the facts. He has had no experience with policing, no experience with public safety,” de Blasio told CNN. “He should really be careful because if we reinstituted stop-and-frisk all over this country, you would see a lot more tension between police and community.” White House Press Secretary Josh Earnest declined to respond to Trump's comments. "I think it does raise questions that a politician would be so dogmatic about protecting second amendment rights yet rather cavalier about protecting the constitutional prohibition against an illegal search and seizure," he said. "It might lead one person to conclude that the politician is more interested in playing politics than finding a solution." But Earnest made sure to note that stop-and-frisk is not the type of practice the administration and its allies support. "Expanding and doubling down on stop and frisk policies is not among the suggestions, I think for rather obvious reasons." Brent Griffiths contributed to this story.
(CNN)Former President Bill Clinton sought to address concerns about his family's namesake foundation in an interview Monday, admitting that while "it was natural" for donors to seek favors from the Clintons, he'd "trusted" that the State Department under Hillary Clinton would appropriately handle potential conflicts of interest. "It was natural for people who've been our political allies and personal friends to call and ask for things. And I trusted the State Department wouldn't do anything they shouldn't do," Clinton told NPR in an interview that aired Monday morning. He also maintained that he would sever his connection to the Clinton Foundation if Hillary Clinton is elected president to remove any conflict-of-interest concerns, though he acknowledged the move would be "hard." "It is hard, but you know, if Hillary is elected, I'm looking forward to it," Clinton said. He noted that he's worked for the foundation "longer than I've ever had any job -- and I loved it." "And you know, we always say in response to our critics that nobody in my family ever took a penny out of this foundation and put millions of dollars in. But I would have paid more to do this job. It was the most fun thing I've ever done," Clinton added. The former president pushed back on criticism that donors to the Clintons Foundation engaged in a "pay-to-play" scheme, whereby donations to the foundation bought influence with Hillary Clinton during her term as Secretary of State. He pointed to the lack of evidence of any such quid-pro-quos, and accused critics of "smearing" him and his wife, according to NPR. "In real life, if somebody tells a lie about you, and I find out it is, I like you more and them less. In political life, they just keep on smearing you -- even if it all comes to nothing -- people will like you less and won't hold anybody accountable for what they say." Clinton also praised his wife for weathering criticism during her presidential campaign. "I wonder if there's a man in America that could have taken what she's been through in the last year and a half." 
In this final stretch before Election Day, the Clinton camp is setting its sights on the youth. The Democratic presidential nominee today held a millennial-focused campaign event at Temple University in Philadelphia, where she made her pitch to the voting bloc that has been unwilling to fully rally behind her. "Even if you are totally opposed to Donald Trump, you may still have some questions about me. I get that," Clinton, in a moment of self-reflection, told the crowd of 300 people. "And I want to do my best to answer those questions.” She explained that the “service” part of “public service” has always been easier for her than the “public” part. “I will never be the showman my opponent is and, you know what, that's OK with me,” she said, referring to Donald Trump.       Over the past week, the Clinton campaign has redoubled its efforts to attract millennials, whom demographers define loosely as people born in the early-1980s through the early-2000s. Clinton surrogates President Obama, first lady Michelle Obama, Sen. Bernie Sanders of Vermont and Sen. Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts have all been tapped to hit the trail. The main focus: urging young people to vote. “We need everyone off the sidelines,” Clinton said today. “Not voting is not an option. That just plays into Trump’s hands, it really does.” Clinton, who started her remarks calling on the country to “remain vigilant” in the wake of the bombings in New York and New Jersey, also used the opportunity to contrast herself with her Republican opponent. "You want something to vote for, not just against," she told the crowd. “Optimism, not resentment. Answers, not anger. Ideas, not insults. Bridges, not walls. “You're also here because you know this election isn't a reality-TV show. It shouldn't be about birth certificates or name calling or stunts to get on the cable news,” she added, referencing Trump’s long-held and false belief that Obama was born outside the United States. “This election comes down to a choice between two very different visions for America,” she concluded. Trump has since said that he believes Obama was born in the United States. Although Clinton is polling better with young adults than Trump (a recent ABC News/Washington Post poll found that she has 40 percent support among youth versus Trump’s 28 percent), the demographic, as a whole, has shown less enthusiasm for her candidacy than other Democrats. According to that same poll, 60 percent of Democratic adults under the age of 30 said they had hoped Sanders would win their party’s nomination, while 26 percent said Clinton. That number, however, is better than it was four months ago. (During the primary in spring, 75 percent of Democrats under the age of 30 supported Sanders, while only 25 percent said they supported Clinton, according to the ABC News/Washington Post poll.) Clinton campaign officials, who hope to close that gap further, say they plan to continue these outreach efforts throughout the rest of the campaign. "The millennial generation is a key voting bloc in this election and it's clear that the campaign must do more to earn their vote,” Clinton spokesman Jennifer Palmieri said in a statement today. “That is why the campaign has recently ramped up efforts to engage millennial voters through a stretch of events with surrogates like President Obama, first lady Michelle Obama, Senator Tim Kaine, Anne Holton, Chelsea Clinton, Senator Elizabeth Warren and Senator Bernie Sanders. “The campaign has also brought on board staff at headquarters and in states to organize and mobilize millennial voters,” she added. “And over the coming weeks, the campaign will continue to host discussions in communities on how Hillary Clinton is fighting for them.” ABC News’ Ryan Struyk contributed to this report.
Washington (CNN)Four days before the government is scheduled to run out of money, lawmakers on Capitol Hill remain at odds about whether to add millions of dollars for Flint, Michigan, to a spending bill to keep agencies operating. Democrats are insisting help for Flint -- hard hit last year by lead poisoning in its drinking water supply -- be attached to the must-pass bill. If it's not, they vow to block the legislation on a key vote in the Senate on Tuesday, leaving little time to get a funding bill through both chambers. But top Democrats signaled Monday there may be a way to resolve the impasse: if House Republicans were to assure them the Flint money would make it into a separate bill that the House is voting on this week. A top House Republican leader seemed receptive to the idea. "This funding measure does not quote a single penny for Flint, Michigan. Not a penny. The people of Flint, Michigan, have been waiting for emergency assistance to clean their poison water for more than a year," Senate Democratic Leader Harry Reid said in a floor speech. "Senate Republicans claim they'll address the needs of Flint when we return after the election. We've heard that before, haven't we?" Republicans counter that Reid's demand for Flint funding to be added to the government spending bill are new and may be politically motivated, designed to disrupt smooth passage of government funding and make Republicans appear ineffective just weeks before the presidential and congressional elections that will determine the balance of power in the capital. "It's true that some in Democratic leadership would like to turn this simple 10-week funding bill into some unnecessary partisan food fight," Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell said. "They think it's good election-year politics." Last Thursday, after weeks of unresolved negotiations, frustrated Senate Republicans stepped away from the negotiating table and put a GOP-authored bill on the floor, essentially daring Democrats to oppose it. The Republican bill would fund the government and the federal response to Zika. Importantly, Republicans said it met Democratic demands for leaving out controversial policy riders. The bill also included what Republicans described as a "down payment" for disaster aid for flood-stricken Louisiana. But Democratic leaders balked arguing they couldn't support money for flooding for Louisiana unless Flint was also addressed. Earlier this month, the Senate passed the Water Resources Development Act, a major water bill that included $220 million in relief aid and loans for Flint. The House is set to pass its version of that bill this week, but it doesn't have any money for Flint. Democrats remain skeptical Republicans will actually agree to provide money for Flint as the two chambers merge those two competing bills into final legislation. However, a Democratic source suggested Monday that one possible way to end the stalemate would be for House Republicans to give Democrats an "ironclad" commitment that the Flint money would be added to that pending water bill. Reid suggested that was a possible path forward, too, when he said on the floor to Republicans: "Call and tell me they're going to take care of this. Give me some assurance we're going to take care of it." Senate Republicans believe they've already shown a commitment to Flint when they overwhelmingly approved the water bill with Flint funding and have vowed to press House Republicans to do the same. House Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy, R-California, told reporters Monday the Flint aid "works perfectly" in the water bill. McCarthy would not say if he would allow the House Democrats to add the Flint aid as an amendment to the water bill, but argued that it would be an issue for a conference committee to settle since the aid is included in the Senate package. Senators will vote Tuesday afternoon on whether to begin debate on the government funding bill. Sixty votes are needed for it to advance and Democrats should be able to block it despite a couple of defections from Democratic senators whose states are impacted by Zika and who want to quickly approve that funding. 
Washington (CNN)President Barack Obama said Saturday that the new Smithsonian museum devoted to African-American history elevates the often-overlooked impact of black Americans and will help others better understand the breadth of the American story. "This national museum helps to tell a richer and fuller story of who we are," Obama, the first African-American president, said at the National Museum of African-American History and Culture. "By knowing this other story we better understand ourselves and each other. It binds us together. It reaffirms that all of us are America, that African-American history is not somehow separate from our larger American story," he added. "It is central to the American story." Saturday's opening ceremony for the museum also was attended by civil rights icon Rep. John Lewis, former Presidents George W. Bush and Bill Clinton and Chief Justice John Roberts. Thousands are expected to have descended on the National Mall this weekend to celebrate the museum's opening. Calling it an "act of patriotism" to understand African-American history and the struggles of all Americans, Obama said "a great nation doesn't shy away from the truth." "We're not a burden on America or a stain on America or an object of shame and pity for America. We are America," Obama said. "And that's what this museum explains." "Hopefully, this museum makes us talk to each other and listen to each other and see each other," he added. Obama also said the museum can provide context to the current national debate on the relationship between law enforcement and black communities that recently made headlines following the police shooting deaths of black men in Tulsa, Oklahoma, and Charlotte, North Carolina. "Perhaps it can help a white visitor understand the pain and anger of demonstrators in places like Ferguson (Missouri) and Charlotte. But it can also help black visitors appreciate the fact that not only is this younger generation carrying on traditions of the past, but within the white communities across the nation, we see the sincerity of law enforcement officers and officials who, in fits and starts, are struggling to understand and trying to do the right thing," he said. "It reminds us that routine discrimination and Jim Crow aren't ancient history. It's just a blink in the eye of history," Obama continued. Star-studded event Saturday's event included musical performances by Stevie Wonder, Patti LaBelle and Denyce Graves, as well as appearances by Robert De Niro and Angela Bassett, who read the words of black poets and historians. RELATED: Congressman: Black history museum is 'an American story' The effort to bring this museum to life began decades ago but was finally set in motion in 2003 when Bush signed a bill creating it. Ground was broken in February 2012. The Smithsonian says the museum is the only one in the US exclusively focused on African-American life, history and culture, but organizers say it is also meant to capture the story of all Americans. One of those who have worked for years to see this museum come to life is educator and historian Lonnie Bunch, founding director for the museum. Asked what does it mean to him to see it finally open, he said, "It means that finally the African-American story on the National Mall is accessible to everybody, and in many ways it means that my ancestors are smiling," he told CNN. "This is framed in a way that this is everybody's story. It is not a black people's story. It is a story of America." Slavery and freedom at focus Officials said the chronicling of slavery and freedom are the centerpiece of the museum. That exhibit contains such items as a slave cabin from South Carolina, a bill of sale for a 16-year-old girl for $600, shackles used on slaves and a copy of the Emancipation Proclamation. RELATED: Clinton, Trump navigate politics of police violence There is also an exhibition focusing on the fight against segregation, which discusses the era from end of Reconstruction through the Civil Rights Movement. Here, visitors see such things as abolitionist Harriet Tubman's hymn book to a dress Rosa Parks was making shortly before she was arrested for not giving up her seat on a segregated bus; a Tuskegee airplane used to train African-American pilots for World War II flights; a segregated Pullman train car as well as a stool from the Woolworth store where there were sit-ins in Greensboro, North Carolina, in 1960; and separate water fountains. A separate section examines the Civil Rights Movement, the Black Power era of the 1960s and 1970s and other activism remembering many activists, including Lewis and Dr. Martin Luther King. The museum holds more than 3,000 artifacts -- with many contributed from ordinary Americans from across the country. There are also tens of thousands of other artifacts which have been contributed which could be rotated later into exhibition space. Obama on Trump: 'Even most 8-year-olds' know slavery was a bad time for black people There are also many iconic items celebrating the achievements in sports, music, television and film including Michael Jackson's fedora hat worn during his 1984 "Victory Tour," boxer Muhammad Ali's headgear, musician Chuck Berry's Cadillac, baseball star Jackie Robinson's bat, some of Olympian Gabby Douglas' items as well as a statue honoring American athletes who held their hands up as a demonstration of solidarity during the 1968 Gold Medal ceremony. Obama featured One exhibit honors the legacy of Obama's election. During an interview airing Friday, he voiced his appreciation for all of those whose work helped make the museum happen. "We were an outgrowth of Frederick Douglass and white abolitionists who partnered with him," Obama told ABC News. "We were the consequence of these Freedom Riders. Of all races. Young people idealistically coming down here and being willing to challenge an unjust system." Also interesting is the design of the building. Sitting next to the Washington Monument on the National Mall, the exterior is made up of 3,600 bronze-colored panels. The architects of the building drew on imagery from both African and American history for the outer layer, saying they were trying to reach towards the sky to express faith, hope and resiliency. The building is three-tiered and is inspired by a traditional wooden column that features a crown or corona -- or African headdress -- at the top. At night, the corona glows from the light within the building. CNN's Kevin Liptak contributed to this report.
(CNN)A group of 375 "concerned" scientists -- including famed physicist Stephen Hawking -- released an open letter Tuesday sharply criticizing Donald Trump, citing the threat of climate change and blasting his push for the US to leave the Paris Accord. "It is of great concern that the Republican nominee for President has advocated U.S. withdrawal from the Paris Accord. A 'Parexit' would send a clear signal to the rest of the world: 'The United States does not care about the global problems of human-caused climate change. You are on your own,'" the group wrote on the website responsiblescientists.org. The use of the term "Parexit" is a reference to a political withdrawal along the lines of the UK's vote to leave the European Union, commonly called the "Brexit." They continued, "The consequences of opting out of the global community would be severe and long-lasting -- for our planet's climate and for the international credibility of the United States." The letter is signed by a number of famous scientists, including Hawking and Nobel Prize-winning physicist Steven Chu, who served as Secretary of Energy under President Barack Obama. CNN reached out to the Trump campaign for a response to the letter, but did not immediately receive a response. The Paris Agreement was reached by 195 countries at the United Nations Climate Change Conference in Paris in 2015, aimed at coordinating global efforts to combat climate change. Obama was a main proponent of the agreement, and Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton supports its ongoing implementation. The group slammed politicians who deny the existence of man-made climate change. "During the presidential primary campaign, claims were made that the Earth is not warming, or that warming is due to purely natural causes outside human control. Such claims are inconsistent with reality," they wrote. Republican nominee Donald Trump opposes the agreement, and he has previously suggested that climate change is a hoax "created by and for the Chinese." He recently said in an interview that "I am not a great believer in man-made climate change." 
For the first time in President Obama’s tenure, the Senate is set to override his veto of a bill that would allow the families of 9/11 victims to sue Saudi Arabia in U.S. courts. The president vetoed the bill Friday, citing concerns that it could open the U.S. government to similar lawsuits. "Our concern extends not just to the impact this would have on our relationship with Saudi Arabia, but rather the impact that this could have on the United States' relationship with countries around the world,” White House press secretary Josh Earnest told reporters Friday. The White House is also concerned that the bill could tarnish the U.S. relationship with the Gulf nation. Saudi Arabia has itself spoken critically of and personally lobbied against the effort, maintaining it had no role in assisting the 9/11 terrorists. But the bill passed with unanimous voice votes in both the House of Representatives and the Senate, meaning the veto override, set for a Senate vote Wednesday and House vote by Friday, will likely get the two-thirds majority in both chambers needed to pass. “I look forward to the opportunity for Congress to override the President’s veto, provide these families with the chance to seek the justice they deserve, and send a clear message that we will not tolerate those who finance terrorism in the United States,” Senate Majority Whip John Cornyn, R-Texas, said in a statement Friday. Former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton has also indicated she would sign the legislation into law if she wins the presidential election.
(CNN)Donald Trump reiterated his view that Hillary Clinton "doesn't have the stamina" to be president during Monday night's debate. "She doesn't have the look. She doesn't have the stamina, I said she doesn't have the stamina, and I don't believe she does have the stamina," Trump said. Fact checking the debate The debate moderator, NBC's Lester Holt, asked Trump to clarify what he meant when he said earlier this month that his Democratic rival didn't have "a presidential look." Trump's women problem "I just don't believe she has a presidential look, and you need a presidential look," Trump had told ABC News' David Muir in an interview. Clinton responded: "As soon as he travels to 112 countries and negotiates a peace deal, a cease fire, a release of dissidents, an opening of new opportunities in nations around the world, or even spends 11 hours testifying in front of a congressional committee he can talk to me about stamina." The most memorable one-liners from the debate Clinton, the first woman to be nominated as a candidate for a major political party in US history, pointed out Trump pivoted from saying she doesn't look like a presidential candidate to saying she doesn't have the stamina. "He tried to switch from looks to stamina, but this is a man who has called women pigs, slobs and dogs," Clinton said in response to Trump. The debate in 140 characters (and more) Trump defended the comments, which he said were about Rosie O'Donnell. "I said very tough things to (O'Donnell), and I think everybody would agree that she deserves it and nobody feels sorry for her," Trump said. "But you want to know the truth, I was going to say something extremely rough to Hillary, to her family, and I said to myself, 'I just can't do it.' " 
The pressure is on Hillary Clinton. Insiders in both parties agree: Clinton, having lost most of her lead over the past few weeks and bringing more experience to the stage, faces higher expectations than Donald Trump when the two square off for the first debate on Long Island. Story Continued Below That’s according to The POLITICO Caucus — a panel of activists, strategists and operatives in 11 key battleground states. Roughly equal percentages of Democrats (69 percent) and Republicans (74 percent) said Clinton is under more pressure to perform than Trump. But Democrats mostly lamented the low expectations for Trump, a relative political neophyte who has exhibited little command of the issues. “She shouldn't be [under more pressure], but so long as he avoids standing on stage and vomiting on himself, the press will give Trump a glowing review,” said a Nevada Democrat — who, like all respondents, completed the survey anonymously. “Hillary will need a strong performance to demonstrate that she passes and Trump fails the commander-in-chief test.” “The media and Trump himself have set the bar too low for Trump,” a New Hampshire Democrat added. “Presidents don't get graded on a curve, and candidates in debates shouldn't be either.” One Ohio Democrat detected a double standard for the first female major-party nominee. “Hillary Clinton has spent a public lifetime of being held to a strikingly different standard, and this debate will be no exception,” said the Ohio Democrat. “She will have to answer every single question flawlessly, exude gravitas, look presidential, channel Bill's and Barack's oratorical mastery, not raise her voice, not cough, wear an acceptable pantsuit, smile enough, be likable, not laugh and have a good hair day. Donald Trump will just have to show up.” Republicans also said Clinton was under greater scrutiny on Monday night, but for different reasons: tightening polls that show Trump eclipsing Clinton in some battleground states. “Somehow she needs to reverse the trend,” said an Ohio Republican. “Never seen anyone do it before. This will be her chance — and maybe her last chance.” “She has to stop [Trump’s] momentum with a strong debate performance, and she has to be able to stand on the stage for 90 minutes and look healthy for 90 minutes or the whole issue of her health comes back with a vengeance,” added a Virginia Republican. “All [Trump] has to do is not say anything racist or sexist and look like he could be president.” Among those insiders who said Trump was under more pressure — 31 percent of Democrats and 26 percent of Republicans — most pointed to the GOP nominee’s volatile personality. “Hillary Clinton is expected to do well. She is a policy wonk,” said a Michigan Republican. “The pressure is on Donald Trump not to lose his cool. He has been doing very well in his public appearances, but that is with the assistance of a TelePrompTer. He will have no such help at the debate, and if I were coaching Hillary Clinton, I would be encouraging her to get him as riled up as possible. To win the debate, all Trump really needs to do is meet expectations, keep his cool, and look presidential.” “The question we are all waiting to have answered is: Can he be serious?” added a Michigan Democrat. “Can he answer questions directly? How will he react (or overreact) when he is directly challenged? Can he control his temper?” Two other takeaways from the pre-debate survey: Most insiders expect Clinton to “win” the debate. Majorities in both parties peg Clinton as most likely to be the victor on Monday night: 76 percent of Democrats and 59 percent of Republicans. “Media look at who best answered questions, and that will likely be Hillary,” said an Iowa Republican. “[Clinton’s] mastery of issues and policies and no-nonsense delivery will prevail over bluster, name-calling and promises that can never be kept,” added a New Hampshire Democrat. But not all Democrats were so optimistic about Clinton — or the media through which voters will interpret the debate. “The press wants Trump to win,” said a Florida Democrat. “Their disdain for her, plus desire to keep the race alive, means unless he really screws up, they'll give him the win on the most absurd grade curve ever.” Some Republicans also claimed media bias — in the other direction. “The media has never been more in the tank for a candidate in modern history: CNN, NBC, ABC and POLITICO will all say she won,” a Virginia Republican said. “But then again everyone also 'knew' that Carter beat Reagan in their debate as well.” Insiders think the debate will matter. Asked whether they expect the debate to have a significant impact on the race, most insiders in both parties think it will generate momentum for one of the candidates. Among Democratic insiders, 66 percent believe Clinton will benefit from the debate, 11 percent think Trump will get a bounce and 23 percent don’t expect the debate to move the needle. “Trump will flounder, ramble and lie (because he always does),” a Michigan Democrat predicted. “The moderators will challenge him, and he'll get mad. He'll complain afterwards that they picked on him and favored Hillary. First impressions are hard to shake off, and this won't go well for him.” The numbers were flipped for Republicans, with slightly less enthusiasm for the GOP standard-bearer: 52 percent think the debate will help Trump, 26 percent think it will help Clinton and 22 percent said it wouldn’t have a significant impact. “Trump has the most to gain by appearing presidential and even-tempered,” said a New Hampshire Republican. “He does that successfully, and he cuts into Hillary's greatest strength.” But some Republicans said Clinton could stunt Trump’s momentum with a strong performance Monday night. “If she pins his ears back, [it helps her],” said an Iowa Republican. “If it's a draw, it's a net negative for her. She has to have something to stop his momentum. She's got to hit him with a brick.” Other insiders, however, doubted whether the debate would have a significant, permanent effect on the race. “We're past the era of the big debate swings: the bloodless Dukakis death penalty answer, the Reagan age quip, the Bentsen 'you're no John Kennedy' moments,” an Iowa Republican said. “Swing voters are like the California Condor, a critically endangered species disappearing at an alarming rate. Opinion media, partisan polarization, and two highly unpopular candidates make this a battle over a very small group of voters in about a dozen states, and whatever bounce comes out of this debate will dissipate as quickly as it appears.” Added a Florida Democrat: “Does a damn thing matter this year? I think not.” These are the members of The POLITICO Caucus, not all of whom participated in this special survey: Colorado: Ryan Call, Laura Carno, Matt Chandler, Will Coyne, Adam Eichberg, Mark Ferrandino, Cole Finegan, Michael Fortney, Andrew Freedman, Ted Harvey, Craig Hughes, Owen Loftus, Pete Maysmith, Frank McNulty, Karen Middleton, Christopher Murray, BJ Nikkel, Josh Penry, Rick Ridder, Alan Salazar, Janice Sinden, Pat Steadman, Pat Waak, Steve Welchert, Taylor West, Roxane White, Rob Witwer Florida: Fernand Amandi, Scott Arceneaux, JP Austin, Tim Baker, Dennis K. Baxley, Slater Bayliss, Dave Beattie, Wayne Bertsch, Ron Book, Pamela Burch Fort, Jose Calderon, Kevin Cate, Kelly Cohen, Gus Corbella, Brian Crowley, Elizabeth Cuevas-Neunder, Justin Day, Judith Diaz, Nelson Diaz, John Dowless, Ryan Duffy, Jessica Ehrlich, Joe Falk, Alia Faraj-Johnson, Mark Ferrulo, Damien Filer, Marty Fiorentino, Rich Heffley, Nick Iarossi, David Johnson, Eric Johnson, Marian Johnson, Eric Jotkoff, Chris Korge, Jackie Lee, Susan MacManus, Beth Matuga, Fred Menachem, Jon Mills, Joe Mobley, Ben Pollara, Andrea Reilly, Steve Schale, April Schiff, Max Steele, Roger Stone, Richard Swann, Kevin Sweeny, Christian Ulvert, Steve Vancore, Ashley Walker, Andrew Weinstein, Andrew Wiggins, Ryan Wiggins, Rick Wilson Iowa: Tim Albrecht, Brad Anderson, Rob Barron, Jeff Boeyink, Bonnie Campbell, Dave Caris, Sam Clovis, Jerry Crawford, Sara Craig, John Davis, Steve Deace, John Deeth, Derek Eadon, Ed Failor Jr., Karen Fesler, David Fischer, Ben Foecke, Doug Gross, Steve Grubbs, Tim Hagle, Bob Haus, Joe Henry, Drew Ivers, Jill June, Lori Jungling, Jeff Kaufmann, Brian Kennedy, Jake Ketzner, David Kochel, Chris Larimer, Chuck Larson, Jill Latham, Jeff Link, Dave Loebsack, Mark Lucas, Liz Mathis, Jan Michelson, Chad Olsen, David Oman, Matt Paul, Marlys Popma, Troy Price, Christopher Rants, Kim Reem, Craig Robinson, Sam Roecker, David Roederer, Nick Ryan, Tamara Scott, Joni Scotter, Karen Slifka, John Smith, AJ Spiker, Norm Sterzenbach, John Stineman, Matt Strawn, Charlie Szold, Phil Valenziano, Jessica Vanden Berg, Nate Willems, Eric Woolson, Grant Young Michigan: Jill Alper, Saul Anuzis, Andrea Bitely, Lori Carpentier, Howard Edelson, Jordan Gehrke, Steve Hood, Darwin Jiles Jr., Joe Lehman, Dennis Lennox, Katie Packer, Ronna Romney McDaniel, John Truscott, Stephanie White, John Yob Nevada: Mac Abrams, Greg Bailor, Barbara Buckley, Yvanna Cancela, Bob Cavazos, Linda Cavazos, Jim DeGraffenreid, Andrew Diss, Peter Ernaut, Ryan Erwin, Chip Evans, Jay Gerstema, Oscar Goodman, Ryan Hamilton, Dan Hart, Pat Hickey, Zach Hudson, Jeremy Hughes, Megan Jones, Lindsey Jydstrup, Adam Khan, Peter Koltak, Roberta Lange, Sam Liberman, Laura Martin, Michael McDonald, Chuck Muth, Erven Nelson, Kristen Orthman, Neal Patel, Nick Phillips, Jon Ralston, Andres Ramires, Emmy Ruiz, Scott Scheid, Mike Slanker, James Smack, Paul Smith, Jack St. Martin, Mari St. Martin, Daniel Stewart, Brendan Summers, Riley Sutton, Robert Uithoven, Michelle White, Ed Williams, Heidi Wixom New Hampshire: Charlie Arlinghaus, Arnie Arnesen, Patrick Arnold, Rich Ashooh, Dean Barker, Juliana Bergeron, D.J. Bettencourt, Michael Biundo, Ray Buckley, Peter Burling, Jamie Burnett, Debby Butler, Dave Carney, Jackie Cilley, Catherine Corkery, Corriveau, Fergus Cullen, Lou D’Allesandro, James Demers, Mike Dennehy, Sean Downey, Steve Duprey, JoAnn Fenton, Jennifer Frizzell, Martha Fuller Clark, Amanda Grady Sexton, Jack Heath, Gary Hirshberg, Jennifer Horn, Peter Kavanaugh, Joe Keefe, Rich Killion, Harrell Kirstein, Sylvia Larsen, Joel Maiola, Kate Malloy Corriveau, Maureen Manning, Steve Marchand, Tory Mazzola, Jim Merrill, Jayne Millerick, Claira Monier, Greg Moore, Matt Mowers, Terie Norelli, Chris Pappas, Liz Purdy, Tom Rath, Colin Reed, Jim Rubens, Andy Sanborn, Dante Scala, William Shaheen, Stefany Shaheen, Carol Shea-Porter, Terry Shumaker, Andy Smith, Craig Stevens, Kathy Sullivan, Chris Sununu, James Sununu, Jay Surdukowski, Donna Sytek, Kari Thurman, Colin Van Ostern, Deb Vanderbeek, Mike Vlacich, Ryan Williams North Carolina: Don Davis, Francis X. De Luca, Anita Earls, Jonathan Felts, Tami L. Fitzgerald, Dylan Frick, Taylor Griffin, Robin Hayes, Morgan Jackson, Patsy Keever, Theresa Kostrzewa, Michael Luethy, Ray Martin, Thomas Mills, Melissa L. Reed, Chris Sgro, Paul Shumaker, Dee Stewart, Brad Thompson, Bruce Thompson, Charlie Wallin, Doug Wilson Ohio: Jerry Austin, Greg Beswick, Matt Borges, Erica Bruton, Tim Burke, Janet Carson, Jai Chabria, Martha Clark, Bob Clegg, Damareo Cooper, Jo Ann Davidson, Michael Dawson, Bill DeMora, Cindy Demse, Kathy Dicristofaro, Katie Eagan, Michael Gonidakis, Wes Goodman, Joe Hallett, Ian James, Melissa Klide Hedden, David Leland, Nick Martin, Rhine McLin, David Pepper, Molly Shack, Mark R. Weaver Pennsylvania: Chris Borick, Larry Ceisler, Valentino DiGiorgio, Jason Ercole, Dan Fee, Charlie Gerow, Marcel Groen, Leslie Gromis Baker, Mark Harris, Nan McLaughlin, Aubrey Montgomery, Christopher Nicholas, Nachama Soloveichik, David Sosar, Todd Stephens, Doc Sweitzer, David Thornburgh, Ray Zaborney Virginia: Ray Allen, Sandra Brandt, Marc K. Broklawski, Patsy Brown, Janet Carver, John Cosgrove, Brian Coy, Doris Crouse-Mays, Tom Davis, Julie Dime, Abbi Easter, Mike Farris, John Findlay, Joe Fitzgerald, Sean Harrison, Margo Horner, Robert Hurt, Gaylene Kanoyton, Chris LaCivita, Sue Langley, Frank Leone, Robert G. Marshall, Tucker Martin, Ed Matricardi, Susan J. Rowland, Peter Snyder, Susan Swecker, Jo Thoburn Wisconsin: Meg Andrietsch, Mary Arnold, Kevin Barthel, Mike Basford, Rebecca Bonesteel, Barry Burden, Terri Burl, Jim Camery, Patrick Guarasci, Robert Hansen, Gary Hawley, Marian Krumberger, Emily Nehring, Jason Rae, Brandon Scholz, John Zapfel Kristen Hayford contributed to this report.
Former Attorney General Ed Meese, a long-time aide to Ronald Reagan and a one-time critic of Donald Trump's candidacy for president, has joined the Republican nominee's transition team, according to two people briefed on the hire. Meese's decision to join the transition team might raise eyebrows among Trump's die-hard supporters. Meese joined a slew of prominent Republicans in bashing Trump earlier this year in National Review, the conservative magazine that has led the charge against the Manhattan businessman. Story Continued Below Meese wrote in January that Trump's "broadsides" against fellow GOP candidates had served "to divide and discourage potential Republican-party supporters." "Questionable assertions that an opponent is not eligible to run, or that another cannot be elected, or that still another lacks enthusiasm or energy, are a poor substitute for addressing the real issues that should be the basis for a positive campaign: restoring economic growth, strengthening national security, eliminating cronyism and corruption, and improving the lives of all Americans," he added. But with Trump's nomination cemented and the polls tightening, Meese and other Trump critics like Ted Cruz are beginning to come around. Two sources said Meese is heading a Trump transition group focused on the Executive Office of the President, which includes the Office of Management and Budget. Meese declined to comment, and the Trump campaign did not respond to a request for comment. Meese was an aide to Reagan during his time as governor of California. He led Reagan's presidential transition team in 1980 and later served as Reagan's attorney general before resigning in July 1988 following a special prosecutor's inquiry involving his ties to an Army contractor and an Iraqi pipeline project. He is a fellow at the Heritage Foundation. Trump's transition team, which is led by New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie, is rapidly expanding, with one source telling POLITICO that nearly 100 people are now involved in the effort. And even as some Republicans refuse to take part, Christie and his staff have managed to recruit people with both establishment and conservative credentials, including former Heritage Foundation President Ed Feulner and Eric Ueland, the Senate Budget Committee's Republican staff director. In addition to Meese and Feulner, sources told POLITICO that Paul Winfree, another Heritage Foundation official, is also working on the Trump transition. Winfree declined to comment.
Donald Trump is planning a "national call day" to Republican donors who've yet to open their wallets, hoping to close a massive fundraising gap between him and Hillary Clinton. Trump is summoning his top fundraisers to Trump Tower on Tuesday, the day after he squares off with Hillary Clinton in the first presidential debate. The fundraisers are being asked to "prepare call lists of prospective donors" and to recruit at least three people from their home states to raise funds on Tuesday, according to a copy of the invitation. Story Continued Below Two people briefed on the event said it would be geared toward attracting the support of Republican contributors who have yet to commit to Trump financially. Many of the party's top donors have expressed profound reservations over Trump's candidacy and have chosen to direct their funds to down-ballot races. The push comes amid mounting concern that Trump, who has lagged in the fundraising race, is being outspent and out-organized in the states that will determine the election. Hillary Clinton has outspent Trump on the TV airwaves by a stunning 7-to-1 margin and in many battlegrounds has dozens more offices and field staffers than the Republican nominee. Through the end of August, Clinton has outraised Trump $373 million to $165 million. Among those still on the sidelines are many of the GOP's biggest donors. Trump suffered a blow this week when Las Vegas casino mogul Sheldon Adelson revealed that he would be directing $40 million to Republican groups devoted to protecting the party's congressional majorities and just $5 million toward electing the GOP presidential nominee. Adelson had once been seen as a potential major Trump donor and seen as possibly giving as much as $100 million to boost his candidacy. Tuesday's event will be hosted by vice presidential nominee Mike Pence and two of Trump's children, Eric and Ivanka. It is being co-chaired by Republican fundraisers Anthony Scaramucci, a prominent Wall Street investor, and Roy Bailey, a Dallas insurance executive. Bailey has long been close with former New York City Mayor Rudy Giuliani, a prominent Trump surrogate and adviser. In the invitation, the campaign says it will offer four invitations to next week's presidential debate to fundraisers who pull in at least $250,000 by Friday.
Washington (CNN)Ivanka Trump, the Republican presidential nominee's daughter, met with House Speaker Paul Ryan in New York on Monday, an aide to the Republican congressman confirmed to CNN. The meeting was requested by Ivanka Trump, according to the speaker's office. "It was a productive conversation where Ryan spoke about his 2012 experience and Ivanka shared updates about her father's campaign," the aide said. Ryan was in town to address a luncheon at the Economic Club of New York. The meeting was first reported by Politico. Ryan and Donald Trump have had a tense relationship throughout the 2016 campaign. Ryan: Trump should release his taxes After Trump became the presumptive nominee, Ryan publicly hesitated to endorse him, saying he needed time to decide. He eventually did endorse Trump, and the two have met. But Ryan has also remained critical of some of Trump's policies and rhetoric. Trump has returned the favor to Ryan, echoing his wait-and-see language on endorsing the speaker during his primary race. Ivanka Trump is one of Trump's closest confidantes. She has also been involved in policy development, recently pushing her father to unveil a childcare proposal. Ryan boasted about his own daughter's new political position during his speech on Monday, revealing that she won a school election to become vice president of her 9th grade class at her high school in Wisconsin. "It goes to show that at least somebody in our family can get elected to vice president, so we broke that curse," Ryan, who served as the GOP's 2012 vice presidential nominee joked. 
Mitch McConnell summoned his Republican Conference to a late afternoon meeting on Tuesday with an unusual ask: Would his colleagues support moving forward on a spending deal that doesn’t even exist yet? The answer, surprisingly, was yes. Story Continued Below The Senate voted 89-7 on Tuesday evening to move forward on a bill that eventually will be used to fund the government through Dec. 9 and deliver $1.1 billion to fight the Zika epidemic. A bloc of conservatives voted no, but the measure easily cleared the 60-vote threshold to avoid a filibuster, powered by votes from Senate Democrats, centrist Republicans and GOP senators up for reelection. “We’ve got a lot of work to do around here,” said Sen. David Perdue (R-Ga.), who voted “no” because of concerns over the unorthodox process. Yet enough Republicans supported McConnell on the matter because there are still several opportunities to block the bill later if senators believe they are getting a raw deal in the end, senators said. The majority leader offered a brief update on the state of play to his conference, but the main reason for the meeting was to make sure there was enough support to begin a process that eventually will allow Senate Republicans to go home and campaign for reelection more quickly. “There are negotiations that are ongoing, and this bill in my view just sets the stage for an agreement that we hope occurs sooner rather than later,” said Sen. Jerry Moran (R-Kan.). Campaign finance, trucking safety and the Internet domain system are among the grab bag of issues keeping the Senate from a final deal to stave off a government shutdown at the end of this month. But the biggest hurdle, Zika, has been resolved without including any language that would block Planned Parenthood’s partner clinic in Puerto Rico from accessing the federal grants — a key demand from Democrats. “We want a clean CR, a clean Zika bill, period,” said Sen. Dick Durbin of Illinois, the second-ranking Senate Democrat. “We’ll save the debate on the riders for the lame-duck session.” McConnell told reporters the parties were “close” to finalizing an agreement Tuesday afternoon, but he said he he would want senators to have some time to consider it before moving forward. And senior Republicans said the Senate was certain to stay in session next week, ensuring that the annual slog over must-pass government spending would — as in previous years — go down to the wire. Democrats pin the blame for the delay on the GOP. “We should have no vexatious, poison-pill riders,” Senate Minority Leader Harry Reid said. “We are not going to have a CR loaded with riders. One is too many, and that’s what they’re trying to do.” The Nevada Democrat took particular umbrage at the prospect of continuing a prohibition on the Securities and Exchange Commission from requiring public companies to disclose political spending. That provision was included in last year’s omnibus spending bill, but Reid said he will fight to strip it out. “We’re not going to have this bill [be] a pincushion for McConnell’s desire to have nothing, nothing reported dealing with campaign spending,” Reid said. Lawmakers also are clashing over the Obama administration’s plan to relinquish the U.S. government’s authority over the Internet domain system to an international body on Oct. 1. Republicans led by Texas Sen. Ted Cruz and Senate Commerce Chairman John Thune of South Dakota are pushing to continue a prohibition on the handover, which is sharply opposed by the administration. “It’s just trying to figure out how to structure it, how to do it, how to make it effective,” Thune said of the Internet domain issue, known as ICANN. “I think in some form, I think that issue has to be addressed.” Republicans said both the SEC language and the Internet battle were still under consideration as of late Tuesday. Cruz voted “no” on moving forward. A GOP-backed push to block Transportation Department rules regarding how long truckers must rest between drives is among other final issues to be determined. As of late Tuesday afternoon, however, it appeared as though the trucking issue was close to being resolved, according to one source familiar with the negotiations. Congressional negotiators also were continuing to discuss offsets for Zika funding. And it looked increasingly likely that the continuing resolution will not include money to address the lead contamination crisis in Flint, Michigan, or to respond to the devastating flooding in Louisiana. “The Democrats are insisting upon Flint, and we’ve got members who are interested in some assistance for flooding in Louisiana,” Thune said. “Maybe it ends up that neither gets addressed — I don’t know.” Thune also suggested that an administration effort to restore the Export-Import Bank’s full financing authority was falling short. “I know that the Dems are very intent on changing that quorum threshold, but even if we could pass it through the Senate — and I don’t know we can — that makes a very heavy lift in the House.” Jennifer Scholtes and Adam Behsudi contributed to this report.
NEW YORK — Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton's decisions to meet separately with Egypt's authoritarian president on the sidelines of the U.N. General Assembly have prompted a growing outcry on both the left and the right. On Monday, a small group of scholars and activists with a focus on Egypt, including some who identify as conservatives, released a letter they had written to both presidential candidates urging them not to meet with Abdel Fattah al-Sisi. The authors pointed to the thousands of people killed and imprisoned under Sisi's harsh rule. Story Continued Below "Since taking power via a military coup three years ago, President Sisi has overseen not only the complete reversal of Egypt’s nascent democratic transition but also unprecedented human rights abuses," states the letter. "It is not in our interest to embrace him but to use our influence to press for beneficial change in Egypt." The letter, dated Friday, further states: "Your meeting with Sisi at the UNGA will be taken in Egypt, and around the world, as an endorsement. To meet with him is a policy decision, which should await a later date after much study and assessment of U.S. policy toward Egypt. Therefore, we strongly urge you to readjust your schedule." The signatories were: Michele Dunne of the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace; Robert Kagan of the Brookings Institution; Elliott Abrams of the Council on Foreign Relations; Reuel Gerecht of the Foundation for Defense of Democracies; Neil Hicks of Human Rights First; and Stephen McInerny of Project on Middle East Democracy. The letter writers are part of a non-partisan working group on Egypt that has been meeting since 2010, according to Kagan. Their criticism follows that of others including Human Right Watch's executive director Ken Roth, who wrote on Twitter: "Why does Hillary again want to meet Sisi? He directed 817+ killed in 12 hours in Rabaa Sq" — a reference to a massacre in a Cairo square under Sisi's watch in 2013. Clinton met with Sisi on Monday evening; the Egyptian leader told her at the start of the meeting that he wished to talk to her “about the path that we are taking in order to build up a new civil society, a new modern country that upholds the rule of law, that respects human rights and liberties. And as a matter of fact we are taking this path that is eventually leading up to this target,” according to a pool report of the event. Trump's team released an account of his meeting with Sisi that was striking in how much praise the Republican heaped on Egypt. Trump expressed to Sisi "his strong support for Egypt’s war on terrorism, and how under a Trump administration, the United States of America will be a loyal friend, not simply an ally, that Egypt can count on in the days and years ahead." Sisi, a retired general, came to prominence during the chaos of Egypt's 2011 Arab Spring revolution. He took power in 2013 after mass protests prompted the military to oust the elected government of Muslim Brotherhood leader Mohamed Morsi. Trump has said that if elected president, he will work with Sisi to fight terrorism, describing him in a speech as someone who recognizes that "this ideology of death that must be extinguished." Clinton is critical of Sisi's predecessor, Morsi, who was arrested after his ouster and now faces a death sentence, in "Hard Choices," her memoir about her years as secretary of state. But Clinton also has criticized Sisi, who she wrote "appears to be following the classic mold of Middle Eastern strongmen." Clinton's decision to meet with Sisi could stem from a desire to signal to Arab allies in the region that she will partner with rulers who impose stability, even if those rulers are autocrats.
MESA, Ariz. -- Mike Pence took aim at Bill Clinton on Thursday, saying “character matters to the presidency.” "I’m old enough to remember back in the last Clinton administration where America really had a debate over whether character mattered to the presidency," the Republican vice presidential nominee told a few hundred people at Living World Bible Church. "We don’t need to have that debate again. Character matters to the presidency and Donald Trump will bring the highest level of integrity to the highest office in the land. You can count on it." Story Continued Below Pence has frequently hit Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton for what he calls a lack of integrity, but Thursday marked the first time he implicated Bill Clinton in the argument. He avoided his typical indictment of Hillary Clinton's use of private email server while secretary of state, instead focusing his attack on her husband. Pence’s running mate, Republican nominee Donald Trump, has not shown a similar reticence in attacking Bill Clinton over the sex scandal that led to Clinton's impeachment in the House but an ultimate acquittal in the Senate. "I'm so glad they kept that dress," Trump said a rally in August, in reference to an infamous blue dress that implicated the former president in the affair. Hillary Clinton, for her part, is preparing for Trump to raise the scandal in the upcoming presidential debate. Trump has also gone further in attacking Bill Clinton, accusing the former president of rape.
With just 50 days until the election, Donald Trump is facing a staggering — and perhaps historic — organizational disadvantage. According to a POLITICO review of campaign spending, Hillary Clinton has invested seven times the amount of money on TV commercials as her Republican rival and has established twice as many field offices in many of the states that will decide who wins the presidency. In many battlegrounds, she has dozens more organizers than Trump. Story Continued Below While Trump, a first-time politician who has surrounded himself with advisers who are new to the rigors of presidential campaigns, has made serious headway in a number of battlegrounds in recent days, his on-the-ground and in-the-air deficits could be what stands between him and 270 electoral votes. “We’re in completely untested waters,” said David Kochel, an Iowa-based Republican operative who is leading a study group at the Harvard Institute of Politics contrasting the traditional campaign approach adopted by Clinton with the non-traditional one being used by Trump. “There has never been such a wide disparity in resource allocation as we're seeing in 2016.” The question, though, may be whether Trump’s lack of infrastructure matters in an election cycle that has so far rewarded a low-budget approach built on free media and mass rallies rather than TV ads and door-knocking. Last week, Smart Media Group, a media buying firm that works with the Republican National Committee, sent an email to a group of top Trump advisers, including campaign manager Kellyanne Conway, TV ad maker Larry Weitzner, and senior communications adviser Jason Miller, briefing them on the latest in commercial spending. The numbers were startling. As of Sept. 12, the email noted, Trump had spent $17 million on TV ads, a small fraction of the $126 million Clinton had invested. When outside groups were added to the mix, Trump’s deficit was even greater -- $33 million to Clinton’s $244 million. Trump aides say the figures reflect a simple reality: Their funds are limited. Through the end of July, Clinton and her outside group allies had raised a combined $435 million to Trump’s $160 million – a difference of more than two-to-one, according to the Center for Responsive Politics. Unlike Clinton, a powerful fundraiser, Trump has struggled to attract the support of deep-pocketed donors, many of whom have been repelled by his candidacy. Those working for pro-Trump super PACs are racing to find a solution. Advisers to one of the groups, Rebuilding America Now, are openly discussing the possibility that Rick Scott, the wealthy Florida governor who is chairing the super PAC, may soon provide it with a contribution. Clinton has used her TV barrage to cast her Republican opponent as a dangerous, unpredictable figure who’s ill-suited suited to occupy the Oval Office. Last week, while Trump aired commercials in just four states, Clinton had spots running in nine battlegrounds. One Clinton ad that went into heavy rotation, titled “Sacrifice,” spotlighted critical comments Trump made about Arizona Sen. John McCain’s war record. Strategists from both parties say they cannot recall the last time a presidential nominee has been so dominated on the TV airwaves. The seven-to-one ratio confronting Trump far eclipses the five-to-four margin President Barack Obama faced in 2012 and the two-to-one ratio McCain encountered in 2008. With early voting in some battlegrounds opening in just days, the race is entering its most intense phase yet. And while Clinton has established formidable operations in many key states, Trump has far fewer full-time staffers to get out the vote, according to figures provided by campaign aides, national party officials, and swing-state operatives. In must-win Ohio, where early voting begins on Oct. 12, Clinton has around 250 organizers and 50 offices. Trump, meanwhile, has roughly 110 staffers and 30 offices. Republicans say Gov. John Kasich’s persistent refusal to endorse Trump has hurt the nominee, depriving him of man-power. Many of Kasich’s longest-serving aides, including Jeffrey Polesovsky and Jai Chabria, have decided to sit on the sidelines. Chabria, a former Kasich senior adviser, said Trump was behind in a state where appealing to low-propensity voters was a weeks-long process that couldn’t be done overnight. “It’s a very late effort by the Trump folks to play catch up, and the Democrats and the Clinton campaign have been here for a long time. That’s going to have an effect,” he said. “Big rallies are really nice, but actual campaigns matter in Ohio.” In North Carolina, where Trump has around 170 staffers and 10 offices, Clinton has over 250 workers and 30 offices. Democrats say they are implementing a detailed plan aimed at intensifying turnout among black and college-educated voters, demographic groups that Trump has struggled with. Last month, Clinton brought aboard Dan Kanninen, who played a key role in Barack Obama’s 2008 and 2012 campaigns, to help oversee her campaign in the state. In New Hampshire, it’s a similar story. While Trump has fewer than 50 full-time organizers and just a handful of offices, Clinton has around 100 staffers and 25 offices. “Two months out, I think Hillary has a stronger operation than Trump up here. That’s pretty apparent from the number of staff, the number of offices, and the number commercials,” said Jim Merrill, a veteran Republican strategist who oversaw Marco Rubio’s primary bid in New Hampshire and held similar positions on Mitt Romney’s two presidential campaigns. “Trump is behind where we were in 2012.” In even conservative bastions, Clinton is developing formidable infrastructure. In Arizona, Clinton has around 160 staffers and 25 offices, and in Georgia she has roughly 40 organizers and 10 offices. In that state, Tracey Lewis, who worked on Michelle Nunn's 2014 Georgia Senate bid, recently signed on as a senior advisor. Republicans declined to detail their numbers in the two conservative states but acknowledged that Clinton had a bigger field presence. While Trump advisers concede they’re behind in the ground war, they insist they’re making serious gains. The campaign, for example, said it had improved its footing in Florida after engineering a recent staff shuffle. State director Karen Giorno, who’d clashed with many members of the Trump team, was replaced with Susie Wiles, a former top adviser to Scott, the Florida governor. Yet in an election that’s so far been driven by daily headlines, some are wondering if textbook campaign metrics like TV ads and field staffers will matter as much as they have in previous years. Some are coming to the conclusion that the New York businessman’s lack of swing-state infrastructure might not be fatal. Throughout his campaign, Trump has invested relatively little on TV ads and field deployment – instead surviving off his ability to pack rallies and generate overwhelming media attention for speeches and statements large and small. On Thursday morning, during a meeting convened by Trump’s congressional supporters on Capitol Hill, Conway said the Republican nominee would give multiple addresses each week focusing on specific policies he’d implement as president. “The fact that the numbers have moved gradually in Trump’s favor in spite of the onslaught of spending by Hillary causes a lot of head-scratching,” said Kochel, who was chief strategist on Jeb Bush’s presidential campaign. “But the voters are getting their information in a thousand different ways outside of the campaigns’ control.”
Hillary Clinton warned about cyber-threats from Vladimir Putin. But Donald Trump is just as worried about obese, couch-bound hackers. Story Continued Below Clinton called recent cyber-attacks on various Democratic campaign arms, which are widely thought to be at the hands of Russian intelligence, “the most recent and most troubling” infiltrations from state actors. “I know Donald’s very praiseworthy of Vladimir Putin, but Putin is playing a very tough, long game here,” Clinton said. “That’s why I was so shocked when Donald publicly invited Putin to hack into Americans'” systems, Clinton said, adding that such comments make Trump “unfit to be the commander in chief.” But Trump said he’s not convinced that Putin is behind the attacks. “She said Russia, Russia, Russia, maybe it was. Could also be China,” Trump said. “Could also be somebody sitting on their bed that weighs 400 pounds.” Regardless, Trump didn’t miss an opportunity to highlight one of the most notable findings from the hack of the Democratic National Committee’s emails: that members of the party leadership were working against Sen. Bernie Sanders’s primary challenge against Clinton. “We learned that Bernie Sanders was taken advantage of by your people, by Debbie Wasserman Schultz,” Trump said, before referring to her subsequent ouster as the party chair. “Whether that was Russia, whether that was China, we don’t know.”
Our policy reporters truth-squad the 2016 presidential debates. “We have a great general, four-star general, today you read it in all the papers going to potentially serve five years in jail for lying to the FBI, one lie. She's lied hundreds of times to the people, to congress, and to the FBI. He's going to probably go to jail.” — Donald Trump Trump referred to the guilty plea former Vice Chairman of the Joint Chief of Staff and retired Marine Gen. James Cartwright, who pled guilty on Monday to a felony charge of making false statements to the FBI in connection with an investigation into leaks about a U.S.-Israel cyber operation to undermine Iran’s nuclear program. A number of statements Clinton made about her use of a private email server have turned out to be dubious or inaccurate, although FBI Director James Comey has said he does not believe that Clinton made false statements to his agency during its investigation. Republican lawmakers have questioned several of Clinton’s statements, including her claim that none of her emails were marked classified, when three had portion markings for classified records — but not proper markings at the top and bottom. Other Clinton statements have also been questioned, although she often couched them as an inability to recall certain events, making it difficult to label them as lies. Clinton said last week in written answers to a federal lawsuit that she did not recall any communcation with computer aide Bryan Pagliano about management or preservation of records in her account, but a conservative group said it has a 2012 email exchange between Clinton and Pagliano about her not receiving messages on her blackberry. During the court hearing this week, Cartwright admitted that he provided and confirmed classified information to one reporter and confirmed classified information to another, although as part of a plea bargain he pled guilty to lying to investigators and not to leaking, which could have carried a more severe penalty. He could receive up to five years in prison on the lying charge. "Aleppo is a disaster. It is a humanitarian nightmare, but it has fallen...from any standpoint." - Trump Donald Trump has said in two debates the Syrian city "has fallen" or "has basically fallen." While the situation has been described as dire, the city is still contested. Forces of the Syrian government of Bashar al-Assad, backed by Russian air strikes are still facing off against Syrian rebel forces. “If you look at your voter rolls, you'll see millions of people that are registered to vote. Millions. This isn't coming from me. This is coming from Pew report and other places. Millions of people that are registered to vote that shouldn't be registered to vote.” — Donald Trump Tonight, Donald Trump tonight cited a Pew Center on the States report which found that around 24 million voter registrations in the U.S. are either invalid or are very inaccurate. The report goes further and finds that 1.8 million dead people are actually listed as voters. “Voter registration in the United States largely reflects its 19th-century origins and has not kept pace with advancing technology and a mobile society,” the report’s authors write, adding that “states’ systems must be brought into the 21st century to be more accurate, cost-effective, and efficient.” That noted, the report did not say that these registrants had in fact voted — nor did it suggest that voter fraud is commonplace as Trump has claimed in the past. “The premiums are going up 60 percent, 70 percent, 80 percent. Next year, they're going to go up over 100 percent.” — Donald Trump In tonight's debate, Trump went even further on his claims about Obamacare premium increases than he has in the past. There are states with extremely high premium increases slated for Obamacare plans in 2017 — some states, like Minnesota and Oklahoma, have reported that average rate increases will top 60 percent and 70 percent. But those numbers aren’t reflective of what’s going on nationally, even if there are outliers where rate increases are especially large. Premium increases will vary highly depending on the local market and insurance company. The large premium increases Trump cited do not tell the entire story, and they do not account for the government subsidies that millions of Americans can receive under the health care law to lower their monthly premiums. “What I have put forward doesn't add a penny to the debt.” — Hillary Clinton This is a gray area. Clinton’s planned tax increases would boost revenues by about $1.4 trillion over a decade, according to the Tax Policy Center. But she’s also proposed increasing spending on a handful of policy priorities, and it’s not clear how she would pay for all of her plans. For instance, she has said she would finance infrastructure investments with “business tax reform,” but hasn’t detailed what that would look like. The Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget estimated that Clinton’s policies would add $200 billion to the debt over 10 years, when measured against the projected levels under current law. (Trump’s plans, the group found, would add $5.3 trillion to the debt.) Ultimately, it’s hard to measure without more detailed policy proposals. “I believe it was her campaign that did it just like if you look at what came out today on the clips where I was wondering what happened with my rally in Chicago and other rallies where we had such violence. She's the one and Obama that caused the violence. They hired people. They paid them $1500, and they're on tape saying be violent, cause fights, do bad things.” – Donald Trump Getting one thing out of the way. There's no evidence President Barack Obama had any role in violence at Trump rallies. For Clinton and her campaign, it's more complicated. Two Democratic political operatives with ties to her White House bid have indeed been caught up in a conservative group’s sting operation that appears to suggest efforts to send plants into the Trump's rallies to cause trouble. The Democrats — Robert Creamer, the husband of Illinois Rep. Jan Schakowsky, and contractor Scott Foval — both have left their jobs this week after several edited videos appeared produced by conservative activist James O’Keefe and his group Project Veritas Action. In one of the videos, Foval, the national field director for Americans United for Change, discussed with an O’Keefe operative, who was posing as an intern, a strategy that included sending plants into Trump rallies to pick fights with his supporters. “I mean, honestly, it’s not hard to get some of these assholes to pop off,” he says in the video. “It’s a matter of showing up, to want to get into their rally, in a Planned Parenthood T-shirt. Or ‘Trump is a Nazi,’ you know. You can message to draw them out, and draw them out to punch you.” In another video, Foval calls himself “the white hat” while and describes Creamer’s group, Democracy Partners, as the “dark hat.” Foval was fired Monday. Both the Clinton campaign and the DNC have condemned the tactics described in the videos while also denying playing any role in sending protestors into Trump rallies. Interim DNC chair Donna Brazile in a statement reported by CNN also turned the tables on O’Keefe, calling him “a convicted criminal with a history of doctoring video to advance his ideological agenda.” Creamer, who stepped down from his post Tuesday, told CNN that Foval’s comments were “flat out wrong.” He also issued a statement saying his firm “has recently been the victim of a well-funded, systematic spy operation that is the modern day equivalent of the Watergate burglars.” “The plot involved the use of trained operatives using false identifications, disguises and elaborate false covers to infiltrate our firm and others, in order to steal campaign plans, and goad unsuspecting individuals into making careless statements on hidden cameras,” he said. "Well, you know, once again Donald is implying he didn't support the invasion of Iraq. I said it was a mistake. I said that years ago. He has consistently denied what is… What is a very clear fact that before the invasion he supported it. Google Donald Trump Iraq and you'll see the dozens of sources which verify that he was for the invasion of Iraq." — Hillary Clinton "Wrong." — Donald Trump Trump has repeatedly claimed he opposed the war in Iraq, but the public record suggests the opposite. During a 2002 interview with Howard Stern, Trump was asked if he supported invading Iraq. “Yeah, I guess so,” Trump responded. “I wish the first time it was done correctly.” These comments were first unearthed by Buzzfeed earlier this year and show that Trump was at best ambivalent about the war — but there is no public record of him opposing it. “Hillary wants to give amnesty. She wants to have open borders.” — Donald Trump By most metrics, describing Clinton’s immigration plan as “amnesty” is a mischaracterization. Clinton’s immigration plan says she’ll “introduce comprehensive immigration reform with a pathway to full and equal citizenship within her first 100 days in office.” According to PolitiFact, Clinton supports two programs for deferred action designation by the Department of Homeland Security — but that’s not the same as amnesty, which the legal dictionary defines as “a blanket abolition of an offense by the government, with the legal result that those charged or convicted have the charge or conviction wiped out.” Clinton also supported “Gang of Eight” immigration reform plan that called for enhanced border security and E-Verify. Debate moderator Chris Wallace pointed out that Clinton used the phrase “open borders” in an excerpt from a paid-speech excerpt released by Wikileaks. But Clinton appears to be talking about trade and energy (though it’s a little hard to see the full context, because the excerpt is only a paragraph long): “My dream is a hemispheric common market, with open trade and open borders, some time in the future with energy that is as green and sustainable as we can get it, powering growth and opportunity for every person in the hemisphere.” “This is a person who has been very cavalier, even casual about the use of nuclear weapons. He has advocated more countries getting them. Japan. Korea. Even Saudi Arabia.” — Hillary Clinton The Clinton campaign has blasted Trump for being too cavalier on nuclear weapons, including advocating the spread of nuclear weapons to countries like Saudi Arabia, Japan and South Korea. On several occasions, Trump indicated an openness to other nations to obtain nuclear weapons, citing the cost of the U.S. to protect countries against regional threats. “Well I think maybe it’s not so bad to have Japan — if Japan had that nuclear threat, I’m not sure that would be a bad thing for us,” Trump said in an interview with the New York Times, referencing the nation's ability to protect itself against a nuclear threat from North Korea. And asked by Cooper if he had “no problem with Japan an South Korea” having nukes, Trump responded: “ At some point we have to say, you know what, we're better off if Japan protects itself against this maniac in North Korea. We're better off, frankly, if South Korea is going to start to protect itself.” All noted, Trump’s past statements and positions on nuclear proliferation have been contradictory. This story has been updated with additional context. "People contribute. I contribute. The money goes, 100 percent, to a lot of charities, including a lot of military.” — Donald Trump Per the reporting of Washington Post’s David Farenthold, Trump has not contributed to his own foundation since 2008. The foundation has also been used for non-charitable purposes, including contributing illegally to a political candidate, buying a portrait of Trump and settling a lawsuit. “When you ran the State Department, $6 billion was missing. How do you miss $6 billion? You ran the State Department. Six billion was either stolen, they don't know. It is gone. $6 billion.” — Donald Trump “Well, first of all, what he just said about the State department is not only untrue, it’s been debunked numerous times.” — Hillary Clinton Clinton is right: Trump is repeating a falsehood. Short version: There was missing paperwork, not missing dollars. The Washington Post has the long version. “[Trump] held a number of big rallies where he said that he could not possibly have done those things to those women because they were not attractive enough… to be assaulted.” — Hillary Clinton “I did not say that.” — Donald Trump While Trump has not said that explicitly, he has repeatedly suggested it over the last week. Regarding People magazine reporter Natasha Stoynoff, who recently alleged Trump forcibly kissed her in 2005, Trump said last week in Cincinnati: “Take a look. Look at her. Look at her words. And you tell me what you think. I don’t think so.” During a rally in North Carolina last Friday, Trump said of Jessica Leeds, the woman that accused him of groping her on an airplane in the 1980s: “Believe me, she would not be my first choice. That I can tell you. You don’t know. That would not be my first choice.”
Ted Cruz is in a bind when it comes to Donald Trump: Loyalists say he should stand by his epic non-endorsement in Cleveland. But Republicans pushing to finally unify the party as the election tightens say it’s time for Cruz to get on board. Cruz hasn’t ruled out an endorsement and is still watching how Trump’s campaign performs down the homestretch, an aide said. But there is a renewed urgency after his former campaign manager told reporters this week that Cruz is warming to Trump’s more disciplined campaign. Cruz himself praised Trump for backing the Texas senator’s crusade to stop a handover of an Internet domain overseer to international regulators. Story Continued Below “If Ted Cruz wants to call himself a Republican I think he should be at least a part of the team. It looks awfully self-serving for not endorsing Donald Trump at this time,” said Sen. Dan Coats (R-Ind.). “You’re on the same team, so you don’t sit on the bench and sulk because you didn’t get the starting job. If he wants to be called on in the future, he needs to show some character.” “It would be helpful,” said Sen. Roger Wicker of Mississippi, chairman of the Senate GOP’s campaign arm. “If I were in Ted Cruz’s position, I would have gone ahead and made the case that of the choices available, Mr. Trump is far and away the best.” Cruz, of course, did exactly the opposite at the Republican convention, drawing boos and jeers from partisans after he urged delegates to “vote your conscience.” It may have made him enemies among Trump supporters, but it also endeared him to those who have flocked to Cruz and his brand of “principled conservatism.” Former aides said they would be crushed if Cruz suddenly came around to Trump after taking so much heat and refusing to back down. “If Cruz's conscience didn't allow him to support Trump at the convention, I don't see any evidence that Trump has changed his behavior to allow Cruz's conscience to support Trump now,” said Amanda Carpenter, a former speechwriter and communications director for Cruz in the Senate. Rick Tyler, who ran Cruz’s press shop during much of his presidential run, said that despite the pressure from Republicans, Cruz will be “done” if he endorses Trump. "There is no negative future stemming from his defense of conservatism speech in Cleveland,” Tyler said in an email. “Either Trump loses and the speech is cast in a new light; OR Trump wins and is a terrible President and the speech is again cast in a new light; OR Trump wins and is a great president, serves 2 terms and everyone forgets it.” Privately, some Republicans interpreted former campaign manager Jeff Roe’s comments on Wednesday at a Bloomberg event as laying the groundwork for an eventual endorsement of Trump. And hours later, Trump joined Cruz’s latest legislative effort aimed at keeping U.S. authority over Internet domain names. Cruz offered his appreciation on Twitter for Trump's support, and Trump’s campaign manager Kellyanne Conway reciprocated with her own appreciation of Cruz. Cruz met privately with vice presidential nominee Mike Pence last week and emerged calling Pence a “strong conservative.” But Cruz hasn’t done much else to indicate publicly he'll be voting for Trump over Hillary Clinton. And Cruz is not alone among Senate Republicans: The likes of Sens. Mike Lee of Utah, Ben Sasse of Nebraska, Lindsey Graham of South Carolina, Jeff Flake of Arizona,, Mark Kirk of Illinois, and Dean Heller of Nevada have all either declined to offer an endorsement of anyone or said outright they won’t vote for Trump. But none carries the kind of political weight Cruz does — not to mention the millions of followers. “Mr. Trump is our nominee and Sen. Cruz represents a big electoral state and is very popular in Texas,” said Texas Rep. Joe Barton. “It certainly would be helpful, I think, for the Trump campaign to have Cruz’s endorsement. Cruz has begun to fundraise for his colleagues and transferred $100,000 to the National Republican Senatorial Committee, important bridges toward his colleagues in the cliquey Senate. But some GOP senators said Cruz finds himself caught between a party he wants to lead and a faction of the GOP that would never forgive him, including prominent conservatives like radio host Steve Deace, who said on Wednesday that "if someone with Cruz's moxie can't hold the line in the GOP it can't be done. So just burn it down" It’s potentially a no-win situation that Republicans are sympathetic to. “If you look at the position he’s in, let’s say Donald Trump wins: Probably not good for Ted Cruz. Donald Trump loses: Probably not good for Ted Cruz,” said a Republican senator. “It’s a big liability.” Moreover, Cruz’s potential foe in his 2018 reelection race, Rep. Mike McCaul (R-Texas), spent the week picking at Cruz’s vulnerability on Trump. He said Cruz's position makes him "very angry." “What he did at the convention turned off a lot of people. He pledged to support [Trump]. He broke his word,” McCaul said on the Laura Ingraham show. A month ago, the terrain looked different for Cruz. Trump was lagging behind Clinton and Republicans were preparing for a blowout, making Cruz less culpable for blame given the widespread belief that Trump himself was the problem. But now the election is close and polls show Trump surging in swing states. Republicans say Cruz’s support could help put Trump over the top and help solidify his position in states that he won in the primary like Colorado, Maine or Wisconsin. On the other hand, a narrow Trump loss could lead to finger-pointing if Cruz doesn't bring on board his supporters. “I think he wants to part of the team. I think he’s very bright, I think he’s capable of really adding something to it. But he also is concerned with being principled in this particular case,” said Sen. Mike Rounds (R-S.D.). “You walk a fine line sometimes. I’m hopeful we’ll have a united effort.”
The massive audience expected for the first presidential debate between Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump is “a gift,” the former secretary of state’s communications director Jennifer Palmieri said Monday evening, because it affords the Democratic nominee a chance to “break through with her positive message.” Palmieri admitted that Trump’s controversial candidacy is likely playing the biggest role in drawing so many eyeballs to the debate, scheduled for Monday night at New York’s Hofstra University. That bombast could prompt millions of Americans to watch the two candidates square off and could end up benefiting Clinton, she said. Story Continued Below “The gift of the debate for us and the gift of running against somebody as controversial as Trump is the interest in the debate, so there’s 100 million people watching,” Palmieri told Chuck Todd on MSNBC’s “MTP Daily.” “It's 100 million people we’re going to be in front of. It's more than the convention. It is a gift that no other presidential candidate has gotten.” “It's bigger than most debates because of that audience. And so we see that as a gift. And so I think the pregame, the post-game, the press coverage, it has an impact but more so than any other debate, what is really going to matter is the actual audience that’s watching,” she continued. “And for us in this cycle, because we are running against somebody like Trump, and it's hard to break through. We fully admit this, our reality is it's hard for Hillary to break through with her positive message.”
Washington (CNN)Members of the House Oversight and Government Reform Committee voted along party lines Thursday to hold the architect of Hillary Clinton's private email server in contempt for failing to appear before them. The panel's 19-15 vote came after Bryan Pagliano failed to attend a second hearing on Clinton's emails and use of a private server while leading the State Department. Republicans blasted his decision as an act of defiance, but Pagliano's lawyers said the demand that he appear "betrays a naked political agenda." House Oversight Chairman Jason Chaffetz, a Utah Republican, argued that previous testimony from another one of Clinton's IT workers, Justin Cooper, made it imperative for Pagliano to testify. "I explained Mr. Pagliano was uniquely qualified to provide testimony to help the committee better understand Secretary Clinton's use of a private email server. This is indisputable," Chaffetz said. "I also made clear the committee would consider all options regarding Mr. Pagliano's failure to appear, including consideration of recommending he be held in contempt." RELATED: Road to 270: CNN's latest electoral college map Pagliano was first called before the oversight committee last week but did not appear. Pagliano pleaded the Fifth Amendment in a closed-door hearing last year of the House panel investigating the Benghazi attacks. It is unclear when the full House would take up a vote on the contempt resolution approved Thursday. Pagliano's lawyers accused Chaffetz of launching a witch hunt. "A subpoena issued by a congressional committee is required by law to serve a valid legislative purpose -- and there is none here. Your demand under the present circumstances, that Mr. Pagliano again assert his constitutional rights in front of video cameras six weeks before the presidential election, betrays a naked political agenda and furthers no valid legislative aim," Pagliano's lawyers wrote in a letter to the committee on Wednesday. RELATED: How to watch the first presidential debate Rep. Elijah Cummings, the top Democrat on the panel, defended Pagliano's refusal to appear. "There is no legitimate legislative purpose in forcing Mr. Pagliano to appear before the committee to assert his Fifth Amendment rights before Congress for a second time, and there is certainly no legitimate legislative purpose in forcing him to do so in public," Cummings said Thursday. The Clinton campaign said Thursday it had not told Pagliano whether or not to testify, and blasted the oversight hearings into her private email server. "He made his own decision, but we certainly have not prevailed upon anyone to cooperate with this sham of an inquiry," Clinton spokesman Brian Fallon said. "The career officials at the FBI and the Justice Department already thoroughly investigated this matter, and closed the case with no further action, and Jason Chaffetz is abusing his office with this blatantly partisan attempt to hurt Hillary Clinton's presidential campaign." 
(CNN)Sen. Jeff Sessions pilloried former President George H.W. Bush's decision to support Hillary Clinton for president over Donald Trump, saying the Bush family "should remember the loyalty they were given by millions of Americans." Sessions expressed frustration with Republicans who've refused to back Trump in an interview with the Washington Examiner published Wednesday. A long-serving Republican senator, he was among the first members of the so-called GOP "establishment" to throw his support behind the eventual nominee during the primary, and has been a fixture of the Trump campaign since. "They should objectively analyze who is likely to advance best the agenda they favor and the agenda the Republicans who supported them favored. And that's clearly Donald Trump," Sessions said. The Alabama Republican also noted that "millions of Americans, including this one, worked their hearts out for the Bushes in 1988, 1992, 2000, and 2004. And it wasn't Bill Clinton that helped the Bushes get elected. It was the same voters, in large part, that elected Ronald Reagan and stand to elect Donald Trump." The elder Bush is the only member of the family whose support for Clinton has become public. Jeb Bush, whom Trump defeated during the primary, has said he won't support the nominee, and former President George W. Bush has declined to reveal his presidential preference. For Sessions, though, the choice is simple, and he expressed puzzlement about the Bush family. RELATED: Ivanka Trump huddles with female Republican members of Congress in Washington "I think they're not thinking clearly enough about this," Sessions told the Washington Examiner. "They're not ... appreciating half the American people, virtually, that have been supportive of Republicans. A lot of them preferred somebody other than Bush candidates, but they rallied around them when it came to November. So I would hope that we see more rallying." And to other Republicans, like Texas Sen. Ted Cruz or Ohio Gov. John Kasich, who have argued Trump isn't conservative enough to lead the party, Sessions says "that's ridiculous." "At this point in history, it's the William F. Buckley test -- who is the most conservative candidate that can win the presidency? Hillary Clinton or Donald Trump? On taxes, on regulations, on judges, on law enforcement — all these are conservative positions. What is the problem here? I just feel on issue after issue he's been firmly in the conservative, classical Republican conservative view." RELATED: The GOP's next civil war is brewing 
Washington (CNN)Homeland Security Secretary Jeh Johnson told a Senate hearing Tuesday that 18 states have taken up his agency's offer to help improve cyber security for their election systems, in the wake of suspected breaches blamed on Russian hackers. "We are seeing a limited number of instances where there have been efforts through cyber intrusions to get into the online presence of various state election agencies. And, one or two of them have been successful, others have not," Johnson said at a Senate Homeland Security Committee hearing. The issue of the integrity of US elections has been a prominent one on the presidential campaign trail, with Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump and Democratic Sen. Harry Reid each raising concerns about possible rigging of the results. Both Trump and his Democratic rival, Hillary Clinton, said at Monday's debate that they would respect the election results. Asked by Sen. Jon Tester, D-Montana, whether hackers are seeking to change votes, Johnson said: "What we are seeing are efforts to get into voter registration rolls, the identity of registered voters, things of that nature, not to change a ballot count." Johnson said the matter was still an active investigation and that the source of the intrusions hadn't been concluded. US officials briefed on the investigation have told CNN that an intrusion in an Illinois voter registration database and an attempted breach in Arizona are believed to be the work of hackers working for Russian spy agencies. US officials say there's strong evidence that Russian government hackers are behind a series other cyber-attacks against the Democratic National Committee and other affiliated political organizations. Johnson, FBI Director James Comey and Nick Rasmussen, director of the National Counterterrorism Center, on a variety issues during the hearing, ranging from the perceived missteps that failed to prevent recent domestic terrorist attacks to the Hillary Clinton email investigation. Lawmakers used the hearing to press Comey on the FBI's handling of suspects in recent domestic attacks, including those behind the Orlando mass shooting and the bombings in New York and New Jersey. The FBI had done preliminary investigations prior to the attacks on both suspects but closed the files on both men after not finding enough evidence to continue. "I'm not here to say the FBI is terrible because it missed these things, but I'm also troubled that the FBI is unwilling to even admit they've made some mistakes," Sen. Rand Paul, R-Kentucky, said. Comey said the FBI will review the case of the alleged New York bomber Ahmad Rahami to see if anything was mishandled. "We will go back and scrub our prior contact with that matter very, very carefully -- and maybe the inspector general will as well, which would be great as well -- and if there is learning, we will learn from it," he said. Republicans on the committee renewed their criticism of the FBI for recommending no charges be brought in the Clinton probe. Comey said the FBI didn't find evidence to bring charges for possible obstruction of justice. Comey spoke of the increased threat of domestic attacks as the US bombing campaign against ISIS prompts foreign fighters to return home. "The so called (ISIS) caliphate will be crushed -- the challenge will be through the fingers of that crush are going to come hundreds of very, very dangerous people," Comey said. "They will not all die on the battlefield in Syria and Iraq. There will be a terrorist diaspora sometime in the next two to five years like we have never seen before." 
(CNN)It's the world's toughest "to do" list: stop violent extremism, solve the worst global refugee crisis in a quarter century, foster peace in the ravaged Middle East and -- in the meantime -- work to end poverty, disease, hunger and the threat of nuclear weapons. That's the agenda as more than 140 heads of state and government descend on New York this week for the annual United Nations General Assembly. As the world grapples with these and other pressing issues, US domestic politics may claim space on the New York stage: Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton is set to meet some world leaders in Manhattan this week as her family's controversial charitable foundation hosts the final meeting of the Clinton Global Initiative. The UN will mark its own endings, too, as both President Barack Obama and UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon attend for the last time in their current capacities. The agenda for the 71st assembly, as aspirational as it is daunting, comes at a particularly uncertain moment. In Asia, North Korea's largest-ever nuclear test this month has cast a new shadow over a region that accounts for 40% of the global economy. In the Middle East, the world is watching to see if a shaky ceasefire will take root in Syria, where the five-year-old civil war and the brutality of ISIS have destabilized the region. That destabilization has seen European countries overwhelmed by record-breaking numbers of refugees moving across their borders, redefining the continent's political landscape and heightening the threat of terrorist infiltrators. It's the world's toughest "to do" list: stop violent extremism, solve the worst global refugee crisis in a quarter century, foster peace in the ravaged Middle East and -- in the meantime -- work to end poverty, disease, hunger and the threat of nuclear weapons. That's the agenda as more than 140 heads of state and government descend on New York this week for the annual United Nations General Assembly. As the world grapples with these and other pressing issues, US domestic politics may claim space on the New York stage: Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton is set to meet some world leaders in Manhattan this week as her family's controversial charitable foundation hosts the final meeting of the Clinton Global Initiative. The UN will mark its own endings, too, as both President Barack Obama and UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon attend for the last time in their current capacities. The agenda for the 71st assembly, as aspirational as it is daunting, comes at a particularly uncertain moment. In Asia, North Korea's largest-ever nuclear test this month has cast a new shadow over a region that accounts for 40% of the global economy. In the Middle East, the world is watching to see if a shaky ceasefire will take root in Syria, where the five-year-old civil war and the brutality of ISIS have destabilized the region. That destabilization has seen European countries overwhelmed by record-breaking numbers of refugees moving across their borders, redefining the continent's political landscape and heightening the threat of terrorist infiltrators. Terror threat Terrorism is already casting a particularly dark shadow over this meeting, as New York police investigate a Saturday bombing in Manhattan that injured 29 people. It occurred on the same day that a blast disrupted a Marine Corps charity run in New Jersey and a man stabbed nine people at a Minnesota mall. All three incidents are being investigated as possible terror attacks and security around UN events will likely be even more stringent than usual. Global leaders will hold special breakout sessions on refugees, Syria and Libya, where instability has also created openings for ISIS and other extremist groups. They'll address other priorities, too, including climate change, human rights, sustainable development and UN reform. Heightened tension On the sidelines, Obama will meet with world leaders. On Monday, he's set to discuss North Korea's nuclear tests and other Asian issues with Chinese Premier Li Keqiang. On Wednesday, Obama will review a newly signed $38 billion aid package for Israel with its Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and discuss the prospects for Mideast peace. He'll also meet with leaders such as Iraqi Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi and Colombian President Juan Manuel Santos. Amid the week-long swirl of meetings at the iconic rectangular UN building bordering Manhattan's East River, there will also be the usual smaller dramas: the leaders who use their speeches to denounce rivals in impolitic ways and heated speculation about potentially fraught or historic meetings. Last year, a tense meeting between Obama and Russian President Vladimir Putin was swiftly followed by Moscow's intervention in Syria. This year, existing tensions will be heightened by a US strike on Syrian forces that the military had thought was an ISIS target, administration officials said. Russia called an emergency UN Security Council meeting, arguing that the Saturday strike showed the US isn't fully committed to cooperating with Moscow on the fight against militant groups including ISIS and warned that the Syrian ceasefire might break down as a result. "We consider what happened as a natural result of the persistent refusal of the United States from the establishment of close cooperation with Russia in the fight against ISIS, Jabhat al-Nusra and other affiliated terrorist groups," the Russian Foreign Ministry said in a statement Sunday. Secretary of State John Kerry and Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov, the architects of the nascent ceasefire, are expected to meet and may offer an update on its progress. The US Ambassador to the UN, Samantha Power, expressed regret for the loss of life Saturday, but added that, "Even by Russia's standards, tonight's stunt -- a stunt replete with moralism and grandstanding -- is uniquely cynical and hypocritical." Iran question Since 2011, Power said, "the Assad regime has been intentionally striking civilian targets with horrifying, predictable regularity." The 2015 General Assembly also featured a historic handshake between Obama and Iranian president Hassan Rouhani. This year, with the Iran nuclear deal under fire in Tehran and a tight US presidential campaign underway, political observers wonder if the two men will meet again. State Department deputy spokesman Mark Toner couldn't say if even Kerry will meet officially with his Iranian counterparts, men he knows well from months of nuclear talks. "We just don't have anything to confirm at this point," Toner said. Kerry also met Sunday with Asian allies to discuss North Korea and tensions in the South China Sea as a rising Beijing asserts itself in the region. Amid all this, the US will be focusing on "three topline priorities," according to Bathsheba Crocker, the State Department's assistant secretary for international organizations, listing "humanitarian response, peace and security, and countering terrorism and violent extremism." Kerry will touch on humanitarian needs at a high-level Monday meeting on refugees. The next day, Obama hosts a Leaders Summit on Refugees. The US announced Wednesday that it will increase the number of refugees it absorbs from 85,000 this year to 110,000 in 2017. And on Friday, the administration said it would give $11 million to a UN fund that helps countries accepting refugees. Waves of people fleeing countries such as Syria, South Sudan and Afghanistan have overwhelmed the international refugee system. Unprecedented strains According to the UN, more than 21 million people are displaced today, half of them children, all of them in need of food, shelter, safety and livelihoods. They are placing unprecedented strains on their host countries, driving the rise of right-leaning anti-immigrant political parties in Europe and becoming a divisive US presidential campaign issue as well. In April, Republican candidate Donald Trump warned a crowd to "lock your doors" to stay safe from Syrian refugees, and in June added that "a lot of those people are ISIS." Crocker said Obama's leader summit on Tuesday aims to yield "significant sustained commitments to UN humanitarian appeals, expanded refugee resettlement programs or alternative legal pathways for admission, and new opportunities for refugees and their host communities to benefit from improved refugee access to education and legal employment." Tuesday will also mark Obama's final address to the UN as president. 
To listen to an audio podcast, mouse over the title and click Play. Open iTunes to download and subscribe to podcasts. CNN has the best political director in the business and every morning Monday through Friday David Chalian will lay out what you need to know from the campaign trail and the world of politics. Discover and share new apps. Follow us on @AppStore. Discover and share new music, movies, TV, books, and more. Follow us @iTunes and discover new iTunes Radio Stations and the music we love.
Washington (CNN)The number of individuals who were supposed to have been deported but were instead granted citizenship is far higher than was initially reported by media covering the Department of Homeland Security Inspector General's office report on the matter. On Monday, the Inspector General reported that 858 individuals from "special interest countries" -- meaning countries that are considered to be "of concern to the national security" of the US -- were supposed to have been deported but were instead granted US citizenship. But the truth is the report is even worse than reported, with more than 1,800 individuals naturalized who should have been deported from the country. A reason for the underplaying of the number may have been the report's focus, which was whether the US Citizenship and Immigration Services was using digital fingerprints effectively. The Inspector General determined that the agency granted citizenship to 858 individuals who had been ordered deported or removed under another identity but "their digital fingerprint records were not available" during the naturalization process. But a footnote on page one of the report also states that there were, as of November 2015, an additional 953 individuals about whom the Inspector General couldn't determine if there was a problem with the fingerprint records specifically, but also should have been deported. This other group consisted of members of a slightly broader classification, from countries of concern as well as from neighboring countries where there is a history of fraud. That amounts to a total of 1,811 individuals granted citizenship who should not have been. The Department of Homeland Security responded to the report, saying it would review all 1,811 individuals "out of an abundance of caution." Monday's report drew condemnation from many Republicans in Congress, including Sen. Ben Sasse, R-Nebraska, who said "a bureaucracy that blunders so badly is one that doesn't take our national security seriously." The White House said Tuesday it's "clear" some systems need improving following a glitch with DHS' fingerprint system that led to hundreds of people inadvertently being granted citizenship. "It's clear there needs to be an improvement in terms of digitizing some of the fingerprint records," said White House spokesman Josh Earnest. "Additional progress would have been made if additional resources had been appropriated by Congress." He said the Obama administration "certainly takes seriously the consideration that is made in terms of protecting our national security in terms of our immigration system." CNN's Kevin Liptak contributed to this report.
The United States made at least two separate payments to the Iranian government via wire transfer within the last 14 months, a Treasury Department spokesman confirmed Saturday, contradicting explanations from President Barack Obama that such payments were impossible. Responding to questions at an Aug. 4 press conference about a $400 million payment delivered in cash to the Iranian government, Obama said, “[T]he reason that we had to give them cash is precisely because we are so strict in maintaining sanctions and we do not have a banking relationship with Iran that we couldn't send them a check and we could not wire the money.” Story Continued Below But a Treasury Department spokesman acknowledged on Saturday that on at least two occasions, the U.S. did make payments to the Iranian government via wire transfer. In July 2015, the same month in which the U.S., Iran and other countries announced a landmark nuclear agreement, the U.S. government paid the Islamic republic approximately $848,000. That payment settled a claim over architectural drawings and fossils that are now housed in the Tehran Museum of Contemporary Art and Iran’s Ministry of Environment, respectively. Then, in April 2016, the U.S. wired Iran approximately $9 million to remove 32 metric tons of its heavy water, which is used to produce plutonium and can aid in the making of nuclear weapons. While some sanctions relating to Iran’s nuclear program were lifted with the implementation of the nuclear agreement, others imposed over the Islamic Republic’s human rights policies and support for terrorist organizations remain in effect. The July 2015 wire transfer was made while the full weight of sanctions against Iran were intact, while the April 2016 payment for heavy water was made after the lifting of nuclear-related sanctions. The Treasury Department spokesman explained that the lifting of those sanctions allowed Iran “to gain incremental access to the international financial system, which opened up more options for executing transactions, such as the heavy water transaction” that occurred in April 2016. The spokesman declined to offer an explanation as to why the July 2015 payment was possible despite the full array of sanctions in place at the time. That $400 million cash payment that Obama said could not have been delivered any other way was part of a larger $1.7 billion settlement with Iran, the remainder of which was also delivered in cash. The $400 million, paid in January to settle a decades-old dispute over military equipment order by the late shah of Iran, was sent through intermediary central banks in Europe, who then delivered pallets of euros, Swiss francs and other currencies to Tehran. The Treasury Department spokesman said that the January settlement specified that payment be made in cash because Iran had previously had difficulty accessing wire-transferred funds and was “very aware of the difficulties it would face in accessing and using the funds from the January 2016 settlement payment if they were in any other form than cash.” A senior Obama administration official contested that the Treasury Department’s confirmation of the twin wire transfers contradicted what the president said at his press conference early last month. The official repeated what the president said at the time, that “we do not have a direct banking relationship with Iran, which means that we cannot wire money directly to Iran,” but did not directly address either the July 2015 or April 2016 wire transfers. “Sanctions had effectively cut off Iran from the international financial system and after several years of trying to gain limited access to its own money held in accounts outside of Iran, Iran was very aware of the difficulties it would face in accessing and using these funds if they were in any form other than cash,” the official said of negotiations surrounding the $1.7 billion settlement. “Therefore, effectuating the payment in foreign currency banknotes was the most reliable way to ensure that they would receive the funds in a timely manner.” Republicans in Congress and on the campaign trail have alleged that Iran requested a cash payment specifically because it would make the money difficult to trace. GOP presidential nominee Donald Trump made an issue of the cash payment over the summer, suggesting that the cash delivery likely wound up funding terrorism or found its way into "some of the mullahs' bank accounts." Sen. James Lankford (R-Okla.), who discovered the two wire transfer payments in briefings with Obama administration officials, echoed those concerns in an interview with POLITICO on Thursday. “Oh, I don’t have any question that Iran wants the money in cash because they wanted it faster than what a wire transfer would be and it’s fungible,” Lankford said. “They announced pretty quickly afterward that they were expanding their defense and their military budget by $1.7 billion dollars, an exact amount that we had just sent over to them. So I don’t think that was accidental.” “But when you give cash, we can’t track,” he continued. “Did that go to Hezbollah? Did that go to the Russians? Did that go to the coup in Yemen? There’s no way to be able to track that.” Republicans, including Lankford, have also suggested that the $1.7 billion delivery constituted a “ransom” payment because it was delivered on the same day that U.S. prisoners were released by Iran. The president dismissed such claims during his Aug. 4 press conference as “the manufacturing of outrage” and said unequivocally, "we don’t pay ransom for hostages.” But State Department spokesman John Kirby acknowledged two weeks later that the U.S. had refused to deliver the cash to Iran until its prisoners were wheels up from Tehran, a decision Kirby said the U.S. made to “retain maximum leverage” over the Iranians. Despite that admission, he maintained that the arrangement did not in any way constitute a ransom payment.
Hillary Clinton on Tuesday warned that the nearly 50-day sprint to Election Day will impact far more than just the next four or eight years. Making an appeal to black voters during an interview on the “Steve Harvey Morning Show,” Clinton stressed that voters can’t sit this one out. Story Continued Below “Every issue they care about is at stake in this election,” Clinton said. “This is not: ‘Oh, you know, a little here, a little there. We can — you know, we can take it, no matter who wins.’ No. The next 50 days will determine the next 50 years, and I say that absolutely seriously.” The former secretary of state said she hopes everyone is registered to vote and directed listeners to a website to find out whether they’re registered “because I need you.” “We gotta stand up and be counted in this election,” she added. Clinton’s comments come after President Barack Obama made an appeal on Clinton's and his own behalf in an address to the Congressional Black Caucus Foundation on Saturday. “My name may not be on the ballot, but our progress is on the ballot,” Obama said. “Tolerance is on the ballot. Democracy is on the ballot. Justice is on the ballot. Good schools are on the ballot. Ending mass incarceration, that’s on the ballot right now.” But up next on the docket is the first presidential debate between Clinton and Trump on Monday in New York, where the former senator expects to absorb a bunch of body blows from an aggressive foe. “I am going to do my very best to communicate as clearly and fearlessly as I can in the face of the insults and the attacks and the bullying and bigotry that we’ve seen coming from my opponent,” she said. “You know, I can take it, Steve. I can take that kind of stuff. I’ve been at this and, you know, I understand it’s a contact sport.” What Clinton won’t take, though, is any insults toward anyone else. “You know, his attacks on African-Americans and immigrants and Muslims and women and people with disabilities, it’s just — it’s just something we cannot tolerate,” she said. As Clinton wrapped up her interview, Trump taunted her on Twitter: “Hillary Clinton is taking the day off again, she needs the rest. Sleep well Hillary — see you at the debate!”
Donald Trump's presidential campaign paid former campaign manager Corey Lewandowski's company $20,000 in consulting fees in August, campaign filings show. Lewandowski was fired as Trump’s campaign manager on June 20 after a series of missteps that included a physical confrontation with a reporter and being charged with battery over an altercation with protesters at a rally. The battery charges were later dropped. Days after the firing, CNN hired Lewandowski as an on-air political commentator, a position he holds currently. Trump's campaign finance filing shows a $20,000 payment made to Lewandowski's company, Green Monster Consulting, LLC, on August 11 for the purpose of "strategy consulting." “Corey Lewandowski, who is no longer involved in the campaign, continues to receive monthly severance payments," the campaign said in a statement. "The campaign will continue to honor its contract with Mr. Lewandowski, which stipulates he will be paid through the end of the year. These payments are in no way compensation for services rendered.” ABC News had previously reported the rapprochement between the fired employee and the presidential candidate. Each day, Trump wakes up, usually in his Fifth Avenue penthouse, and has a routine round of phone calls, sources told ABC News last month. The calls include his campaign leadership, his children, some close allies and, quite frequently, Lewandowski. “They talk almost every day,” one senior level campaign staffer said, requesting anonymity. 
(CNN)Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump disputed Monday that Russia may be behind a series of cyberattacks on election systems in the US and on the Democratic National Committee -- a conclusion that US officials and lawmakers have come to. The New York real estate mogul questioned Russian culpability in response to comments by Democratic opponent Hillary Clinton at the first presidential debate pointing the finger at Russia for recent breaches. "She says, 'Russia, Russia, Russia,' " Trump said. "It could be China. You don't know who broke into the DNC." He continued, "It also could be somebody sitting on their bed that weighs 400 pounds." But Clinton said there was "no doubt" that Russia has been responsible, an assessment top US security authorities and members of congressional intelligence committees support. "Cyber security, cyber warfare will be one of the biggest challenges facing the next president," Clinton warned at the event in Hempstead, New York. Recent hacks have targeted state election boards and the Democratic National Committee. The FBI is currently investigating. Sen. Dianne Feinstein, a California Democrat on the Senate intelligence committee, and Rep. Adam Schiff, a California Democrat on the House intelligence committee, recently released a statement saying that "based on briefings we have received, we have concluded that the Russian intelligence agencies are making a serious and concerted effort to influence the US election." On Monday, Clinton also issued an implicit threat to Russia that the US could hit back hard and would do so if necessary. "The United States has much greater capacity," Clinton said, "and we are not going to sit idly by and permit state actors to go after our information, our private sector information or our public sector information." "We don't want to have to use the kinds of tools we have, but we will defend the citizens of this country and the Russians need to understand that," Clinton said. Clinton added that Russia's suspected hacking attempts on US voting systems were one reason she was "so shocked when Donald asked Putin to hack into Americans," a reference to Trump's comments during a July news conference. "Russia, if you're listening, I hope you're able to find the 30,000 emails that are missing" from the private server Clinton used while secretary of state for official business and was later destroyed, Trump said at that event. Foreign policy issues were a relatively minor part of the debate, but each candidate tried to use national security issues to score points. Trump claimed that Clinton has done such a bad job of managing global crises and Middle East conflict that she has been fighting ISIS her "whole life." The group that evolved into ISIS formed in 2006, while Clinton was born in 1947. For her part, Clinton targeted Trump's claims that the US should consider letting South Korea and Japan manage their own defense without American support. "Words matter," Clinton said. "Words matter when you run for president and they really matter when you are president, and I want to assure our allies in South Korea and Japan and elsewhere that we have mutual defense treaties and we will honor them." In response, Trump qualified his position, saying, "as far as Japan is concerned, I want to help our allies, but we cannot be the policeman of the world." 
As Donald Trump courted African-American voters in Cleveland on Wednesday at a town hall taped by Fox News to air Thursday evening, he seemed to express support for establishing the stop and frisk policing policy on a national level. When asked by an audience member how he would stop violence in the black community, Trump responded, "I would do stop and frisk. I think you have to. We did it in New York. It worked incredibly well. And you have to be proactive, and you know, you really help people sort of change their mind automatically." He added, "New York City was incredible, the way that worked, so I think that could be one step you could do."       The law enforcement policy — in which police officers stop and question pedestrians regardless of whether they believe a crime has been committed, then search the pedestrians if the officers suspect violations — has been extremely controversial, particularly in communities of color, and has been the subject of several legal challenges alleging racial profiling and discrimination. The policy gained prominence in the 1990s under New York City Police Commissioner Bill Bratton and Mayor Rudy Giuliani, who is now a close confidant of Trump's. Trump previously expressed his support for the policy, praising Giuliani for its success in New York. Trump has as of late also been an ardent supporter of profiling regarding immigration, believing it is a helpful tactic in stopping terrorism. He has drawn the ire of some African-Americans not only for praising stop and frisk but also for painting a grim portrait of black life. On Tuesday night, Trump said, "Our African-American communities are absolutely in the worst shape that they've ever been in before, ever, ever, ever" — seeming not to take into account slavery, institutional segregation or the often violent reactions in the civil rights movement. On Thursday morning, however, in an interview on "Fox & Friends," he sought to amend his position, saying he never meant to suggest that stop and frisk should be implemented nationally. "Now Chicago is out of control. I was referring to Chicago with stop and frisk," Trump said. His initial answer came in response to a question that did not mention Chicago, though Trump cited the city in a previous answer as a place that is "out of control." Of course, as president, Trump would not be able to unilaterally implement the policy in a single city; he would have to defer to local officials and law enforcement. During a press conference, the members of the Congressional Black Caucus were asked about Trump's stop-and-frisk remarks. "The notion that stop and frisk had anything to do with the improving public safety numbers in New York is ludicrous, and Donald trump needs to check his facts," said Rep. Hakeem Jeffries, D-New York. "We would ask Donald Trump to bone up on his knowledge of what is constitutional and what is unconstitutional," said Rep. Yvette Clarke, D-New York.
Speaker Paul Ryan said on Wednesday he expects the House will vote to override any presidential veto of a bill that would allow the families of 9/11 victims to sue Saudi Arabia, despite his concerns that the measure could touch off a wave of retaliatory lawsuits. “I really don’t know the answer to that question,” Ryan (R-Wis.) said when asked if the House would take up a veto override this month before Congress prepares to leave until after Election Day. But Ryan did not say exactly when he expected the override vote to happen. Story Continued Below “It depends on how long it takes for us to get our other work done. I heard that the Senate majority leader said they’re going to stay so if we’re in and they pass it, then it’s going to come over here and we’ll pass it,” he added. President Barack Obama has said he will veto the measure, which passed both chambers unanimously, in part over concerns that the bill could open up U.S. officials to legal retaliation in foreign courts. He has until the end of the week to issue his veto. Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.) said his chamber will take up the veto override vote before leaving for recess. Ryan said he has concerns with the bill, listing many of the same complaints voiced by the White House, but that shouldn’t stop the veto override from coming up for a vote. “I worry about legal matters. I worry about trial lawyers trying to get rich off of this. And I do worry about precedence. At the same time, these victims need to have their day in court,” Ryan told reporters. “I do have concerns about the legislation but I’m going to let Congress work its will because that’s what Congress does. I do think the votes are there for the override.”
Sanders' next book, "Our Revolution," is being adapted for teenagers and being pitched to booksellers as a high school graduation gift. The young adult version of the book, which is not yet titled, will come out in April 2017, according to the publisher, Henry Holt Books for Young Readers. The publisher shared details about the book project with CNNMoney on Wednesday. Policy-oriented books are de rigueur for politicians. But they're usually written for adult readers and read only by devoted supporters and policy wonks. Sanders is doing something unusual by targeting the teenage market. The book will be written for 12- to 18-year-olds. The list price will be $17, $10 less than the edition for adults. Sanders' interest in reaching young readers is in line with his recent bid for president, which tapped into a deep well of support from young voters. Since conceding the Democratic nomination to Hillary Clinton, and endorsing her in the presidential race, he has spoken at length about the importance of motivating young people to care about the electoral process. He recently told The Nation that Democrats have got to open the door to young people." The party needs to "[w]elcome them in and understand that it will be messy, that many young people are not professional politicians," he said. "The Democratic Party is going to have to adjust itself to their reality, rather than force young people to be adjusted to the Democratic leadership's reality." Sanders is currently wrapping up "Our Revolution," which will come out on November 15, one week after Election Day. It is being published by Thomas Dunne Books. Both that imprint and Henry Holt are owned by Macmillan. The young adult edition will follow five months later. Henry Holt describes it as "an inspiring teen guide to engaging with and shaping the world — a perfect gift and important read."
(CNN)Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump are virtually tied headed into their first presidential debate Monday night, a new ABC News/Washington Post poll shows. The survey shows likely voters split 46% for Clinton and 44% for Trump -- with 5% supporting Libertarian Gary Johnson and 1% backing the Green Party's Jill Stein. That's well within the poll's 4.5 percentage point margin of error. Among a broader group -- registered voters -- Clinton and Trump are tied at 41%, with Johnson at 7% and Stein at 2%. The results show the race has tightened in recent weeks. In the same poll, Clinton led by 5 points in early September and by 8 points in early August. A new CNN Poll of Polls incorporating the results of the new Post-ABC Poll finds the margin in an average of the five most recent polls holding at a three-point edge for Clinton, 43% back her, 40% Trump in that calculation. There's been a similar tightening in the key swing state of Pennsylvania, a new Allentown Morning Call/Muhlenberg College survey shows. That poll, released Sunday, has Clinton at 40% to Trump's 38%, with Johnson at 8% and Stein at 3%. That's a drop for Clinton, who led by 8 points in the same poll a week earlier. The ABC News/Washington Post poll also underscored that the 9 p.m. ET Monday debate at Hofstra University in New York will be a crucial moment in the campaign for both candidates. Eight in 10 voters said they plan to watch the debate -- with expectations slightly higher for Clinton, with 44% saying they expect her to win the debate while 34% expect Trump to win. Jennifer Agiesta contributed to this report.
HEMPSTEAD, N.Y. — The first 20 minutes of the long-awaited showdown between Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton appeared to be a draw. It was only later, when Clinton began a barrage of possible explanations for Trump's failure to release his tax returns and then sat back as he squirmed his way through an explanation of his history of birtherism, that her victory became clear. But it was rooted in those opening exchanges and a seemingly off-hand but actually quite deliberate decision by Clinton to bait Trump—by mentioning his father and challenging his own conception as a self-made man. Story Continued Below “Donald was very fortunate in his life, and that's all to his benefit,” Clinton started. “He started his business with $14 million, borrowed from his father, and he really believes that the more you help wealthy people, the better off we'll be and that everything will work out from there.” Trump quickly dismissed Clinton’s characterization, saying he received “a very small loan” that he turned into a company valued, he claimed, in the billions. “I say that only because that’s the kind of thinking that our country needs.” In the moment, he seemed calm—but from that point forward he was anything but. “She mind screwed him from the beginning by mentioning the loan from his father,” said Rob Stutzman, a GOP operative in California. “That was brilliant psychological warfare on her part. He slowly unwound from there, culminating is borderline incoherency over the final 30 minutes.” Suddenly, his words were dripping with sarcasm as he asked his rival if he could call her “Secretary Clinton—yes, is that OK? Good. I want you to be very happy. It's very important to me.” His voice rose as he skewered her for flip-flopping on his signature issue of trade. And before long, he was interrupting both Clinton and moderator Lester Holt, interjecting as she ran through allegations that he rooted for the housing crisis and claimed that climate change was “a hoax perpetrated by the Chinese.” He remained on the defensive throughout, unwilling to apologize for—or dispute—accusations of stiffing contractors and paying little to no federal income tax. Indeed, by the debate’s end, he’d again defended the years he spent refusing to recognize the U.S. citizenship of the nation’s first black president, showed no quarter on walking back his statements that Clinton, the first woman presidential nominee in the country’s history, “doesn’t have a presidential look,” and spent the final minutes defending having once called Rosie O’Donnell a fat pig. For Trump, who had appeared to pull nearly even with Clinton heading into their first debate showdown before a Super Bowl-sized television audience, it may amount to a colossal missed opportunity. GOP pollster Frank Luntz, who held a focus group of undecided voters in suburban Philadelphia Monday night, reported that 16 of the 22 participants deemed Clinton the winner. If history reflects this debate as a pivotal moment in this campaign, Trump, should he lose support and the White House as a result, will have only his own thin skin and scant impulse control to blame. But it wouldn’t be the first time Trump was thought to lose a debate only to see his standing in the polls improve. Indeed, while insiders and viewers alike handed the win to Clinton, the Republican certainly scored with his base when taking the Democrat to task on trade. But that’s about all. Before the candidates had cleared the stage, Clinton’s surrogates were pouring into the spin room, eager to take a victory lap and to focus their comments on Trump’s angry, animated performance. “He became unhinged,” Robby Mook, Clinton’s campaign manager, told reporters. David Plouffe, a top Obama strategist, also noted Trump’s behavioral change as the debate went on. “In the beginning of the debate, he tried to be sedated, straitjacketed Trump, kind of on his best behavior,” he said. “And I think as the debate went on, we saw the Donald Trump all of you have covered: a little bit unhinged, a little bit rattled.” Jennifer Palmieri, Clinton’s campaign communications director, used the same word—“unhinged”—in describing Trump’s performance. Clinton’s surrogates stuck to their talking points, including their denial that they had planned to bait Trump into a meltdown. “We thought he would hold it together,” she said. “This is not the debate we mocked. We didn’t think this is what he would do; we thought he would come buttoned up, we thought he would be more disciplined.” But, in fact, Clinton’s team had invested in psychological research as to how she might get under Trump’s skin, according to two sources who said her off-hand reference to his father in the debate’s opening minutes was a deliberate calculation. Plouffe, holding court with reporters, didn’t mention the research but explained the analysis, couching it as his own. “My analysis of Trump is the thing he’s most interested in defending is himself—even more than winning the presidency,” Plouffe said. “So any time his record’s challenged, his business record’s challenged, he kind of spends a lot of time on that. I think he spent a lot more time on himself than the American people.” After the debate, Jason Miller, Trump’s senior communications adviser, cast Clinton as “programmed.” Campaign manager Kellyanne Conway said Trump had been a “gentleman” for not mentioning Bill Clinton’s past infidelities. As Trump’s staff was spinning hard, most Republicans, from seasoned operatives watching at home, to close Trump allies like Rudy Giuliani who let it slip in the spin rooms that the performance was “not one of his better nights,” concurred. “Trump opened strong and hit some key themes that work for him. He won the early exchanges on jobs and trade, outsider versus politician, and presenting himself as the agent of change,” said Bruce Haynes, a GOP consultant in Washington. “But Trump was not disciplined enough or prepared enough to carry those themes through the debate. Trump found himself discussing Sean Hannity, Sidney Blumenthal and Rosie O'Donnell in a presidential debate. He was like Charlie Brown, he tried to kick every football that Lucy held out there and he missed them every time.” After a dozen GOP primary debates, Trump’s former rivals were hardly surprised to see him so easily baited. “He refuses to let any criticism go unanswered,” said Curt Anderson, who guided Bobby Jindal’s presidential bid last year. “It's a conscious decision on his part. It's a bad decision.” They’d seen this Trump before. We all have. Just never on such a stage. Annie Karni contributed to this report.
A Chinese company and four of its employees accused of attempting to evade U.S. sanctions against North Korea were the target of a set of enforcement actions announced Monday morning by the Department of Justice. Chinese trading company Dandong Hongxiang Industrial Development Co. Ltd., its majority owner and three of its managers are charged with conspiring to violate the International Emergency Economic Powers Act and Weapons of Mass Destruction Proliferators Sanctions Regulations. They are also charged with attempting to defraud the United States and conspiring to engage in international money laundering. Story Continued Below The charges arise from financial transactions using U.S. dollars between Dandong Hongxiang Industrial Development and Korea Kwangson Banking Corporation, which is under both U.S. and UN sanctions. Those transactions, according to the Justice Department, were conducted both by Dandong Hongxiang Industrial Development as well as by “numerous front companies” that it controlled. The Justice Department also announced a civil complaint, seeking the civil forfeiture of all the money held in the 25 Chinese bank accounts of Dandong Hongxiang Industrial Development and its front corporations. Those accounts are subject to forfeiture, the Justice Department said, because they received hundreds of millions of dollars that arrived via the United States. Because the money was routed through the U.S., it falls under American jurisdiction, the department said. Pressure has mounted on President Barack Obama’s administration to crack down on China, North Korea’s largest trading partner and international protector, since the isolated nation’s latest nuclear test earlier this month. Republicans and even Obama’s own former secretary of state Hillary Clinton have urged the president to more forcefully pressure China to enforce international sanctions against North Korea. Rep. Ed Royce (R-Calif.) has specifically called on Obama to put to use the North Korea Sanctions and Policy Enhancement Act, a law signed by the president earlier this year that affords his administration authority to sanction any individual who "imports, exports, or re-exports luxury goods to or into North Korea" or "engages in money laundering, counterfeiting of goods or currency, bulk cash smuggling, or narcotics trafficking that supports the government of North Korea or its senior officials." Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump has blamed Clinton for North Korea’s most recent nuclear launch. Jason Miller, Trump’s senior communications adviser, labeled it “one more example of Hillary Clinton's catastrophic failures as secretary of state," and added that "Clinton promised to work to end North Korea’s nuclear program as secretary of state, yet the program has only grown in strength and sophistication."
(CNN)Kevin Johnson -- the NBA star-turned-Sacramento mayor -- was pied in the face by a man at a charity dinner Wednesday night at the high school he once attended. But the pie-thrower appeared to get the worst of it. Sean Thompson, 32, approached the mayor, pulled a pie out of the bag and shoving it in his face -- setting off a short scuffle, in which Johnson punched Thompson in the face several times, according to witnesses descriptions of the scuffle in local media reports. "There was an altercation that occurred after he got the pie in the face," Sgt. Bryce Heinlein, a Sacramento police spokesman, told CNN. "There were some punches thrown, and then the subject was quickly taken to the ground by one of the officers that is on the mayor's security detail" and some event attendees, Heinlein said. Thompson was arrested and faces felony charges of assaulting a public official, Sacramento police said. The Sacramento Fire Department transported him to a local hospital after the scuffle. A booking photo shows him with two sets of stitches around a blackened left eye. Crystal Strait, Johnson's chief of staff, was on hand for the incident Wednesday night, and described a briefly chaotic scene. She said in an email that "the Mayor was attacked and grabbed him from behind and struck with what we afterwards learned was a pie from an unknown man. He reacted in self-defense like most people do when attacked by an unknown object." She that Johnson "did not have any significant injuries," though one staffer was receiving medical care Thursday for a minor injury that occurred while helping to restrain Thompson. The mayor, who was a star point guard for the Phoenix Suns in the late 1980s through the 1990s, addressed the incident on Twitter, saying: "Appreciate everyone. I'm doing fine. Thank you to Sac PD for being there. Be safe everyone." 
Hillary Clinton will almost certainly win Monday night’s epic presidential debate on points — and still could lose. It’s hard to see how Clinton, who has marinated in public policy for 30 years and is preparing for the debate like it is the invasion of Normandy, won’t repeatedly best Donald Trump on substance. Story Continued Below Her strength in this area perfectly matches Trump’s weakness. Trump has appeared to learn for the first time such basic information as that the Trans-Pacific Partnership doesn’t include China and that Russia has already invaded Ukraine on the debate stage or during a media interview. He sometimes reads his speeches as if they include revelations to him — “so true,” he’ll interject after coming across a striking fact or observation in the text. If Trump has spent time hitting the briefing books, his campaign has kept it under wraps and he has yet to reveal any hint of a new policy depth in anything he’s said over the past few weeks. So Trump won’t be particularly well-informed, and figures it won’t particularly matter — and may well be right. Trump has a significant built-in advantage in that there is a lower standard for him — not because the media isn’t tough enough on him, as all the media mavens agree, but because he is the de facto challenger and candidate of change in a change election. Trump can win by clearing a bar of acceptability, whereas Clinton has to do more than that and either significantly wound Trump or make a compellingly positive case for herself that has so far eluded her in both 2008 and 2016. This is not to say that Trump won’t be on treacherous terrain. He can’t bully and mock Clinton the way he did his Republican rivals. He won’t have a crowd to feed off of. Without a teleprompter, message discipline still tends to elude him. The one-on-one format for an hour-and-a-half could make his thin knowledge painfully obvious. And any misstep or outburst that reinforces the idea that he lacks the qualities to be commander in chief would be devastating. But Trump just needs to seem plausible and the very fact that he is on a presidential debate stage, the most rarified forum in American politics, will benefit him. During the Republican primary debates, the intangibles worked in his favor and they presumably will on Monday, too. Trump is a big personality with a dominant physical presence. His critics often sneeringly say he is a reality TV star, but you don’t become one without charisma and a performative ability that are major political assets. The fact is that Trump will have to stumble badly — and probably sabotage himself — to live down to Hillary’s critique of him. She has made her campaign almost entirely about how Trump is a monstrous madman. This was an understandable calculation — she wanted to disqualify him out of the box and differentiate and isolate him from other Republicans. The cost is that she has done more than anyone to lower the standard for Trump. It’s not as though he needs to mount a convincing, detailed defense of his tax or child care plan or anything else to invalidate Clinton’s critique of him; he just needs to seem a reasonable person. That is why Trump doesn’t need to be the aggressor. As long as he’s firm and calm, he is implicitly rebutting the case against him on temperament. And then he can look for a big moment or two that will be memorable and drive the post-debate conversation in the media that is arguably as important as the debate itself. These contests aren’t evaluated by college-debate judges. Trump won one of the Republican primary debates with his barbed quip in response to Vicente Fox’s vulgar declaration that Mexico wouldn’t pay for the wall, “The wall just got 10 feet higher.” This wasn’t an argument or a policy; it was a sentiment. No one would have written it down in a briefing book. And yet, it punched through. If Trump has taught us anything, it is that simple, evocative statements can make up for a multitude of evasions and confused non-answers. In the past, most presidential debates have had a slight or ephemeral effect on the race. Monday could be different because it is an event tailor-made for Trump to change one of the main factors holding him back. By roughly 60 percent to 30 percent, people think Clinton is prepared to be president; by roughly 60 percent to 30 percent, people think Trump is not. A credible performance could move that number for Trump, and appreciably increase his odds of winning the presidency. Hillary is both formidably well-prepared for Monday, and at significant risk. Such is the dynamic of the race and the way most voters absorb information that she could “win” on points, and still lose ground.
Catherine Cortez Masto would be the first Latina senator if she wins the race to replace Harry Reid in Nevada. But some Republicans are nonetheless accusing her this week of “hispandering” to voters. On Thursday, two former political aides to Rep. Joe Heck (R-Nev.) questioned Cortez Masto’s emphasis on her ethnicity, responding to a Washington Post story highlighting the former attorney general as one of the prominent Hispanic candidates running for federal office this fall. Story Continued Below Thomas McAllister, a former political director to Heck who is Hispanic, called her appeals to be elected as the first Latina in the Senate “BS,” deeming her “as Mexican as I am” on social media, then questioning why she doesn’t speak Spanish fluently. Mark Ciavola, who managed Heck’s previous runs for Congress, called her campaign “hispandering at its finest.” In a phone interview on Friday, Cortez Masto called the comments “an attack on Mexican-Americans.” “It's a criticism for me and other Mexican-Americans. It is an attack on all of us who come here and have worked hard in Nevada to make it home,” she said after holding a press conference in Nevada to decry the remarks by Heck’s former political aides. “It’s an indication of their theme, which is to attack me personally.” Cortez Masto’s grandfather immigrated to the United States from Chihuahua, Mexico. Cortez Masto's Senate race is one of the most closely watched in the nation. One other Latina Senate candidate, Rep. Loretta Sanchez (D-Calif.), is on the ballot this fall, but she's a heavy underdog. McAllister and Ciavola had been working on Heck’s campaign until this spring. Heck’s campaign said they do not speak for the candidate and moved to distance the congressman from their comments. “We have many questions for [Catherine Cortez Masto], but none of them relate to her heritage. No one affiliated with this campaign has questioned that,” said a spokesman for Heck, later adding: “Her attempt to link us to someone unaffiliated with this campaign is ridiculous given her silence on her chief surrogate and fundraiser Harry Reid’s many offensive comments, such as calling Iraq veteran Joe Heck a ‘detriment to our country.’” But Cortez Masto said that’s not enough for her and she’s “going to keep talking about” her heritage and those questioning it as part of her efforts to succeed Reid. “That's the first I’m hearing of it. And quite frankly he should be very vocal in denouncing it. And that's the problem: He hasn't denounced anything,” she said. On Thursday evening Buzzfeed reported that Heck’s son, Joey, had posted a string of offensive messages on social media. He and Heck later apologized for the second such outburst in four years. Cortez Masto called Joey’s remarks “horrific” in the interview. Cortez Masto has consistently trailed Heck in recent polls and the Republican has been credited for running a strong campaign in a difficult year overall for the GOP. Democrats believe that surveys have under-represented Latino support for Cortez Masto. Democrats have been frustrated by Heck and conservative groups’ relentless attacks on Cortez Masto's record as attorney general recent Republican ads blame her for an increase in crime and going easy on drunk drivers. Heck has set up a website calling her “corrupt.” The race is one of a handful central to Democrats' hopes of winning control of the Senate.
Donald Trump’s son will headline a fundraiser for a Trump super PAC next week, a move that comes amid ongoing confusion in the Republican donor world about which pro-Trump group to support. Donald Trump Jr. is slated to attend a New York City fundraiser on Thursday for Rebuilding America Now, a super PAC that’s being chaired by Florida Gov. Rick Scott. Alex Castellanos, a veteran Republican strategist, is also helping to steer the group. Story Continued Below An invitation to the fundraiser lists a handful of hosts including former World Wrestling Entertainment CEO Linda McMahon, Wall Street investor Anthony Scaramucci, and investor Howard Lorber. It’s not the first time the younger Trump has boosted Rebuilding America Now. On Monday, he appeared at another event for the group. Donald Trump Jr. spoke optimistically about his father’s campaign, arguing that he was demonstrating strength in even traditionally Democratic areas, according to one attendee. The Thursday event comes as many Republican donors continue to grapple with which Trump super PAC to give to. Another group, Great America PAC, recently hosted a fundraiser in Trump Tower that was attended by another Trump son, Eric. And this week, it was revealed that two of the Republican Party’s biggest donors, casino mogul Sheldon Adelson and TD Ameritrade founder Joe Ricketts, would contribute to a third anti-Hillary Clinton group, Future45. With many Republican donors keeping their distance from Trump, none of the pro-Trump super PACs have raised anywhere near as much money as the pro-Hillary Clinton Priorities USA. To date, Priorities USA has taken in over $133 million.
With the world watching, President Barack Obama today took an apparent swipe at Donald Trump's plan to build a wall along the U.S.-Mexico border, in his eighth and final address to the United Nations General Assembly as commander in chief. "Today a nation ringed by walls would only imprison itself," Obama warned, without naming the Republican presidential nominee. Obama further cautioning against "the same forces of global integration" that have made democracies interdependent while exposing "deep fault lines in the existing international order" like gaps between the rich and poor created by capitalism throughout the world. He made two other references to the ineffectiveness of walls in stopping global forces, quipping in an apparent reference to the Zika virus that "mosquitoes don't respect walls" and saying of terrorism that "the world is simply too small to be able to build a wall and stop it from affecting our own societies." Though he never directly addressed the U.S. presidential election, Obama's message for the General Assembly was in many ways applicable to the impulses raging in the race, citing "a contest between authoritarianism and democracy right now" and an appeal for a top-down "strongman model." Obama rejected such tendencies. "History shows that strongmen are then left with two paths," he said. "Permanent crackdown, which sparks strife at home, or scapegoating enemies abroad, which can lead to war."     Speaking about the big picture, the Obama recounted the progress made during his presidency, on issues such as the global financial crisis, international terrorism and re-establishing relations with Cuba. "This is important work," he stressed. "It has made a real difference in the lives of our people, and it could not have happened had we not worked together." Obama said nations "can choose to press forward with a better model of cooperation and integration" or "retreat into a world sharply divided and ultimately in conflict along age-old lines of nation and tribe and race and religion." "I want to suggest to you today that we must go forward and not backward," he said, although he added that doing so would require nations of the world to "acknowledge that the existing path to global integration requires a course correction." "The answer cannot be a simple rejection of global integration," Obama said. "Instead, we must work together to make sure the benefits of such integration are broadly shared and that the disruptions — economic, political and cultural — that are caused by integration are squarely addressed." Obama demanded that democracies of the world "speak out forcefully" for "freedom and dignity." "A world in which 1 percent of the economy controls the other 99 percent will never be stable," he said. "These are the policies I've pursued in the United States, and with clear results" — touting progress in job creation, cutting poverty, improving infrastructure and investing in childhood education. His speech came as fighting in Syria has resumed after the Syrian military declared Monday an end to the fragile cease-fire deal that was brokered between the U.S. and Russia just over a week ago. "Together now we have to open our hearts and do more to help refugees who are desperate for a home. We should all welcome the pledges of increased assistance that have been made at this General Assembly gathering," Obama said. "There's a lot of nations right now that are doing the right thing, but many nations — particularly those blessed with wealth and the benefits of geography — that can do more to offer a hand." In the same month that North Korea conducted its second nuclear test of the year, Obama highlighted the benefits of free markets over markets resisting influence from globalization. "We cannot unwind integration any more than we can stuff technology back into a box, nor can we look to failed models of the past. If we start resorting to trade wars, market distorting subsidies, overreliance on national resources instead of innovation, these approaches will make us poor collectively, and they're more likely to lead to conflict," he said. "And the stark contrast between, say, the success of the Republic of Korea and the wasteland of North Korea shows that central plan to control the economy is a dead end," Obama said.
Donald Trump will not be fazed by the presence of another brash billionaire businessman, Mark Cuban, in the front row of the upcoming debate, the Republican nominee's campaign asserted Friday. Cuban, a Hillary Clinton supporter who has repeatedly criticized Trump, tweeted Thursday night that he would be in attendance at what he termed the "Humbling at Hofstra," in reference to the debate's site at the Long Island university. Story Continued Below "I just think it’s worth noting that this is one of those things that could get inside somebody’s head. And Mark Cuban, sitting right there in front of him," Fox Business host Maria Bartiromo said during a discussion with national spokeswoman Katrina Pierson. Pierson objected to that assessment, remarking, "No one can get in Donald Trump's head. No one can get in Mr. Trump’s head." "He's going to be focused and he’s gonna be ... focused on talking to the American people," Pierson said. "It doesn't matter who's in the front row. Mr. Trump is gonna make his case at Monday night." Campaign manager Kellyanne Conway mocked Clinton's invitation of Cuban later on the same network, calling it "a typical Monday night for Hillary Clinton spending it with billionaires who don't particularly care for Donald Trump." Conway added, "What's he gonna do -- make funny faces at Donald Trump?"
Washington (CNN)The cast of "The West Wing" is back -- but this time, instead of the fictional Jed Bartlet, they're backing a different Democrat for president. Members of the massively popular NBC drama will appear with Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton at several events in Ohio on Saturday and Sunday. Actors Richard Schiff, Allison Janney, Bradley Whitford, Dulé Hill, Joshua Malina and Mary McCormack will make campaign stops in the Mahoning Valley, Cleveland, Sandusky and Toledo areas on Saturday, and in the Dayton and Columbus areas on Sunday. Joss Whedon's Avengers take shots at Trump in get out the vote video The actors will talk about why they're supporting Clinton and encourage the public to register to vote, according to a campaign statement. This isn't the first time "West Wing" -- the plot of which centers on a Democratic presidential administration -- clashes with real life. Janney, who played White House press secretary C.J. Cregg, made an unexpected appearance in the White House press briefing room in April. The surprised press corps had been expecting actual White House spokesman Josh Earnest for their usual press briefing. The Emmy Award-winning show has been off the air since 2006, but remains popular even a decade later. 
Washington (CNN)Republicans are preparing for the penalty phase of the 2016 election. The next Republican civil war came into greater focus over the weekend when party chairman Reince Priebus threw a thinly veiled warning at former GOP 2016ers who haven't yet endorsed Donald Trump: "Get on board" or face penalties if you ever seek the presidency again. The nudge -- aimed at Republicans such as John Kasich, Ted Cruz and Jeb Bush -- was no off-the-cuff expression of frustration. Several Republican party chairs in early voting states told CNN that Priebus has spent days talking about enforcing the pledge that all 17 GOP candidates signed at the outset of the 2016 primary to support the eventual nominee. Find out all you need to know for the 2016 election on "The Daily DC" podcast "I can't tell you how many people have asked me, 'What are you going to do about these candidates that are not keeping their promise?'" Iowa GOP chairman Jeff Kaufmann told CNN Monday. He said the Iowa state GOP receives 10 to 20 calls per week from rank-and-file Republicans wondering what, specifically, the party will do to force Kasich, Cruz and Bush to stick to their pledges and back Trump. "If I'm hearing it here from a state of 3 million, it must a megaphone there in DC," said Kaufmann, who has spoken with Priebus and other Republican officials about enforcing the pledge. "There's no wiggle room in terms of what that promise was, and it should be honored." A representative for Priebus didn't comment on the conversations. But his call for penalties wasn't widely embraced -- with the No. 2 House Republican breaking with Priebus Tuesday morning. "There's a better way to unite people. I'm not a big believer that punishment unites people," House Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy told reporters at a weekly session in the Capitol. The California Republican added, "If Hillary (Clinton) can't unite Republicans, I don't think anything can." Premature conversation? Of course, talk of penalties on candidates who might run in 2020 could be all for naught if Trump wins. The race between Trump and Clinton has narrowed dramatically in recent weeks, though the Democratic nominee still has more paths to the White House. But the episode underscores the frenzy that could consume the GOP if Trump loses the race and the party searches for a new direction. The anatomy of a white, working-class Trump voter "We're watching the trailer for the GOP civil war, out in theaters November 9," said a top Republican strategist, who asked not to be named to avoid openly feuding with Priebus. The penalty talk spilled into the open Sunday, when Priebus told John Dickerson on CBS' "Face the Nation" that members of the 2016 Republican presidential field who haven't yet abided by their pledge to back the eventual nominee and endorsed Trump need to "get on board." And for those who don't, he said future presidential bids won't "be that easy." "If a private entity puts forward a process and has agreement with the participants in that process, and those participants don't follow through with the promises that they made in that process," Priebus said, "what should a private party do about that if those same people come around in four or eight years?" Kasich's camp quickly zipped off a response accusing Priebus of putting party over principles. Kasich strategist John Weaver said the Ohio governor "will not be bullied by a Kenosha political operative that is unable to stand up for core principles or beliefs." Cruz brushed Priebus off Tuesday evening. "These are serious times. I think the last thing we need to worrying about is bickering between Republicans," he said. "My focus is on defeating Hillary Clinton and helping preserve a Senate Republican majority." The RNC's leverage Penalties, several Republicans said, would likely come from the national party in the form of restrictions on access to the Republican National Committee's data and voter files -- and potentially bans from primary debates. Individual states, though, likely couldn't keep candidates off their ballots. Still, Republicans cautioned that talk of penalizing pledge-breakers is aimed at nudging Kasich, Cruz, Bush and others to support Trump in 2016 -- not to handicap the party's presidential candidates in the future. Some said it's not even clear the RNC would have authority to impose the crackdown Priebus discussed. "Reince has simply posed a question to which there is no good answer yet -- and I'm not sure that the question deserves an answer. That's to be determined," said Matt Moore, the South Carolina GOP chairman. RNC spokeswoman Lindsay Walters declined to address the possibility of penalizing future presidential candidates who didn't abide by their pledges to support Trump. "We are focused on winning back the White House and maintaining our majorities in the House and Senate," Walters said in an email. Donald Trump opens the personal insult vault (again) While some party honchos like Kaufmann backed Priebus' warning shot, others -- including Ohio GOP chairman Matt Borges -- bristled. "No. This is not what we are all about as a party. Besides, let's stay focused on 2016 for the next 50 days," Borges tweeted Sunday night. Top Mitt Romney 2012 strategist Stuart Stevens tweeted: "So idea is most popular recent Republican governors of battleground states should run as independents? Great plan." RNC's handling of Trump The RNC's handling of Trump under Priebus will be on trial as the party picks a new chair -- or extends the Wisconsin operative's tenure -- shortly after the election. Then comes a swing-state governor's race in Virginia, followed by the midterm elections, where Trump's brand of populism could butt against more orthodox conservatives. And in 2020, the early stages of the Republican primary would be defined by how the candidates treated Trump. It would be the clearest differentiator of like-minded conservatives like Mike Pence, the Indiana governor who became Trump's running mate and chief defender, and Cruz, the Texas senator who was booed off stage for refusing to endorse Trump at his own nominating convention. "Assuming Trump loses, there'll be a really pitched battle for the heart and soul of the party," said Weaver, the Kasich strategist who wrote the scathing rebuttal to Priebus on Sunday. "You're going to have off-year elections, you're going to have midterms -- some of that will impact the defining of the party, clearly. But you won't have any new definition of it until there's a new nominee," Weaver said. "There's a broader debate ultimately about what the party stands for and where the country should go." Adelson to spend at least $45 million on 2016 races in boost for GOP Many Republicans still fault Priebus for failing to criticize Trump forcefully enough in late 2015, when he proposed a clearly unconstitutional ban of all Muslims from entering the United States, and believe the party could have done more to slow Trump's rise. They point out a particular irony: The party that insisted it couldn't intercede in the 2016 nominating contest is now threatening to use its leverage to undercut individual candidates in future races. Saul Anuzis, a former Michigan GOP chairman who helmed Cruz's state effort in the primary, defended pledge-breaking candidates, arguing that "circumstances change" -- a reference to the pledge's creation as a tool to keep Trump from launching an independent campaign. He said he doesn't see how Priebus could impose penalties on future presidential candidates. "There's no provisions in the RNC rules that allow anybody to punish anybody," Anuzis said. "The idea of doing that, I think, is extremely difficult, because you normally are looking toward the future, not the past." CNN's Deirdre Walsh and Manu Raju contributed to this report.
President Barack Obama wants Hillary Clinton to “be yourself and explain what motivates you” when she takes the stage Monday night for her first presidential debate. Obama offered the advice during an interview on ABC with “Good Morning America” host Robin Roberts from the soon-to-open National Museum of African-American History and Culture on the National Mall. The two spent the bulk of their interview discussing the museum and what lessons it might offer for protesters in Charlotte who have at times become violent. Story Continued Below But Roberts took time to ask the president what advice he might offer to Clinton ahead of Monday night’s debate, to which the president responded that his former secretary of state should allow the American public to see her “I've gotten to know Hillary and seen her work, seen her in tough times and in good times,” Obama said of his former secretary of state. “She's in this for the right reasons.” Monday night’s debate will be held at New York’s Hofstra University and is scheduled to begin at 9 p.m. It will be moderated by NBC Nightly News anchor Lester Holt.
The suspect in a spate of bombings that terrorized the New York City metropolitan area this weekend visited a city in Pakistan known for being a hotbed of insurgent activity, a source told ABC News. The suspect, Ahmad Khan Rahami, was born in 1988 in Afghanistan and is a naturalized U.S. citizen, according to the FBI. Rahami spent time in Quetta, Pakistan, and Afghanistan during a trip, from April 2013 to March 2014, the source said.     Quetta, a city of about 2 million people, is a known hotspot for insurgents and the reported home of the leadership of the Afghan Taliban. "If they spent more than a few days, it raises suspicions that while they were there, they will have been recruited by terrorist groups," national security consultant Richard Clarke said on ABC News' "World News Tonight" Monday, referring to Rahami's travel to the area. A spokesman for the Taliban, Zabiullah Mujahid, told ABC News that there was no link between the Taliban and Rahami.   Afghan and U.S. government officials say they believe Quetta has sheltered the Afghan Taliban's leaders since the U.S. invasion forced them to flee the country in 2002. The Taliban's central leadership council, believed to be based there, is known as the Quetta Shura. Officials say leaders there have planned and directed attacks across the border in Afghanistan and coordinated with terrorist groups like al-Qaeda. The area has a major border crossing that leads to Kandahar in Afghanistan and is reported to be a transit point for extremists traveling in and out of Afghanistan and a hub for illegal trade crossing the porous and largely unsecured border.   Several al-Qaeda militants have been killed or captured in the area, and the United States last year destroyed an al-Qaeda base across the border in Kandahar province that U.S. officials said was the largest militant training camp discovered in the history of the Afghanistan war. Quetta harbors a long-simmering insurgency against the Pakistani government. The city has seen a number of significant violent attacks and bombings, most recently last month, when a blast killed more than 70 people and injured over 100 others. In May of this year, a U.S. airstrike in Baluchistan province, which encompasses Quetta, killed Taliban leader Mullah Akhtar Muhammad Mansour. The Pentagon said in a 2014 report that as long as Afghan Taliban forces enjoy “sanctuary” in Quetta and in neighboring border areas of western Pakistan, the Afghan insurgency will persist. Rahami, who was captured Monday after a shootout with police, is being held on charges of attempted murder of a law enforcement officer, second-degree unlawful possession of a weapon and second-degree possession of a weapon for an unlawful purpose.
White Plains, New York (CNN)Hillary Clinton's supporters in the Beehive State have launched Utah Mormons for Hillary, according to a release from the campaign, the latest attempt to court a group of people deeply skeptical of Donald Trump. Clinton's campaign has sought to draw a wedge between Mormons -- a religious group that makes up about 60% of Utah, according to some estimates -- and Trump, the Republican presidential nominee. Some Mormon voters have grown concerned by Trump's candidacy, citing questions they have about his principles and comments he has made that hint at religious persecution. The goal, according to David Irvine, a former Republican member of the Utah House of Representatives and a member of the the organization, is to convince people within The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints to pick Clinton over Trump by touting the former secretary of state's values and commitment to religious liberty. Since its founding in 1830, Mormons have been persecuted and chased out of a number of areas they tried to settle. Members of the faith, after being expelled from Ohio, Illinois and Missouri, eventually settled in Utah in 1847. Irvine said in a statement that Trump is "belittling and scapegoating people of other religious and ethnic minorities in the harshest language." "His disdain for them is equaled only by his disdain and crudity toward women," Irvine said. "The most enduring pioneer value is charity in its broadest sense, and Utahns looking for those kinds of values" should vote for Clinton. Last month, Clinton pitched Mormon voters in an op-ed published by the Deseret News, a paper owned by the church. Clinton nods to the church's history of persecution in her op-ed, noting that other Mormons have compared Trump's comments to "when Missouri Gov. Lilburn Boggs singled out Mormons in his infamous extermination order of 1838" and "President Rutherford B. Hayes' attempt to limit Mormon immigration to America in 1879." Shortly after the piece came out, Jake Sullivan, Clinton's top policy adviser, opened a campaign headquarters in Salt Late City. Clinton is not the only presidential candidate looking to undermine Trump in Utah. Evan McMullin, a former House Republican aide and a Mormon born in Provo, Utah, announced his plan to get on the ballot in Utah earlier this year, hoping to court members of the church away from Trump. McMullin's campaign stresses that he is plugged into the Mormon church's power structure, and in a close race in Utah, a strong McMullin showing could help put the state's six Electoral College votes into Clinton's column. Clinton's aides know that chances of winning Utah are long, but her outreach is more about forcing Trump to spend time and money to shore up support in a state that hasn't voted for a Democrat since Lyndon Johnson in 1964. 
Washington (CNN)The battle over gun rights returned to the nation's capital Tuesday, as a federal appeals court took up a challenge to a restriction that requires applicants for a license to carry a concealed firearm to demonstrate a "good reason" to fear injury to his or her person or property. "This is the most important question in the Second Amendment today," said Adam Winkler of UCLA School of Law. "Whether people can carry guns in public and under what conditions is a major battleground." Lawyers for District of Columbia called the license restriction an "important public safety law" and argued before a panel of the US District Court for the District of Columbia that the law should be allowed to remain in effect pending appeal. "This case is in its infancy," said Holly M. Johnson, an assistant attorney general for the District. But challengers asked the court to block it, arguing that "very few people" will be able to demonstrate that they are eligible for the permit. The three judges hearing the challenge were all nominated by Republican presidents. Judge Thomas Griffith, a George W. Bush nominee, asked by far the most questions on the bench. He noted there is a "long history" of courts sustaining bans on concealed carry, but, joined by Judge Stephen Williams, a Ronald Reagan appointee, he repeatedly questioned the scope of the DC permit requirement. More than once he asked about someone who lived in a dangerous neighborhood but had never been attacked who might not qualify for the permit. Griffith asked whether someone had to be "attacked first." Griffith noted that only a handful of other states have similar laws. The third judge, Karen Henderson, a George H. W. Bush nominee, did not ask a question. One of biggest cases since Heller Eight years ago, it was another Washington gun ordinance that triggered a landmark Supreme Court opinion -- District of Columbia v. Heller -- that held for the first time that the Second Amendment protects an individual's right to bear arms. The opinion capped off a decades-long debate on whether the right applied only in connection to service in a state militia. Back in 2008, the law at issue concerned a total ban on handguns in the home. Tuesday's case deals with weapons outside the home. Gun rights advocates thought that Heller -- penned by the late Justice Antonin Scalia -- would encourage courts to strike down restrictions across the country. That didn't happen. Instead, many courts relied upon a different part of Scalia's opinion where he cautioned that the Second Amendment should not be understood as conferring a "right to keep and carry any weapon whatsoever in any manner whatsoever and for whatever purpose." Meanwhile, the Supreme Court has declined to take up any follow-up cases. How Scalia will be replaced has become a major issue in the presidential race. Donald Trump has pledged to appoint conservative justices in the mold of Scalia. Trump's GOP primary rival, Ted Cruz, consistently name-checked the Heller decision. Hillary Clinton has advocated for stronger gun control laws. Meanwhile, President Barack Obama's nominee for the bench, Judge Merrick Garland, waits on the sidelines. The DC law at issue in Tuesday's case is based on similar provisions in New York, Maryland and New Jersey. Several plaintiffs are challenging the law, including Matthew Grace, who says he was denied a permit in 2016 because he had failed to show a "good or proper reason" to support his request for a license. He owns four lawfully registered handguns and seeks to carry them outside the home for self-defense. Grace's case and a similar one brought by different plaintiffs split two different district court judges reviewing the law. The United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia will hear both appeals on Tuesday. "The District of Columbia has spent the last four decades trying to drain the Second Amendment of any meaning," Charles Cooper, a lawyer representing Grace and other plaintiffs, argued in court papers. Cooper objects to the fact that DC officials have given themselves the power to decide "on a case-by-case basis" whether an applicant has "good reason" to obtain a license to carry a concealed gun. He says that such a power is "categorically irreconcilable" with the Second Amendment. "Nearly a decade after Heller, the District of Columbia still refuses to treat the right to bear arms as a genuine constitutional right," he said. In their briefs, lawyers for the District of Columbia point out that Washington is "unique" in that it is filled with thousands of high ranking federal officials, and diplomats and it hosts hundreds of heavily attended events annually including political marches and protests. Citing Supreme Court precedent, they argue that the "Second Amendment preserves the ability of local jurisdictions to devise solutions to social problems that suit local needs and values, and that is precisely what the Council has done through the 'good reason' standard." DC is supported by lawyers for the Brady Center to Prevent Gun Violence, who emphasize that from 2014 to 2015, the homicide rate in the District increased 54%. "The District may meet or surpass that tragic record in 2016," Jonathan Lowy, an attorney for the Brady Center, argued in briefs. He pointed out that in one DC area -- Ward 7 -- homicides have tripled so far this year. "It is critical that law enforcement maintain its longstanding authority to prevent the rampant carrying of guns in public places," Lowy said in an interview. "It would be an extraordinary and radical shift for a court to find that law enforcement has no authority to reasonably regulate the carrying of hidden handguns in public." But the National Rifle Association counters that while DC officials are "rightly concerned about violent crime," the "Constitution affords them considerable discretion in addressing the problem. " "The Second Amendment's protection of the 'right of the people to keep and bear arms' necessarily takes certain policy choices off the table." NRA's lawyer Paul Clement argued in court briefs. "Municipal leaders, no matter how well-intentioned, cannot simply enact any gun control law that they deem to be reasonable." 
(CNN)CNN will host the "CNN Presidential Town Hall: America's Military and the Commander in Chief," with President Barack Obama on Wednesday September 28 at 9 p.m. ET. CNN anchor and chief Washington correspondent Jake Tapper will sit down with the President to discuss veterans, national security and foreign policy issues impacting the US military. Obama will field questions from the audience made up of active duty service members, veterans and the military community. The one-hour primetime event will take place in Fort Lee, Virginia, home of the Combined Arms Support Command. The town hall will air on CNN, CNN International and CNN en Español and will be streamed online and across mobile devices via CNNgo. 
The reliably liberal editorial board of the Los Angeles Times has endorsed Hillary Clinton, calling her "an experienced, thoughtful and deeply knowledgeable public servant" in a lengthy editorial. The paper lambasted Donald Trump, by contrast, as a "thin-skinned demagogue who is unqualified and unsuited to be president." Story Continued Below Echoing criticisms leveled by Clinton and her allies, the editorial attacks the billionaire businessman as someone who "has never held elected office and has shown himself temperamentally unfit to do so. "He has run a divisive, belligerent, dishonest campaign, repeatedly aligning himself with racists, strongmen and thugs while maligning or dismissing large segments of the American public. Electing Trump could be catastrophic for the nation," the board writes. The editorial then goes on detail Clinton's perceived strengths and attack Trump's record at length. But it also wrestles with the former secretary of state's perceived shortcomings, noting her "penchant for secrecy" and dinging her "for adjusting her positions to match popular opinion and for being a little too comfortable with the use of military force." Ultimately, the board concludes: "To be a great president, she will have to struggle to overcome her own weaknesses. But compared with Trump’s infirmities as a candidate, her failings are insignificant. It’s absurd — and perilous — to portray this election, as so many are doing, as a choice of the 'lesser of two evils' or to suggest that her flaws are in any way on a level with his." The LA Times also endorsed Clinton ahead of the California Democratic primary. It also endorsed Barack Obama in 2008 "without hesitation," and again in 2012, hailing his "steady leadership."
A House panel will vote Wednesday on whether to begin contempt proceedings against StemExpress, a human tissue procurement company that used to work with Planned Parenthood. The House Select Investigative Panel on Infant Lives will vote to hold the company and CEO Cate Dyer in contempt of Congress for not complying with subpoenas to turn over documents on its fetal tissue processing, Chairwoman Marsha Blackburn (R-Tenn.) announced Monday evening. The panel would have to vote to send the resolution to the full House — a matter that is unlikely to take place until after the November election. Story Continued Below The panel, which was initiated in the wake of the sting videos by an anti-abortion group targeting Planned Parenthood, has sought information from StemExpress for months. Blackburn has said that the company and its executives have not fully complied with congressional subpoenas to turn over accounting records and other documents. StemExpress executives and lawyers say the company has complied with the subpoenas and has offered to testify before the committee. Democrats on the panel agree the company has complied and blasted the investigation as a "witch hunt." "The McCarthyesque threat that StemExpress ‘name names’ of all employees, or face congressional contempt is disgraceful," Rep. Jan Schakowsky (D-Ill.), the committee's top Democrat said in a statement, noting that StemExpress turned over 1,700 pages of documents. "We will fight this continued abuse of congressional authority every step of the way.” The investigation into the fetal tissue business began in the wake of anti-abortion activist David Daleiden’s sting videos last summer. The videos suggested that Planned Parenthood illegally sold fetal tissue and organs to companies like StemExpress. Both Planned Parenthood and StemExpress denied doing anything improper and say the videos were selectively edited to create misleading impressions. In two of the videos, former StemExpress technician Holly O’Donnell claims that she once saw another technician appear to obtain fetal tissue without a patient’s consent. StemExpress “unequivocally” denied the claim. O’Donnell worked for the company for only a short period. The committee issued dozens of subpoenas to researchers, abortion providers and fetal tissue companies like StemExpress. Republicans have focused in particular on obtaining StemExpress's accounting records, such as tax records and invoices, to see the company's expenses and revenues over several years. Republicans argue that if money was made procuring fetal tissue, it would be a violation of federal law. StemExpress, which used to collect fetal tissue from Planned Parenthood and send it to researchers throughout the country, ended its relationship with Planned Parenthood in August 2015. Blackburn told POLITICO last week that the panel was considering how to deal with the unanswered subpoenas. "We have said so many times, 'Work with us,' and it is amazing to me that these entities are not working with us and helping us to make certain we protect these women and babies," she said. "We want to make sure we report back on what is actually happening and we'll continue" the work.
The anti-Donald Trump movement is on its death bed, the Republican presidential nominee boasted on Wednesday. “You’ll hear about these Never Trumpers, who are dying. Right now they’re on respirators, OK,” Trump said in response to a question about whether he will stand firm on his commitment to naming “true constitutionalists” to the Supreme Court. Story Continued Below Trump cited an “amazing” Wall Street Journal report “about all of the support that we’re getting.” The real estate mogul appears to be referring to a story published online late Monday in which the Journal reported that billionaires Sheldon Adelson and Joe Ricketts plan to pump millions of dollars into Trump and a pro-Trump super PAC. “From lots of rich people even,” Trump said of the fresh support he’s getting. “They’re coming in. These were Never Trump, Never Trump, Never Trump and now they’re — believe me, they see lower taxes, they see cutting the regulations, they see job creation, which is so important, and it’s really been amazing.” “And one of the things that they see and that you people see,” he told the group of pastors inside a Cleveland church, “is that — and so important — the judges. So I picked 11 judges. Very, very much into the world of the Constitution because we have people that, in some cases, not — I think in all cases — will have absolutely no — the Constitution will have no bearing on their decisions, OK, if somebody else gets it. And we picked 11 and we’re adding nine more. We’re gonna have a total of 20 people and I will pick from that group of 20 people. These are 20 outstanding people.”
The Clinton campaign has slammed Donald Trump as “a fraud who believes the rules don’t apply to him” over reports that the GOP presidential candidate used money from his charitable foundation to settle two lawsuits filed against his for-profit businesses. The Washington Post reported today that Trump made two payments totaling $258,000 to settle suits — one involving the Mar-a-Lago Club, which he owns, in Florida and another involving one of his golf clubs in New York.  Clinton’s deputy communications director, Christina Reynolds, put out a statement after The Washington Post story was published, calling Trump a fraud. “Clearly the Trump Foundation is as much a charitable organization as Trump University is an institute of higher education,” she said. “Trump’s version of charity is taking money from others to settle his own legal issues ... which experts say is a clear violation of laws governing charitable organizations,” Reynolds said.   ABC News has reached out to the Trump campaign for comment.     Lloyd Mayer, a professor at the University of Notre Dame Law School, told ABC News that if the allegations made by the Post are true, the payments violate federal law.   “Federal tax law bars a private foundation like the Trump Foundation from using its assets to benefit its insiders or the businesses they own. That’s exactly what’s been alleged here. If true, the foundation and its managers, including Mr. Trump, violated tax laws,” Mayer told ABC News.  The lawsuit involving Mar-a-Lago, filed in 2007, revolved around a complaint by the town of Palm Beach over an oversize flagpole at the club. Publicly available court documents show that as a condition of a settlement, “Mr. Trump will contribute $100,000 to charities agreed to between the parties” in return for the town’s waiving fines against Mar-a-Lago. Another section of the court documents specified, “Mar-a-Lago shall contribute $100,000 to charities agreed to between parties dealing with Iraq War veterans, American flag or the local VA hospital.”   In a September 2007 letter to the town, as reported by the Post, Trump wrote, “I have sent a check for $100,000 to Fisher House. Although the court documents show that under the settlement, Trump or Mar-a-Lago would make the payment, the payment apparently instead came from the Trump Foundation. Tax forms for the Trump Foundation show that in 2007 the charity gave $100,000 to Fisher House, an organization that helps pay for housing for veterans’ relatives when their loved ones are receiving medical treatment. It was one of only three $100,000 donations it made that year; the other two were to a New York hospital and a police athletic league. Fisher House confirmed to ABC News that it received a $100,000 check from the foundation on Sept. 11, 2007. It does not have a copy of the check available.  The IRS has strict rules on the operation of tax-exempt private foundations, including against what it calls self-dealing. To qualify for tax-exempt status, a foundation is required to demonstrate, among other things, that “no part of its net earnings inure to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual,” according to an online IRS publication. Mayer noted that if the lawsuit settlement was paid for by Trump’s foundation, he wouldn’t be the first person to violate tax law in this way. “It’s not unheard of for people to use their private foundations for their own benefit. Usually if the IRS learns about it, the insider has to pay a penalty tax and repay foundation with interest,” Mayer said. It can be a civil action or a criminal violation, but Mayer has “never heard of anyone serving prison time for this kind of thing.” “Here the foundation allegedly paid for a substantial benefit to Trump’s business — the dropping of lawsuits. That is clearly crossing the line. It’s not even close,” he said.  The Trump Foundation takes in substantial donations from people and organizations, including until eight years ago Trump himself. In 2007, tax forms show that the charity had revenue of close to $4.1 million, from contributions, gifts and grants. Of that total, Trump donated $35,000. Similarly, in 2008, Trump gave $30,000 to the foundation. In previous years, his contributions were bigger, ranging from $184,000 to $713,000. Trump made no donations to his foundation from 2009 to 2014, which is the last year for which records are available. A few years after the Mar-a-Lago settlement, the foundation reportedly paid $158,000 to settle a lawsuit against one of Trump’s golf courses in New York, which led to a charitable donation by the foundation. The foundation is under investigation by the New York Attorney General’s Office over a payment made to a political group associated with Florida Attorney General Pam Bondi, a Trump supporter who spoke at the Republican National Convention this summer. A person familiar with the probe tells ABC News that the New York Attorney General’s Office is also investigating all the donations mentioned in the Post report. The Clinton campaign’s Reynolds said in her statement, “Once again, Trump has proven himself a fraud who believes the rules don’t apply to him. It’s past time for him to release his tax returns to show whether his tax issues extend to his own personal finances.” ABC News’ Liz Kreutz contributed to this report.
Gary Johnson said a Hillary Clinton or Donald Trump presidency would be deeply flawed and shrugged off the notion that he could play spoiler in a tight presidential contest, despite fears among Democrats, in particular, that he’s snatching votes from Clinton. “The people voting for me are voting for Gary Johnson,” the Libertarian presidential contender said Sunday on ABC’s “This Week,” with George Stephanopoulos. “I take great pride in the fact that I am actually offering an alternative. … Fifty percent of people that are registering to vote are registering as independents. How is it that we can only have two candidates?” Story Continued Below “I’m going to sleep well at the end of all this, giving people a first vote, not a second vote, not a lesser of two evils.” Clinton’s campaign manager, Robby Mook, who spoke earlier on the same program, shrugged off Johnson’s impact on the race. “He’s taking votes from both candidates, but your own poll showed that his numbers are — are dropping,” he said, referring to a new Washington Post/ABC News poll that showed Johnson dipping to 5 percent support. “I don’t think that they’re — that either of the third-party candidates are really going to factor into the head-to-head in this race.”
CNN will host a town hall with President Barack Obama next week, the channel announced Monday. CNN’s chief Washington correspondent Jake Tapper will moderate “CNN Presidential Town Hall: America’s Military and the Commander in Chief,” which will center around national security, veterans issues and foreign policy as it relates to the U.S. military. The town hall, which will air at 9 p.m. on September 28, will be held in Fort Lee, Virginia. At the event, Obama will take questions from the audience, which will be comprised of service members, veterans and others in the military community, the cable channel said. The town hall will be available on the cable channel and online, and will also stream in virtual reality.
Washington (CNN)Donald Trump's campaign is weighing in at the 11th-hour of negotiations on Capitol Hill over government funding -- and one key sticking point: whether to allow an international consortium to take over the assigning of website domain names. In an unusual alliance, Trump is siding with Texas Sen. Ted Cruz, who is leading the push to prevent it from taking effect Oct. 1. Congressional sources tell CNN that Trump's late effort to engage on this issue could throw the last-minute negotiations into flux. "The US should not turn control of the Internet over to the United Nations and the international community," Trump's national policy director, Stephen Miller, said in a statement. "President Obama intends to do so on his own authority -- just 10 days from now, on Oct. 1, unless Congress acts quickly to stop him. The Republicans in Congress are admirably leading a fight to save the Internet this week, and need all the help the American people can give them to be successful." Cruz has not endorsed his former rival for the GOP presidential nomination, but tweeted out his thanks for Trump's backing his efforts. "Appreciate @realDonaldTrump's support of our efforts to keep the internet free." Democrats have been skeptical of Cruz's efforts, siding with tech firms like Google and Facebook who believe it will be better for the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers, based in Los Angeles, to take over domain names to improve information sharing across the Internet. The Internet issue is one of several matters that the two sides still are haggling over as part of the talks. They have until Sept. 30 to reach a government funding deal, which will also include funding for Zika. The Senate GOP had hoped to reach a deal this week in order to wrap up the session and let their vulnerable incumbents campaign. But business is expected to extend into at least next week. 
Washington (CNN)Did he really say that again? And again?  At a Florida rally Monday night, Donald Trump twice repeated the false claim that he opposed the Iraq War before it started. "I was against going into the war in Iraq, he told the crowd, "but we got out the wrong way. President Obama did a terrible thing the way he got us out of the war."  But CNN's research shows no evidence for his repeated claim of opposition to the war before it started. Instead, during a September 2002 interview on Howard Stern's radio show Trump was asked if he supported invading Iraq. "Yeah, I guess so," he answered. Hardly a ringing endorsement of the upcoming war. But nowhere near full-throated opposition.  In an August speech, Trump pointed to an interview with Fox News Channel anchor Neil Cavuto, three months before the war started, to bolster his case that he opposed the war. At one point in the interview, he expressed impatience with President George W. Bush for not starting the war.  "Well, I'm starting to think that people are much more focused now on the economy," he said. "They are getting a little bit tired of hearing, we're going in, we're not going in, the -- you know, whatever happened to the days of the Douglas MacArthur. He would go and attack. He wouldn't talk. We have to -- you know, it's sort like either do it or don't do it."  Later in the interview, Trump said the war was not a higher priority than the economy. But he never said it should not be undertaken. "He's under a lot of pressure," Trump said of Bush. "I think he's doing a very good job. But, of course, if you look at the polls, a lot of people are getting a little tired. I think the Iraq situation is a problem. And I think the economy is a much bigger problem as far as the president is concerned."  It wasn't until August 2004 -- 17 months after the invasion began and the war was being widely criticized -- that Trump came out fully against the war. "What was the purpose of this whole thing? Hundreds and hundreds of young people killed," he said in an interview with Esquire magazine. "And what about the people coming back with no arms and legs? Not to mention the other side. All those Iraqi kids who've been blown to pieces. And it turns out that all of the reasons for the war were blatantly wrong. All this for nothing!"  This gap between what Trump claims and the evidence to the contrary has been pointed out many times. Yet he keeps repeating the claims. Given that, it is hard to come to any other conclusion than that he is simply lying.  
For the first time in its 126-year history, The Arizona Republic has endorsed a Democratic candidate for president. The paper's editorial board said Hillary Clinton is "the only choice to move America ahead." "Since The Arizona Republic began publication in 1890, we have never endorsed a Democrat over a Republican for president. Never. This reflects a deep philosophical appreciation for conservative ideals and Republican principles," the paper's editorial board wrote. "This year is different." The editorial said Clinton's temperament and experience prepare her for office, while it questioned Donald Trump for not releasing his tax returns, asking "whose hand do you want on the nuclear button?" Clinton has racked up her fair share of nontraditional endorsements from newspapers. Last week, The Cincinnati Enquirer, which noted it had backed Republican candidates for president “for almost a century," also endorsed Clinton. Earlier this month, The Dallas Morning News endorsed the former secretary of state, making her the first Democrat that newspaper has endorsed in over 75 years.
Twitter and Bloomberg Media are teaming up to stream the upcoming presidential debates live on Twitter. The social media site had similar arrangements for the conventions with CBS News, and is also streaming Thursday night NFL games and other sporting events. The debates will be available at debates.twitter.com, in Twitter Moments or on @bpolitics. The stream will also include thirty minute shows before and after the debate with Bloomberg Politics Managing Editors Mark Halperin and John Heinemann. Twitter and Bloomberg already have a deal for live streaming three Bloomberg TV shows. On Tuesday, Facebook announced it was teaming up with ABC for a similar streaming arrangement for the debates, along with commentary from the ABC News team before and after the debates.
White Plains, New York (CNN)When Donald Trump tried to score points by saying that Hillary Clinton had spent days off the campaign trail to prepare for Monday night's debate, Clinton -- having spent days off the trail to prepare -- had a ready reply. "I think Donald just criticized me for preparing for this debate," Clinton said wryly after Trump hit Clinton for taking time off the trail. "And, yes, I did. You know what else I prepared for? I prepared to be president. And I think that's a good thing." The line was not spontaneous. According to sources inside Clinton's debate prep, Trump and his surrogates telegraphed his line of attack as they were hitting Clinton for the time off before the debate. So they looked for a way to flip the line on the Republican nominee and urged Clinton to use it. But it wasn't the only pre-planned moment in a debate that became a prolonged opposition research dump on the Republican nominee. The most damaging may be when Clinton used the story of Alicia Machado, the former Miss Universe who says Donald Trump called her "Miss Housekeeping" as a way to counter sexism on Trump's part. Near the end of the debate, when Trump didn't back away from saying Clinton didn't look like a president, the former secretary of state pounced. "He called this woman 'Miss Piggy,' then he called her 'Miss Housekeeping' because she was Latina," Clinton said. "Donald, she has a name. Her name is Alicia Machado. And she has become a US citizen and you can bet she is going to vote this November." Trump didn't back away from the line, interrupting Clinton as she spoke with "Where did you find her?" Quickly, the Clinton campaign blasted out a video about Machado's story. On Tuesday, they held a press call with the former Miss Universe, who said that cried when she heard her name mentioned on Monday. When asked how the back-and-forth has played with Spanish speaking media, a Clinton aide had a one-word response: "H-U-G-E." Afterward, Clinton's aides were giddy about how the debate played out, using words like "unhinged" to describe Trump. That glee was compounded when they heard Trump went to the spin room and complained about the microphone, claiming that his was defective. "Anybody who complains about the microphone is not having a good night," Clinton said. Aides acknowledged that they felt Trump effectively hit Clinton on trade, especially in attacking her support of the North American Free Trade agreement, a deal her husband -- who was sitting in the audience -- approved as president. Clinton tried to distance herself from the Trans Pacific Partnership on the debate stage, and Trump correctly said that she called it the "gold standard" as secretary of state. And one aide also said that while Clinton's email answer was shorter and more succinct than past answers, no one inside the campaign likes it when Clinton spends any time explaining her decision to use a private email server as secretary of state. But for the most part, there was no hiding the enthusiasm on Clinton's side. She received a loud ovation from staff and crew boarding her campaign plane Tuesday morning. Clinton poured herself into debate prep for days before the Monday contest. The former first lady conducted two-a-day debate sessions on Friday, Saturday and Sunday, not leaving the Doral Arrowwood hotel and spa until past 11 p.m. ET to return to her nearby home. Ron Klain, who advised President Barack Obama and ran part of Hillary Clinton's debate prep, played moderator Lester Holt during he session, according to a Clinton aide. Klain played only one version of Holt, aides said, believing that the NBC anchor would fact check Trump when confronted with a blatant falsehood but also leave it to Clinton to do some fact checking, too. Aides who were in on the debate preparations said Philippe Reines, a longtime adviser who played Trump in the sessions, poured himself into the role, sporting a red tie and large cufflinks to look like the businessman. Reines, who spent hours studying Trump's policies and debate performances, acted out some of the Republican nominee's mannerism during the prep, including a hand gesture that the campaign called "the cobra" -- where Trump brings his fingers together like a snake ready to pounce. While Reines didn't try to mimic Trump's voice, aides said the longtime adviser's rendition of the Republican nominee was so on point that even Clinton was surprised. As she came off the stage Monday, Clinton had the highest of praise, an aide said. "Wow, that sounded exactly like Philippe," Clinton said. 
A Syrian human rights group said today that at least 32 people had been killed and dozens injured in Aleppo, Syria, and its western suburbs in the hours after Syria's military declared the U.S.-Russian brokered cease-fire over. After the Syrian military blamed rebels for not observing the truce, which was in its seventh day, the United Nations said a convoy transporting aid to the hard-hit city had been attacked, with 18 of the convoy's 31 trucks initially believed to have been hit. The rights group, the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, said that 12 people had been killed when the convoy was struck. Farhan Haq, a deputy spokesman for U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, told ABC News that he could not confirm any information on potential casualties or the cause of the attack. He said that the United Nations' initial understanding was that a warehouse operated by the Syrian Arab Red Crescent had also been hit along with the convoy, before the trucks could distribute any aid to 78,000 people whom international groups had hoped to reach. The fighting came amid signs the cease-fire was falling apart, with Russia casting doubt on it and the Syrian military declaring its conclusion. But U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry, speaking to reporters in New York City, disputed the notion that the cease-fire had ended and redirected his frustrations toward the Russians. "We have not had seven days of calm and delivery of humanitarian goods, and so it'd be good if they didn't talk first to the press but if they talked to the people who are actually negotiating this," Kerry said. "And I think it's -- as I said yesterday -- time to end the grandstanding and time to do the real work of delivering on the humanitarian goods that are necessary for access. So we just began today to see real movement of humanitarian goods, and let's see where we are, and we're happy to have a good conversation with them about how to proceed." Kerry is in New York City for the United Nations General Assembly, where international leaders will discuss the world's refugee crisis in a large part caused by the five-year Syrian war. In a statement, State Department spokesman John Kirby stressed that the U.S. was waiting to hear from Russia on the current state of the cease-fire. "While we have seen comments attributed to the Syrian military, our arrangement is with Russia, which is responsible for the Syrian regime's compliance, so we expect Russia to clarify their position," he said. Before today's declaration by the Syrian military, the cease-fire was already on shaky ground, with reports of violations on both sides. According to the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, the besieged city of Aleppo was hit by at least four airstrikes on Sunday. The group also reported that convoys carrying humanitarian aid shipments had not received permission to enter the city, which desperately needs them. Aleppo is home to nearly 2 million people who lack regular access to water and electricity. An estimated 250,000 to 275,000 people live in areas held by anti-government rebels that have been a focus of intense airstrikes and artillery bombardment.     Additionally, on Saturday the U.S.-led coalition fighting ISIS halted an airstrike in eastern Syria that the Russian Defense Ministry said killed 62 Syrian government soldiers and injured 100 others. A U.S. defense official told ABC News that the strike was supposed to target a collection of vehicles and personnel believed to belong to ISIS. The airstrike was halted after Russia communicated to the coalition that it was Syrian forces that were being struck. Australia, Denmark and the United Kingdom have acknowledged that their aircraft participated in the strike. A senior Obama administration official told ABC News that the U.S. "relayed our regret" to the Syrian government through Russian officials. According to a U.S. defense official, the leading theory is that the Syrian forces hit in the airstrike may have been conscripts or prisoners wearing civilian clothes, not regular Syrian Army uniforms. The cease-fire must be renewed every 48 hours. The last extension was on Friday. ABC News' Luis Martinez contributed to this report.
Atlanta (CNN)Long before New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie ran for president, and later transformed into one of Republican nominee Donald Trump's main supporters on the 2016 campaign trail, he was mired in a political scandal that left its mark on his career: Bridgegate. It's been a few years since the brouhaha over the George Washington Bridge's lane closures rocked the Christie administration. Now, after three years of federal investigations, a couple of indictments and jury selection, the trial of a former aide of New Jersey's governor and one of his longtime political allies will begin this morning in federal court. Though Christie himself has not faced any charges related to this incident -- he's denied all involvement from the onset -- he's expected to remain a key figure in the trial, unable to fully escape scrutiny from a controversy that's overshadowed his second and final term as governor. On Monday, prosecutors said Christie knew of the road closures while they were happening. The allegations came during opening arguments in the case involving Bill Baroni, deputy executive director of the Port Authority, and Bridget Kelly, Christie's former deputy chief of staff. In case you forget how Bridgegate all went down -- and what's at stake in the coming weeks -- here's an explanation of how we got to this point. So, what's Bridgegate again? In November 2013, Christie won re-election to his second and final gubernatorial term (he's term limited), cruising to a decisive victory fueled in part by his strong showing of leadership in the wake of Hurricane Sandy. Despite his popularity at the time, not everyone endorsed the Republican, who needed bipartisan backing in a blue state. Mark Sokolich, the Democratic mayor of Fort Lee, was among the politicians who didn't support the incumbent governor. The following September, on the first day of the school year, Port Authority officials abruptly shut down some of the traffic lanes on the New Jersey side of the George Washington Bridge, drawing the ire of motorists. Initially, Christie's administration characterized the closures as a part of a traffic study. Later on, though, Port Authority officials testified that no such study ever happened. One month before the lane closure, with Christie's re-election campaign in full swing, and Kelly texted David Wildstein, a former Port Authority official and a political ally of Christie: "Time for some traffic problems in Fort Lee." "Got it," Wildstein replied. The messages, contrary to the Christie administration's spin that chalked it up to ineffective bureaucracy, offered evidence that the closures were an act of political vengeance, according to federal prosecutors. "They agreed to and did use public resources to carry out a vendetta and exact retribution," US Attorney for New Jersey Paul Fishman said in May 2015. Who was charged in Bridgegate? Bill Baroni, deputy executive director of the Port Authority and Kelly were indicted on numerous conspiracy and fraud charges in May 2015. Wildstein avoided trial by pleading guilty to one charge of conspiracy to commit fraud on federally funded property and one civil rights violation. The Bridgegate charges stem from a series of damning emails and texts made public in January 2014. In response to the charges, Kelly chalked up her correspondence with Wildstein to "sarcasm and humor." Then, she lambasted Wildstein for lying about her involvement in order to get himself a plea deal. What about Christie? Those facing charges had clear and direct ties to Christie. However, the governor has not faced charges and he has maintained he had no knowledge of the lane closures, denying any wrongdoing. Shortly after the texts surfaced, Christie fired Kelly, noting that he felt "embarrassed and humiliated" by the "abject stupidity" of her actions. Two months after those emails went public, lawyers retained by Christie's office released a Bridgegate report that exonerated Christie. "It's a search for the truth and we believe we have gotten to the truth," former federal prosecutor Randy Mastro, whose law firm produced the Bridgegate report, told NJ.com in 2014 upon its release. "What we found was Gov. Christie had no involvement in the decision to close these lanes, and no prior knowledge of it." Will the governor testify at the Bridgegate trial? It remains to be seen whether Christie will be subpoenaed. In an interview with CNN's Jake Tapper Sunday, the governor said he would have "no problem" testifying if called upon. However, he didn't think he would be called he has "no knowledge of this incident at all." "Of course, I will," Christie told CNN. "I've been more open about this than anybody in public life. I've been investigated by three public entities, two of them led by partisan Democrats who have all found that I had no knowledge of this incident and no involvement." it's unclear what the developments from Monday's court date, and prosecutors saying that Christie was aware of Bridgecate, means for the possibility that the governor will testify. Even if Christie doesn't take the witness stand, the governor will likely remain front and center in the federal trial. Last month, a former Christie staffer, who worked underneath Kelly, claimed that he "flat out lied" about his staff's involvement in Bridgegate during a December 2013 news conference. What's at stake for the defendants? If a jury finds Baroni and Kelly guilty, they each could face prison time for their involvement in Bridgegate. Fishman, the federal prosecutor in the case, told The New York Times at the time of the indictment that Baroni and Kelly each face a maximum sentence of 86 years. It was more likely that Baroni and Kelly would receive up to three years behind bars if convicted, Fishman added. Of course, they could also leave the court as free people, should a jury clear them of all charges. As for Christie, who Trump has said would head his transition team, the Bridgegate trial has the potential to drag him through the mud — if not in a court facing a trial before his peers, then in the court of public opinion. 
Hillary Clinton and her allies extended their financial lead over Donald Trump in August. The Trump campaign raised $41.8 million and spent $29.9 million, ending the month with $50.2 million on hand, according to its report to the Federal Election Commission. Together with supporting super PACs and the Republican National Committee, he had almost $96 million in the bank. Story Continued Below The Clinton campaign, the Priorities USA super PAC and the Democratic National Committee raised a combined $112.3 million and started September with $121.4 million stockpiled. Great America PAC and Make America Number 1, two super PACs supporting Trump, raised $3.6 million and $1.1 million, respectively.
Kim Kardashian is still with her. "I found that without a doubt, I stand with Hillary. I'm with her," according to a statement released on Kardashian's website on Saturday. "I believe Hillary will best represent our country and is the most qualified for the job. This year, I'm not just voting for myself, but also for my children, and I took that into careful consideration when I made my decision." Story Continued Below A comment surfaced Friday where the reality-TV star said she was “on the fence” about the presidential election and thinking about changing her vote to Donald Trump. According to comments surfaced by The Huffington Post, Kardashian told Wonderland Magazine that she’s reconsidering her support for Hillary Clinton in the November election, thanks to a conversation she had with stepparent Caitlyn Jenner, the transgender Olympic athlete formerly known as Bruce. Jenner is a Republican. “At first I thought, ‘Oh my God, I’m so Hillary [Clinton],’ but I had a long political call with Caitlyn last night about why she’s voting Trump. I’m on the fence,” Kardashian said, according to HuffPost. Just over a year ago, Kardashian seemed to endorse Clinton, then not yet the Democratic Party’s nominee, on Instagram, posting a selfie with the former secretary of state. Kardashian’s husband, recording artist Kanye West, peered from behind them in the photo. “I got my selfie!!!” an apparently jubilant Kardashian wrote in the post. “I really loved hearing her speak & hearing her goals for our country! #HillaryForPresident.” As of midafternoon Friday, the interview posted on Wonderland’s website did not include any mention of Trump or Clinton, but The Huffington Post reported that it confirmed the statements with the story’s author, Eve Barlow. An editor at Wonderland did not immediately respond to an email from POLITICO seeking clarification. In her conversation with Wonderland, Kardashian sounded off on a few other political issues — including her recent admission that she does not consider herself a feminist (she doesn’t “like labels”) and her husband’s stated interest in running for president in 2020. (She suggests he would probably run as a Democrat, but perhaps an independent. “I don’t know how serious he is about it. We’ll see.”) And asked whether she’s prepared to serve as first lady, Kardashian offered: “Look at all the awful things they’re doing to Melania [Trump], putting up the naked photos [of her] … I’ll say to Kanye: ‘Babe, you know the kind of photos they’d put up of me!’ Haha.”
(CNN)The arrest of Ahmad Khan Rahami, the man suspected of Saturday's bombing in New York and explosion in New Jersey, is reviving a debate that's become familiar when American citizens are implicated in terrorism post-9/11: Whether or not they can be considered enemy combatants. Sen. Lindsey Graham, R-South Carolina, and others have suggested that Rahami be detained by the military as an enemy combatant, in part so he would not have be read his Miranda rights. Here are five common questions about terrorism suspects and the legal system: 1) Do U.S.-citizen terrorism suspects arrested within the United States have constitutional protections in the first place? Yes. There are ongoing debates over the constitutional rights of non-citizens (and citizens traveling overseas), but the Supreme Court has never suggested that a US citizen arrested within the United States receives lesser constitutional protection simply because he's a terrorism suspect. To the contrary, as Justice Felix Frankfurter once wrote: "The safeguards of liberty have frequently been forged in controversies involving not very nice people." Put more bluntly, providing US-citizen terrorism suspects with full constitutional protection is how we can be sure, as a society, that they're punished according to principles of justice, rather than vengeance. 2) Can such individuals be detained by the military? Probably not. A federal statute enacted in 1971 (in response to the World War II-era Japanese American internment camps) prohibits the detention of US citizens "except pursuant to an Act of Congress," and no statute expressly authorizes the detention without trial of US-citizen terrorism suspects. The Supreme Court has held that the Authorization for Use of Military Force (AUMF), enacted by Congress one week after 9/11, implicitly authorizes the detention of US citizens captured in Afghanistan while fighting on behalf of al Qaeda or the Taliban. But four justices have suggested that the AUMF does not authorize the detention of even those individuals when captured within the United States -- and without such an affiliation, there's no argument that the AUMF applies. 3) Can US-citizen terrorism suspects be prosecuted in the Guantánamo military commissions? No. When Congress enacted the Military Commissions Act of 2006, it expressly limited the statute to "alien" defendants. And although there are precedents from World War II for trying US citizens in military commissions, that's only when the citizen is accused of international war crimes (which terrorism, by itself, is not). 4) Can US-citizen terrorism suspects be interrogated? Absolutely. No rule, statute, or constitutional provision prevents the government from interrogating terrorism suspects -- so long as none of the interrogation methods involve torture or other forms of cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment (prohibitions that today apply equally whether the interrogation is conducted by the FBI, the military, and the CIA). There are many examples of lawful interrogations in terrorism cases producing actionable intelligence information. 5) At what point do US-citizen terrorism suspects have to be apprised of their Miranda rights? Not right away. First, Miranda is only an exclusionary rule -- meaning that the penalty for interrogating a suspect without reading him his rights is simply the exclusion of his statements from his trial. Second, even if admissibility at trial were an issue, the Supreme Court has recognized a "public safety" exception to Miranda, where the interrogation is designed to identify future threats to the public, and not to elicit further evidence of the suspect's guilt. Thus, in the case of the so-called "underwear bomber," the government conducted a substantial interrogation of the suspect before reading him his rights, but was still allowed to use his statements during that period against him at trial. Finally, there's no direct correlation between the provision of Miranda rights and a suspect's refusal to cooperate. So in a case like this one, there's little reason to think that Miranda really does prevent the government from taking necessary steps to prevent future acts of terrorism. Vladeck is a CNN contributor and professor of law at the University of Texas School of Law.
Evan Bayh was the Democrats' prize Senate recruit this election cycle, a popular former senator and governor with a huge war chest and sky-high name ID in his home state. Top Democrats heralded his surprise entrance into the race in July with hopes that Republicans would abandon his little-known and underfunded GOP rival, Rep. Todd Young, and give up on Indiana. Instead, outside GOP groups including the Chamber of Commerce and the billionaire Koch Brothers have poured some $10 million into the race, eroding Bayh's fund-raising advantage and closing his lead over Young to low- or mid-single digits. With Republicans determined to retain their narrow majority in the Senate, they have brought big-name surrogates like former President George W. Bush and House Speaker Paul Ryan into the state. They have succeeded in putting Bayh on the defensive, in the process turning the race into one of the hardest fought contests in this year's heated struggle for control of the U.S. Senate and the balance of power in Washington, D.C. "I'm not a lobbyist," Bayh was forced to insist in an ad responding to a barrage of attacks on his work in Washington, D.C., since leaving the Senate six years ago. And with Bayh dropping fast in the polls, outside Democratic groups are belatedly coming to his aid, with the Senate Majority PAC and the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee both announcing spending on his behalf in recent days, a move some Democrats once hoped would not be necessary. "Clearly our message is resonating with Hoosiers — and over a very short time period," Young said at a recent news conference before former President Bush headlined an Indianapolis fundraiser on his behalf. "This race for United State Senate here in Indiana could dictate control of the U.S. Senate and even composition of the Supreme Court moving forward," Young added. "It is essential that Republicans hold on to this seat in what is otherwise a Republican state." Democrats concede that their initial strategy of scaring off the GOP with a shock-and-awe entry from Bayh didn't pan out. But they insist they still have a path to victory, even if some privately question whether the 60-year-old Bayh is up for a tougher fight than he envisioned when Sen. Chuck Schumer of New York urged him into the race. Bayh himself, appearing over the weekend at a Jefferson Jackson Day Dinner Banquet in Muncie, dismissed the attacks coming his way. "These are the acts of desperate people who don't stand for a doggone thing," Bayh said. "They know the only way they can try and win this election is not on the basis of their ideas or what they're going to do for you or the good people of Delaware County because they've got no ideas for the people of Delaware County." The race in Indiana is practically the only competitive Senate contest being fought this year in a red state, where Donald Trump is all but certain to triumph easily over Democrat Hillary Clinton, who herself played a role in encouraging Bayh to run. Both sides agree that Indiana's GOP tilt helps Young, although Democrats contend that Bayh's strong reputation and high name ID counteract it. Young remains little known, but Republicans have succeeded in driving down Bayh's numbers with ads tying him to Clinton and criticizing his support for President Barack Obama's health care law, which is unpopular in the state. Incumbent GOP Sen. Dan Coats is retiring. Democrats insist they can still win in Indiana, but the changing landscape here comes amid a shifting Senate map nationally that's looking more favorable for the GOP. Republicans now have a 54-46 advantage in the Senate, meaning Democrats need to pick up five seats to win control, or four if Clinton wins the White House since the vice president casts tie-breaking votes. Democrats appear to be losing confidence in battleground Ohio and Florida but pushing into North Carolina and Missouri, while New Hampshire and Pennsylvania remain closely fought. Republicans have all but abandoned GOP incumbents in Illinois and Wisconsin, but are focused on picking up a seat in Nevada, where Minority Leader Harry Reid is retiring. In the latest development in Indiana, the National Rifle Association announced it is coming into the state with a $500,000 buy to attack Bayh's "anti-gun record." Despite the influx of outside spending, Indiana University public affairs professor Paul Helmke says the race is still Bayh's to lose. "Evan Bayh came with a major lead in money, which meant there was going to be a lot of outside money coming in," said Helmke, a former Republican mayor of Fort Wayne, Indiana, who ran for U.S. Senate in 1998 but lost to Bayh. "If they were thinking this was a laydown, then that was a mistake on their part. Bayh's going to have to work this one really hard to win." ——— Werner reported from Washington.
11/19/16, 3:14 PM CET BY Chris Spillane So is anti-establishment message of Nigel Farage, the Labour leader said. 11/19/16, 1:55 PM CET BY Sarah Wheaton Alumni of the Obama White House spent days mourning Trump’s win. Now they’re ready to fight. 11/19/16, 11:37 AM CET BY Chris Spillane Dick Schoof: ‘Chance of attack in the Netherlands is real.’ 11/19/16, 10:38 AM CET BY Chris Spillane Government could focus on starting the process of leaving the bloc sooner. 11/19/16, 10:13 AM CET BY Benjamin Oreskes Diplomats say the president-elect already has a playbook to undermine the global body. 11/19/16, 10:01 AM CET BY Michael Crowley and Nahal Toosi Flynn, Bannon represent ‘Islamophobic’ thinking of the type rejected by Bush and Obama, critics say. 11/19/16, 5:25 AM CET BY Michael Kruse The blue-collar workers who put Donald Trump in the White House are ready for him to deliver. How much time will they give him? 11/19/16, 5:20 AM CET BY Ryan Heath, Tara Palmeri, Harry Cooper and Quentin Ariès  11/18/16, 9:09 PM CET BY Harry Cooper A Polish political party’s links to a pan-European group raise questions about funding. 11/18/16, 6:31 PM CET BY Tom McTague Signs that Britain’s political class is coming to terms with June’s EU referendum. 11/18/16, 6:26 PM CET BY Hortense Goulard Conservative MEP denounced Juncker’s efforts to drum up support for Schulz as ‘outrageous.’ 11/18/16, 5:31 PM CET BY Ivo Oliveira Drawing the top stories around the globe. 11/18/16, 4:55 PM CET BY Cynthia Kroet Italians are likely to reject prime minister’s reform package in next month’s vote. 11/18/16, 4:48 PM CET BY Elana Schor, Kyle Cheney and Louis Nelson The president-elect starts building out his administration with loyalists. 11/18/16, 4:01 PM CET BY Nicholas Vinocur Left-wingers hope that by backing Alain Juppé, they will see off two political enemies. 11/18/16, 3:15 PM CET BY Cynthia Kroet Jens Stoltenberg did not mention the total number or reasons for the requests. 11/18/16, 3:02 PM CET BY Florian Eder and Janosch Delcker Wird Martin Schulz die SPD in den Bundestagswahlkampf führen? Oder schafft er es, doch noch einmal EU-Parlamentspräsident zu werden? Er muss sich bald entscheiden. 11/18/16, 2:34 PM CET BY Anthony Skinner Syrian refugees are pawns in Turkish president’s pursuit of power. 11/18/16, 2:33 PM CET BY Charlie Cooper Shadow Brexit secretary ‘seriously pissed off’ at colleague’s comments. 11/18/16, 2:33 PM CET BY Cynthia Kroet German chancellor is ‘championing the interests of Europe,’ Witold Waszczykowski said. 11/18/16, 12:58 PM CET BY Cynthia Kroet Nikola Gruevski stepped down in January over a wire tapping scandal. 11/18/16, 12:48 PM CET BY Barbara Surk Jens Stoltenberg said he had a ‘good talk’ with the president-elect. 11/18/16, 12:35 PM CET BY Esther King Majority of those who failed to gain international asylum come from the Balkan states. 11/18/16, 11:48 AM CET BY Esther King Immigration is what keeps the country running, says pro-EU Lord. 11/18/16, 10:57 AM CET BY Esther King Conditions at offshore detention center for refugees are ‘cruel, inhuman and degrading,’ said François Crépeau. 11/18/16, 9:36 AM CET BY Esther King Foreign Minister Linas Linkevičius warned that Vladimir Putin could use transition period in Baltics, Syria. 11/18/16, 8:55 AM CET BY MADELINE CONWAY Former ambassador to the UN says there are ways of supporting the opposition that does not involve the use of American military force. 11/18/16, 8:39 AM CET BY Cristiano Lima Her presence is likely to raise fresh concerns about potential conflicts of interest. 11/18/16, 8:35 AM CET BY Bryan Bender The retired lieutenant general’s hardline views on Islam — as well as laudatory statements about Russia — have made him a lightning rod, as did his strident attacks on Hillary Clinton during the campaign. 11/18/16, 5:33 AM CET BY Nicholas Vinocur The center-right’s first ever presidential primary looked all over. Now it’s wide open. 11/18/16, 5:25 AM CET BY Tim King The Günther Oettinger controversies are tainting this European Commission by intimate association. 11/18/16, 12:17 AM CET BY Nahal Toosi Much of Europe is alarmed over what Trump’s presidency could augur. 11/17/16, 11:52 PM CET BY Shane Goldmacher and Andrew Restuccia ‘We feel way ahead of schedule and never in a rush to do the wrong thing,’ said campaign manager Kellyanne Conway. 11/17/16, 9:42 PM CET BY Jacopo Barigazzi Maltese interior minister not impressed with Bratislava’s migration plan. 11/17/16, 9:33 PM CET BY Edward-Isaac Dovere In Berlin, the president warned his successor that his divisive campaign style won’t wear well in the Oval Office. 11/17/16, 8:24 PM CET BY Janosch Delcker US President hopes Trump won’t ‘simply take a Realpolitik approach.’ 11/17/16, 8:21 PM CET BY Hortense Goulard European Parliament president will only accept foreign minister role if he is also the SPD candidate for the top job. 11/17/16, 8:18 PM CET BY Konstantin Richter Germans, of all people, are now called on to be bulwarks of democracy. 11/17/16, 8:06 PM CET BY Paul Dallison and Esther King Euroskeptic party stands accused of breaking rules on spending EU funds. 11/17/16, 7:16 PM CET BY Brent Griffiths  11/17/16, 6:31 PM CET BY Maïa de La Baume Brussels faults Ankara for ‘neglecting and undermining’ democracy and the rule of law. 11/17/16, 6:27 PM CET BY Louis Nelson  11/17/16, 5:47 PM CET BY Cynthia Kroet Jean-Marie Le Pen should receive €15,000 because he was prevented from carrying out his duties. 11/17/16, 4:57 PM CET BY Carter Stoddard Net debt has ballooned to £338 million, and currency fluctuations are partly to blame. 11/17/16, 4:34 PM CET BY Laurens Cerulus In finally passing her surveillance bill, Britain’s PM just made Brexit even more complicated. 11/17/16, 4:13 PM CET BY Hortense Goulard French prime minister called for more European integration amid rising nationalism. 11/17/16, 3:23 PM CET BY Cynthia Kroet Former European Council president joins forces with Flemish singer. 11/17/16, 2:53 PM CET BY Paul Dallison Corey Lewandowski said president-elect will work closely with Theresa May, with no need for UKIP leader as a go-between. 11/17/16, 2:37 PM CET BY Cynthia Kroet Freedom Party leader’s comments on Moroccans living in the Netherlands were ‘unnecessarily offensive.’ 11/17/16, 2:11 PM CET BY Esther King Nigel Farage’s party stands accused of breaking rules on spending EU funds. Syrian children look down from a window at a convoy of United Nations and Arab Red Crescent vehicles carrying aid in the rebel-held town of Talbisseh on the northern outskirts of Homs on September 19, 2016 | Mahmoud Taha/AFP via Getty Images By Zoya Sheftalovich 9/22/16, 11:36 AM CET The United Nations will resume efforts to deliver aid to besieged areas in Syria after halting all convoys at the Turkish border following an airstrike on its vehicles, heading to the opposition-controlled part of Aleppo earlier this week, the BBC reported Thursday. Trucks will roll into the war-wracked country “as soon as possible,” according to the U.N.’s Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, but will avoid the opposition-controlled Aleppo because it has been under heavy bombardment. U.S. officials blamed two Russian aircraft for Monday’s attack on the U.N. aid convoy. Russia denied its aircraft were operating in the area at the time and suggested the U.S. was behind the attack, claiming a U.S. Predator drone was in the area when the vehicles, carrying desperately needed supplies to people under siege, were struck. Also On Politico Zoya Sheftalovich Also On Politico JULIAN REICHELT Meanwhile, officials are scrambling to salvage a U.S.-Russia ceasefire agreement that went into effect September 12, with Washington calling for all war planes operating over Syria to be grounded, the BBC reported. At the U.N., U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry said Syria’s future was “hanging by a thread,” and flights had to be suspended “in order to de-escalate the situation and give a chance for humanitarian assistance to flow unimpeded.”  © 2016 POLITICO SPRL Log in to access content and manage your profile. If you do not have a login you can register here.
With seven weeks until Election Day, Hillary Clinton and her allies are set to outspend Donald Trump and his allies by wide margins during the homestretch. A whopping 95 percent of all campaign television ad spending scheduled between today and Election Day — more than $143 million worth — comes from Clinton’s team, according to an ABC News analysis of CMAG/Kantar Media data. Team Clinton will spend $143.2 million on television ads, versus only $6.8 million for Team Trump. The difference in future spending in key battleground states is even starker — with Team Clinton slated to spend 53 times as much as Team Trump on television ads in Florida between now and Nov. 8. In Florida, Clinton is spending $36.6 million, versus just under $700,000 for Trump. The differences continue in Ohio ($20.9 million versus $1.8 million), Pennsylvania ($18.8 million versus $1.5 million) and North Carolina ($14.3 million versus $1.3 million.) Those are crucial states for Trump’s campaign. If he wins all four, he will almost certainly land in the White House. If he loses even one, it will be very difficult for Clinton to lose the general election. Recent polling in these states has shown a tight matchup but a lead for Clinton in Pennsylvania. While ads for the campaigns are guaranteed to be at lower prices during these final 60 days, outside groups can get charged steep prices. That’s why it’s important that Priorities USA Action has already scheduled so many ads: It will be paying less than Trump’s outside groups — like the NRA and his super PACs — will be paying if they try to schedule ads now. Clinton’s campaign is footing the bill for slightly more than half her scheduled television advertising, while Trump’s campaign is slated for about $4 in $10. Clinton’s behemoth super PAC accounts for virtually all the rest of pro-Clinton spending, and Trump’s spending is splintered among the NRA and two other super PACs. Team Clinton has already spent $174 million on television ads during the general election, versus a mere $40 million for Trump and his allies. The contrast is also stark when comparing only the campaigns: $110.7 million for Clinton versus $18.7 million for Trump. Team Clinton Future Ads Florida: $36.6 million Ohio: $20.9 million Pennsylvania: $18.8 million North Carolina: $14.3 million Nevada: $10.1 million New Hampshire: $7.3 million Iowa: $7.1 million Colorado: $5.8 million Virginia: $0.5 million Nebraska: $0.2 million National: $21.6 million Total: $143.2 million Team Trump Future Ads Ohio: $1.8 million Pennsylvania: $1.5 million North Carolina: $1.3 million Florida: $0.7 million Colorado: $0.3 million Iowa: $0.2 million New Hampshire: $0.1 million Maine: $0.1 million National: $0.6 million Total: $6.8 million
Ahmad Khan Rahami, earlier named a person of interest in the weekend explosions in New York City and New Jersey, has been charged with five counts of attempted murder of a law enforcement officer. He is also charged with second-degree unlawful possession of a weapon and second-degree possession of a weapon for an unlawful purpose. Rahami was taken into custody and hospitalized this morning after a shootout with police in Linden, New Jersey, the Union County acting prosecutor said today. He has been "directly linked" to the devices used in the New York and New Jersey explosions on Saturday, FBI official Bill Sweeney said. New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio said this afternoon there is "every reason to believe this was an act of terror." But there is "no indication that there is a cell operating in the area or in the city," Sweeney said, adding that "the investigation is ongoing." "We will continue to conduct investigative activity to ensure we completely understand Rahami's social network," Sweeney said. "For that reason, I do not plan to answer specific questions about our techniques, or our knowledge of the devices." Rahami was taken into custody in Linden, about 4 miles south of Elizabeth, after being injured in the altercation, during which a responding officer was shot in his bulletproof vest and second officer was injured.   Rahami was taken to a hospital in Newark, where he is undergoing surgery, said Grace Park, the Union County acting prosecutor. The extent of his injuries was not immediately clear. The confrontation happened at about 10:30 a.m., when an owner of a Linden bar reported that someone was sleeping in a hallway of his establishment, Linden Mayor Derek Armstead told ABC New York station WABC. The bar owner, Harry Bains, told ABC station WABC in an exclusive interview that "it was my gut reaction" to call the police. Armstead said, "One of our police officers went to investigate and to wake him up and realized that he was [Rahami], the suspect that had been being sought in the bombings." "He realized it was the suspect, and within moments, the suspect fired on him," Armstead said. "And thank God that he had his vest on. And I think that was very helpful for him. I think that saved his life."   President Barack Obama said this afternoon that he spoke on the phone with the officers who apprehended Rahami. "They are going to be fine, they sustained some modest injuries but ones that they’ll rapidly recover from," Obama said. "They were in good spirits and I communicated to them of how appreciative the American people are." A source briefed on the investigation said agents are searching for other people they want to talk to and that the investigation is not over. An alert sent shortly before 8 a.m. today said police were seeking a man in connection with the Saturday night bombing in Manhattan's Chelsea neighborhood -- identified by authorities as Rahami, 28. He is believed to be the man seen in surveillance video at both the scene of the explosion on West 23rd Street and on West 27th Street, where the unexploded device was found, a police source said.   His last known address was in Elizabeth, New Jersey. The address of a home searched by FBI agents in Elizabeth this morning is linked to a person with a similar name. Rahami is a U.S. citizen of Afghan descent.         Sources said authorities believe the three bombs -- one exploding in an oceanfront town on the New Jersey shore, one in Manhattan and another in Elizabeth, a town bordering Newark International Airport, just beyond New York City's borders -- are related. Sweeney said today the explosion in Elizabeth is still under investigation.   The explosions did not cause any fatalities, but the Chelsea explosion injured 29 people. The incident have put residents, police and other security personnel on high alert. De Blasio, on "Good Morning America" today, praised the NYPD's response to the threat and said the department has "the largest anti-terror force of any police force in the country." The latest incident was Sunday night in Elizabeth, about 15 miles southwest of the Chelsea neighborhood in Manhattan. Police recovered five possible homemade pipe bombs in a backpack, and one device exploded early today as a police robot attempted to disarm it. The FBI's Newark office tweeted that its bomb technicians had responded to the scene, along with investigators from Union County and the State Police of New Jersey. No one was injured.   The Manhattan blast took place on West 23rd Street around 8:30 p.m. Saturday and injured 29 people. All the injured have been released from hospitals, Mayor de Blasio said.    New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo told reporters Sunday night there was no evidence of international involvement. But he said today he considers the explosion an act of terrorism. "I believe it was an act of terrorism," he said. "I believe you set off a bomb and you try to set off a second bomb, that is an appearance of trying to intimidate New Yorkers." He added, "Yesterday there was no hint of any connection to foreigner terrorism." "No group had taken accountability. No group had put out a statement. It was very early in the investigation. It still is early. But there may very well turn out to be a link to foreign terrorist organizations," he said. "We will find that out today or in the coming days."     New Jersey Sen. Bob Menendez called the incidents "clearly an act of terrorism." In the search after the Chelsea explosion, officials found a possible second device on 27th Street, said James O'Neill, the city's police commissioner. The second device, described as a pressure cooker, was removed and did not explode. The first incident of the weekend was Saturday morning, when an apparent improvised explosive device was set off in Seaside Park, New Jersey, a beach town about 90 miles south of New York City. The device went off along the route of a planned 5K charity race to benefit U.S. Marines and sailors. Because of delays with the start of the run, the explosion occurred before many people were nearby.   Officials announced late Sunday night the detention of up to five individuals in connection with Saturday night's explosion in Chelsea. No charges were made, and the individuals are no longer in custody, the FBI's Sweeney said today. "I'm not going to discuss what they could face in the potential future," he said. As the investigations continue, officials in New York City are preparing to host heads of government from around the world at the annual United Nations General Assembly this week in Manhattan. President Obama is among the speakers. ABC News' J.J. Gallagher and Michael Edison Hayden contributed to this report.
Minutes before Ted Cruz took the stage at the Republican National Convention in Cleveland, Texas Lt. Gov. Dan Patrick cornered the senator, huddling with him in a last-ditch effort to coax an endorsement of Donald Trump. It didn’t work. “A missed opportunity,” Patrick fumed after Cruz's notorious snub. "He makes his own decisions.” Story Continued Below Two months later, amid political troubles home in Texas, unyielding pressure from the Republican establishment in Washington and growing irritation from the conservative grass roots, Cruz reversed course. The senator gave his imprimatur to a man he once called a “pathological liar” and a “bully” during their bitter primary campaign. After telling voters to “vote your conscience” in July, Cruz said he had plumbed his own. “If Clinton wins, we know — with 100% certainty — that she would deliver on her left-wing promises, with devastating results for our country. My conscience tells me I must do whatever I can to stop that,” Cruz said on Facebook Friday. His about-face stunned the political world and supporters who've flocked to his no-compromise conservatism. But so much had changed in the past 60 days that Cruz apparently believed he had no other choice than to bust out of the political box he had built for himself in Ohio. At the time of his convention speech, there was compelling political logic for the ambitious firebrand to steer clear of Trump. Cruz appears likely to run for president again, and Trump, at the time, looked like was headed toward a blowout loss. Not to mention, Trump had essentially called Cruz's wife unattractive and erroneously linked his father to JFK’s assassination. Cruz's allies believed if he played it right, he could emerge from the election as one of the last principled conservatives — the final bulwark against a candidate who violated many of the values conservatives hold dear. But with Trump approaching Hillary Clinton in the polls, Cruz’s diss had become more of a liability: A narrow Trump loss might have been pinned on Cruz for keeping conservatives home on Election Day because they were following his lead. In recent days, strong signals emerged that the two rivals were warming to one another. Privately, Cruz huddled with Mike Pence last week. Trump backed Cruz’s effort on a legislative play involving internet regulation, then floated close Cruz ally Sen. Mike Lee (R-Utah) for the Supreme Court. Cruz praised Trump on Twitter. Those moves by Trump, a source familiar with the process, were what made the difference for Cruz. "Trump's willingness and decisive action to release a list of conservative jurists, particularly including Mike Lee, with the promise to choose from that list, was a top factor in Cruz's ultimate decision," the person said on Saturday morning. By Friday afternoon, Cruz caved and Trump celebrated, despite having once said that he wouldn’t accept a Cruz endorsement even if it was offered. "The things that bind them together is what's most important: their love for the country, their fear of a Hillary Clinton presidency," said Kellyanne Conway, Trump's campaign manager and a former president of a pro-Cruz super PAC. "This is a very big fish because these were the last two guys standing." The endorsement took weeks to come together, people involved said. There was a long, subtle pitch from Trump’s camp to Cruz's people appealing to the senator's commitment to principle, and even suggestions that Cruz might be held responsible if Clinton wins. Sources within the campaign said Pence and Cruz made considerable progress during their meeting on Sept. 13, helping to set the stage for the eventual endorsement. And Cruz, they said, was also feeling pressure from the donor class, including the powerful—and once pro-Cruz-- Mercer family, which publicly reminded Cruz of his commitment to support the GOP nominee. Still, there are limits to their alliance: Cruz and Trump didn't speak in advance of the endorsement, campaign sources say, though they talked afterward. Cruz’s brand of “principled” conservatism has been predicated on never bending to political pressure, and he's spent his years in the Senate criticizing Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell and other Republican leaders for bending to the will of Democrats and lobbyists. Now that could all be compromised. “I frankly just don’t understand it at all,” said someone who works for Cruz on Friday. “You have to stick to your guns. What does Ted get out of this now? Frankly, what does Trump get out of it? He gets an unpopular person.” In an interview Friday, Conway noted the tension within Cruz’s own camp. There was "enormous pressure on Sen. Cruz to not endorse,” she said. But remaining a holdout “would be an abrogation of the commitment he made a year ago," in his pledge to support the Republican nominee. Cruz was caught between two whirling forces in the GOP: The conservative movement he led just five months ago and a Republican Party now finding itself actually unifying after a bizarre and divisive primary election seemed to threaten the party’s very existence. Former Cruz aides wanted their onetime boss to stand strong. Rick Tyler, a former Cruz spokesman, said on Thursday that “there is enormous pressure to get on board [with Trump] but if he does, he's done.” “If he announces he endorses, it destroys his political brand,” said someone who had worked for Cruz's campaign. Cruz’s political calculation was exceedingly complicated. He’s now at risk of facing a real primary challenge in 2018 from Rep. Mike McCaul (R-Texas), a deep-pocketed Republican who could draw backing from the GOP establishment in Texas. And Cruz’s standing in Texas has taken a significant hit since his refusal to endorse Trump, with some polls showing him vulnerable in his Senate primary. But Cruz, at least publicly, has come to see the election as the binary choice Republicans have been citing all along as they fall in line behind Trump: The business mogul isn’t their first choice, but he’s better than Clinton. “If you don’t want to see a Hillary Clinton presidency, I encourage you to vote for” Trump, Cruz wrote Friday. For some in the GOP, Cruz will be known as a good party soldier. But others were plainly dejected. Glenn Beck called it a “profoundly sad day for me,” former Cruz speechwriter Amanda Carpenter could only muster that the turn of events was “very disappointing.” Top political aide Jason Johnson’s only comment was a photo of himself, covering his eyes. Other Republicans said that the bizarre arc of Cruz and Trump’s relationship was less about winning the election — and more about egos. “The people who are disposed to vote for Donald Trump are going to vote for Donald Trump regardless of who is or is not endorsing him,” said a Republican senator. “I don’t know that all of a sudden you’ll see this groundswell of people” supporting Trump. Steve Deace, a conservative radio host who was instrumental in Cruz’s Iowa Caucus win, summed up the feeling that many Cruz loyalists were grappling with as the decision came down on Friday: "This is gonna be a political disaster," he said. "Sad. Unavoidable. Entirely self-inflicted." Shane Goldmacher contributed to this report.
The Cincinnati Enquirer, which by its own admission has backed Republican candidates for president “for almost a century,” is endorsing Hillary Clinton for president. “Presidential elections should be about who’s the best candidate, not who’s the least flawed. Unfortunately, that’s not the case this year,” the newspaper’s editorial board wrote in its endorsement, published Friday. “Our country needs calm, thoughtful leadership to deal with the challenges we face at home and abroad. We need a leader who will bring out the best in all Americans, not the worst.” Story Continued Below “That’s why there is only one choice when we elect a president in November: Hillary Clinton.” The Enquirer is not the first newspaper to buck a long tradition of endorsing GOP candidates in favor of Clinton. Earlier this month, The Dallas Morning News endorsed the former secretary of state’s White House bid, making her the first Democrat that newspaper has endorsed in over 75 years. And other newspaper editorial boards, some of which have a long history of supporting Republican presidential nominees, have broken for Clinton in 2016. In addition to the Enquirer and the Morning News, the editorial boards of the New York Daily News and the Houston Chronicle also switched to the Democratic nominee this time. (The New York Daily News endorsed Barack Obama in 2008.) The Richmond Times-Dispatch and the New Hampshire Union-Leader, both of which backed Romney four years ago, have opted to go with Libertarian nominee Gary Johnson instead. Several swing-state newspapers that backed Romney have also withheld an endorsement to this point, although some did not endorse until October in 2012. Those newspapers include the Arizona Republic, the Las Vegas Review-Journal, Pittsburgh Tribune-Review, the Orlando Sentinel, the Sun-Sentinel (Ft. Lauderdale, Fla.), the Columbus Dispatch, the Detroit News, the Grand Rapids Press, the Des Moines Register, the Florida Times-Union and the Wisconsin State Journal. In its endorsement, the Enquirer called Clinton “a known commodity with a proven track record of governing.” The newspaper praised her willingness to work with Republicans as a senator and her efforts to assist first responders suffering health problems resulting from the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks. It also lauded her work on the Children’s Health Insurance Program as first lady and her support for LGBT rights and efforts to close the pay gap between men and women. Trump, by contrast, poses a “a clear and present danger to our country,” the Enquirer’s editorial board wrote, and lacks any experience in governance and foreign policy. That so many military and national security have refused to back the GOP nominee “speaks volumes” about what type of president he would be, the newspaper said. “His wild threats to blow Iranian ships out of the water if they make rude gestures at U.S. ships is just the type of reckless, cowboy diplomacy Americans should fear from a Trump presidency,” the newspaper’s endorsement said. “Do we really want someone in charge of our military and nuclear codes who has an impulse control problem?” The Enquirer’s endorsement of Clinton was not without reservation, however. While it complimented her as a “competent secretary of state,” it also said “mistakes were made in Benghazi, and it was tragic that four Americans lost their lives in the 2012 terror attacks on the U.S. consulate there.” But the newspaper dismissed the concerns that many Republicans have about Clinton’s involvement, or lack thereof, in the attack: “The incident was never the diabolical conspiracy that Republicans wanted us to believe, and Clinton was absolved of blame after lengthy investigations.” Clinton’s “refusal to acknowledge her poor judgment in using a private email server and mishandling classified information is troubling,” the newspaper wrote, as is her “lack of transparency,” evidenced by her recently-snapped streak of 275 days without holding a press conference. But the Enquirer was far more damning of Trump, who the newspaper slammed for backing the so-called “birther” movement and feuding publicly with the parents of a Muslim soldier who was killed in 2004 in Iraq. Trump’s private sector acumen has created jobs, the newspaper admitted, but has also sent jobs overseas and left some who did business with him unpaid. The editorial questioned if Trump makes as much money as he says he does or if he has paid his fair share of taxes, questions the newspaper said have gone unanswered because the Manhattan billionaire has thus far refused to release his tax returns. That Trump has toned down his rhetoric is recent weeks failed to impress the editorial’s authors. “But going two weeks without saying something misogynistic, racist or xenophobic is hardly a qualification for the most important job in the world,” the editorial read. “Why should anyone believe that a Trump presidency would look markedly different from his offensive, erratic, stance-shifting presidential campaign?” “Hillary Clinton has her faults, certainly, but she has spent a lifetime working to improve the lives of Americans both inside and outside of Washington,” it continued. “It's time to elect the first female U.S. president – not because she's a woman, but because she's hands-down the most qualified choice.” Madeline Conway contributed to this report.
As the two candidates prepare to spar at tonight’s first presidential debate, a new poll has Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton tied 46 percent to 46 percent in a two-way race among likely voters. The Bloomberg poll, however, has Trump ahead by 2 points in a four-way race, with Trump earning 43 percent to Clinton’s 41. Libertarian candidate Gary Johnson has 8 percent and Green Party candidate Jill Stein comes in with 4 percent. Story Continued Below And earlier Bloomberg poll in August had Clinton beating Trump by 6 points in a two-race race. Clinton still has a large, but shrinking, lead among likely women voters, besting Trump 52 percent to 39 percent. And among voters 35 years or younger, Clinton is beating Trump 50 percent to 40. But Trump continues to lead Clinton with white voters 55 percent to 38 percent and with those without college degrees 50 percent to 42. Polling averages show a slight Clinton lead: RealClearPolitics has her 2.1 points ahead, while HuffPollster has her leading Trump by 4 points. FiveThirtyEight has Clinton up by 1.1 points. According to POLITICO’s average of battleground state polls, Clinton’s lead is 2.8 points in the 11 states most likely to decide the Electoral College vote. The poll surveyed 1,002 likely voters and has a margin of error of plus or minus 3.1.
Hillary Clinton is looking to channel some more Barack Obama magic — although she promises not to incite a civil war if her strategy doesn't work. "I wouldn't take up arms. That might be a little extreme," Clinton told Zach Galifianakis on Between Two Ferns, a mock interview show hosted by the comedian, when asked what she'd do if she lost the presidential election. Clinton added that if her quest for the White House were to fail she would stay in the country to try to prevent Donald Trump from "destroying the United States." Story Continued Below Some analysts credit the president's March 2014 appearance on Between Two Ferns with helping boost enrollment in Obamacare right when his administration needed it the most. And in an episode posted Thursday, Clinton decided to see if it could boost her campaign. Her team has admitted that is struggling to reach millennials, a demographic ripe for the show's humor. Joking about those who have questioned her judgment in recent days, Clinton said her appearance would probably prove her detractors right. As with Obama, Galifianakis left few topics untouched. He riffed on Clinton’s time as secretary of state. “How does Obama like his coffee?” he asked before questioning how many words per minute Clinton could muster. Galiafinakis also made light of Clinton's recent bout of pneumonia and questioned just how on earth she lost Scott Baio's vote to Donald Trump. "You know, Zach, those are really out-of-date questions, you need to get out more," Clinton retorted when asked blatantly sexist questions. "I could send you some pamphlets." The 46-year-old comedian also snuck in a 1990s hip-hop reference on the Trans Pacific Partnership trade deal, asking Clinton if she was “down with TPP.” The Democratic nominee helped pave the way for the agreement as secretary of state, but now opposes it. But the sharpest moments came at the expense of Clinton’s opponent. Asked what tie Donald Trump might wear to the first presidential debate on Monday night, Clinton said probably a red power one. But when Galifianakis asked how a “white power tie” would fit, Clinton joked that such a hue might be more appropriate. In another dig at Trump, Galifianakis said the show was sponsored by the New York businessman — courtesy of the now discontinued Trump Steaks. Clinton said she would be “afraid to eat them.” Galifianakis ended the interview by asking: "What's the best way to reach you? Email?"
ORLANDO — Tim Kaine and Mike Pence are both feeling more pressure to perform in their own vice presidential debate after Monday's caustic contest between Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton. Kaine spoke to Clinton shortly after, disclosing to a crowd at a Democratic field office here that his running mate's debate chops raise expectations for Kaine to match her. Story Continued Below "Man, you've really raised the bar. You put the kind of pressure on me that I like to really help my debate next Tuesday," Kaine recounted telling Clinton in a speech to field organizers here. Pence expressed similar sentiment, saying on Fox News he's been dusting off his Capitol Hill experience to get ready to go toe-to-toe with the Virginia senator. "Donald Trump raised the bar for his running mate last night,” Pence said. From there, however, the two vice presidential hopefuls' assessments diverged. Pence said that Trump took "command" of the stage while Kaine likened the GOP nominee to a heavyweight prizefighter on the verge of quitting. "If you're that rattled in the debate, try being president," Kaine said. "Donald Trump was up on the split screen like a boxer ready to go down on a TKO." Louis Nelson contributed to this report.
As the presidential campaign enters its home stretch, CNN's Steve Holmes will be scrutinizing political claims that ignore the facts with a reality check. (CNN)It was early Sunday morning when many Americans were having their breakfasts that New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie appeared on CNN's "State of the Union" with Jake Tapper -- serving up two whoppers. The issue was how long Donald Trump continued to ask whether President Barack Obama was born in the United States even after Obama produced his long-form birth certificate birth certificate in 2011. That document showed Obama was born in Hawaii. In the interview, Christie stretched the truth beyond recognition two times within 30 seconds, a kind of double Salchow of prevarication. First, his assertion that the so-called birther issue was first raised by the Clinton campaign. "It was a contentious issue," Christie told Tapper, "and, by the way, an issue that Patti Solis Doyle of the Clinton campaign in 2008 has recently admitted that it was an issue that Mrs. Clinton also injected into her campaign in 2008 in a very quiet, but direct way against then-Sen. Obama." Really? Solis Doyle said that? Actually, here's what she said to CNN's Wolf Blitzer. "The campaign, nor Hillary, did not start the birther movement. Period. End of the story. There was a volunteer coordinator, I believe in late 2007, I think in December. One of our volunteer coordinators in one of the counties in Iowa, I don't recall whether they were an actual a paid staffer, but they did forward an email that promoted the conspiracy." "The birther conspiracy?" Blitzer asked. "Yeah. Hillary made the decision immediately to let that person go. We let that person go, and it was so, you know, beyond the pale, Wolf, and you know, so not worthy the kind of campaign that certainly Hillary wanted to run or that we as a staff wanted to run that I called David Plouffe, who was obviously managing Barack Obama's campaign in '07, to apologize and basically say this is not coming from us." Funny, Solis Doyle's admission sure sounds an awful lot like a denial and there is no evidence that then-Sen. Clinton interjected this into her campaign in any way. Shortly thereafter, Christie took issue with Tapper for saying that Trump stayed on the birther issue for five years after Obama released his long-form birth certificate in April 2011. "It's just not true that he kept it up for five years," Christie said to Tapper. "It's simply not true. It wasn't like he was talking about it on a regular basis until then, and when the issue was raised he made very clear the other day what his position is." Here is what CNN reported on what Trump said and did after the long-form birth certificate was released: -- "He didn't know he was running for president, so he told the truth. The literary agent wrote down what he said ... He said he was born in Kenya and raised in Indonesia ... Now they're saying it was a mistake. Just like his Kenyan grandmother said he was born in Kenya, and she pointed down the road to the hospital, and after people started screaming at her, she said, 'Oh, I mean Hawaii.' Give me a break." May 24, 2012, interview with The Daily Beast's Lloyd Grove, responding to an erroneous report about Obama -- "A lot of people do not think it was an authentic certificate. ... Many people do not think it was authentic. His mother was not in the hospital. There are many other things that came out. And frankly if you would report it accurately I think you'd probably get better ratings than you're getting." May 29, 2012, to CNN's Wolf Blitzer -- An 'extremely credible source' has called my office and told me that @BarackObama's birth certificate is a fraud. Follow Donald J. Trump ✔ @realDonaldTrump 4:23 PM - 6 Aug 2012 9,792 9,792 Retweets 6,844 6,844 likes -- a tweet more than a year after Obama released his long-form birth certificate. -- "Was it a birth certificate? You tell me. Some people say that was not his birth certificate. Maybe it was, maybe it wasn't. I'm saying I don't know. Nobody knows." August 2013 to ABC News - "How amazing, the State Health Director who verified copies of Obama's 'birth certificate' died in plane crash today. All others lived." Follow Donald J. Trump ✔ @realDonaldTrump 4:32 PM - 12 Dec 2013 5,796 5,796 Retweets 3,709 3,709 likes -- in a tweet about the death of Loretta Fuddy. -- "Well, I don't know -- did he do it? ... Well, a lot of people don't agree with you and a lot of people feel it wasn't a proper certificate." May 2014, in an interview with TV3's Colette Fitzpatrick in Ireland, Trump first contested whether Obama had released his birth certificate, then questioned its legitimacy. -- "There are three things that could happen. And one of them did happen. He was perhaps born in Kenya. Very simple, OK? He was perhaps born in this country. But said he was born in Kenya because if you say you were born in Kenya, you got aid and you got into colleges. People were doing that. So perhaps he was born in this country, and that has a very big chance. Or, you know, who knows?" May 27, 2014, in remarks at the National Press Club -- "Who knows about Obama? ... Who knows, who knows? Who cares right now?... I have my own theory on Obama. Someday I will write a book, I will do another book, and it will do very successfully." January 6, 2016, in an interview with CNN's Wolf Blitzer Sure sounds like Christie is wrong when he says that Trump is not keeping the issue alive. Don't ya think? 
“[Trump is] someone who has said pregnancy is an inconvenience to employers.”— Hillary Clinton “I never said that.” — Donald Trump Trump did make such a claim. In a 2004 interview with NBC’s “Dateline,” Trump said pregnancy is “a wonderful thing for the woman, it’s a wonderful thing for the husband, it's certainly an inconvenience for a business. And whether people want to say that or not, the fact is it is an inconvenience for a person that is running a business.”
Charlotte Mayor Jennifer Roberts on Friday called for Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton to delay their planned trips to the North Carolina city in the wake of three days of protests that she says have strained local resources. While expressing appreciation for the candidates' concerns for the city, Roberts told CNN's Erin Burnett that Charlotte has "very stressed resources for security." Story Continued Below "If there would be a way to delay these visits in terms of giving us a chance to get our city back to order and back to more of a state of normalcy, that would probably be ideal," she said. Clinton's campaign announced earlier Friday that the candidate would visit Charlotte Sunday, however, in a statement released later Friday, Clinton campaign communications director Jennifer Palmieri confirmed that the visit had been postponed. "Hillary is grateful for, and intends to honor, the invitation from faith leaders to visit with the Charlotte community. After further discussion with community leaders, we have decided to postpone Sunday's trip as to not impact the City's resources. She will plan to visit Charlotte next Sunday, provided circumstances allow. In the meantime her prayers are with the people of Charlotte during these difficult days." Donald Trump quickly responded to Clinton's reversal, tweeting that Clinton was trying to "grandstand" and calling her initial decision to go to Charlotte "dumb." "Crooked Hillary's bad judgement forced her to announce that she would go to Charlotte on Saturday to grandstand. Dem pols said no way, dumb!" Trump was reportedly considering going to Charlotte next week but has not elaborated on those plans. He incorrectly identified Clinton's initial trip as scheduled for Saturday. Clinton has called for Charlotte police to release video footage of the confrontation between officers and Keith Lamont Scott, the African-American man whose fatal shooting by a police officer Tuesday ignited recent protests. Clinton wrote on Twitter Friday: "Charlotte should release police video of the Keith Lamont Scott shooting without delay. We must ensure justice & work to bridge divides." Charlotte should release police video of the Keith Lamont Scott shooting without delay. We must ensure justice & work to bridge divides. -H — Hillary Clinton (@HillaryClinton) September 23, 2016  Roberts, who favors releasing the video as long as it does not impinge the "integrity" of the investigation, also weighed in Friday on the ongoing controversy over whether Scott was carrying a weapon, as officers have claimed. "I think all three videos have obscured or blurred or it is not precise enough view of what was actually going on," she said. "So I it remains inconclusive in my opinion."
Washington (CNN)Hillary Clinton's moment of truth with the Obama coalition is fast approaching -- and she has work to do. The Democratic nominee's effort to win over voters who twice put Barack Obama in the White House -- and who represent her best chance of victory in November -- will reach new intensity this week in the run-up to her first crucial debate clash in seven days. Young, college-educated and minority voters formed the backbone of Obama's majority in 2008, helping to put once reliably Republican states like Virginia and North Carolina in the Democratic column and shore up the battered incumbent in swing states like Ohio and Florida in 2012. But recent polls indicate the race tightened dramatically in recent weeks, with GOP nominee Donald Trump on a roll. They suggest that Clinton is lagging behind Obama with younger voters and that she has failed to kindle the enthusiasm that drove them to the polls four and eight years ago. Questions are also mounting about the scale of likely turnout among black and Hispanic voters, who are expected to vote disproportionately for Clinton but could let her down if they do not show up in sufficient numbers in battleground states. Obama delivered a direct appeal to these voters over the weekend at the Congressional Black Caucus dinner where he made a passionate plea to his supporters to show up in November for Clinton. Clinton eyes NC as a firewall in tightening race After appealing to forums of African-American and Hispanic leaders in recent days, Clinton will travel to crucial Pennsylvania on Monday to highlight the stakes for millennials. She previewed the likely thrust of her remarks last week in North Carolina in a more personal, emotive stump speech that she retooled while laid up with pneumonia. "I am running for young people like so many of you here who dream of changing our world for the better," Clinton said. In that speech, the Democratic nominee also reached out to other sectors of the Obama coalition, including LGBT voters, African Americans and those who secured health care under the current president. Clinton's running mate, Virginia Sen. Tim Kaine, made a forceful push for millennial votes on NBC's "Meet the Press" Sunday, arguing that on the issues young people care about most, like climate change, women's health, college affordability, immigration reform and LGBT equality, there was only one possible choice in November. "It's on our shoulders to make the case. But on at least five litmus test issues, the differences between Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump are vast," Kaine said. Clinton's need to improve her standing among young voters has become apparent in recent polling. A Quinnipiac University poll this month found that Clinton was backed by 31% of voters aged 18-34 while 29% favored Trump. But 44% of that group said they would vote for Libertarian Gary Johnson or Green Party leader Jill Stein. Other polls have also shown Clinton needing to improve her standing among the younger demographic. If she does not, it could harm her election chances because she is far more dependent on the youth vote than Trump, as the core Republican vote skews much older. A CNN/ORC poll last week had Clinton leading Trump by 54% to 29% among voters under the age of 45. But she's running behind Obama, who beat Romney 60% to 37% among the same group in 2012. While the former secretary of state has work to do to electrify the Democratic coalition, she could not have better allies. Most prominently, Obama himself, enjoying some of the best approval ratings of his presidency, is emerging as a passionate, adamant fighter for her cause. First lady Michelle Obama is also taking on a key role. Following her acclaimed speech at the Democratic National Convention this July, she told young voters in Virginia last week that their choice in November would decide whether they could afford a college education and keep their health care when they graduate. Even Clinton's bitter primary rival, Bernie Sanders, who became a rock star on college campuses and among young voters, is beginning to become more prominent as an advocate warning of the dangers of a Trump presidency. However, transferring support from one candidate to another is not just a simple matter of passing the baton. Obama's popularity among Democrats seems intimately attached to the President himself. His efforts to boost Democrats in mid-term elections in 2010 and 2014 had little effect, and his record on picking winners in off-year races is also patchy. It's left the impression that his is a uniquely "Obama" coalition that cannot be easily bequeathed to a successor. RELATED: Obama: Would be 'personal insult' to legacy if black voters don't back Clinton That may be one reason why Obama's appeal to black voters at the Congressional Black Caucus dinner on Saturday was so striking; he figuratively put himself on the ticket in November, urging African Americans to vote for him and his legacy. "My name may not be on the ballot, but our progress is on the ballot," he said. "After we have achieved historic turnout in 2008 and 2012, especially in the African-American community, I will consider it a personal insult, an insult to my legacy, if this community lets down its guard and fails to activate itself in this election," Obama said in strikingly direct remarks. "You want to give me a good sendoff? Go vote." Obama's press secretary Josh Earnest told CNN's "New Day" on Monday that the President's comments were aimed at voters who were turned off by the negativity of the campaign that the "stakes are too high" to tune out. "I think the impact is to send a clear message to the President's supporters across the country that even though his name isn't on the ballot, he feels passionately about the outcome of this race," Earnest said. The process of transferring Obama's African-American support to Clinton was given a significant lift by Trump's clumsy effort to lay to rest the "birther" controversy over his repeated false claims that the President may not have been born in the United States, and hence wasn't eligible for the country's highest office. Though the GOP nominee finally admitted on Friday that Obama was indeed born on American soil, he gave the controversy fresh life by claiming inaccurately that Clinton's 2008 campaign started the furor and that he ended it -- despite pushing the rumor years after Obama produced his birth certificate. "If you would ask me to come up with one thing that would ruin Donald Trump's momentum over the last three weeks, I would say bringing up the birther thing," said Kevin Madden, a former top Romney strategist, on CNN's "State of the Union Sunday. "In many ways it has brought up new questions and in many ways it has put the spotlight again on Donald Trump in a very negative way." For her part, Clinton, despite facing the historically daunting task of trying to win a third consecutive White House term for her party, is hugging Obama close. She paid a fulsome tribute to the President at the CBC dinner and vowed to work tirelessly for a strong African-American turnout in November. "I want you to know I'm not taking your vote or anyone's vote for granted," she said. "I need your help over the next 52 days to bring our campaign across the finish line together." Trump's cause, however, has been boosted by a string of recent polls showing that the GOP nominee has all but neutralized Clinton's big convention bounce. And his campaign is suggesting that she will fail to pull off the kind of high turnout among key Democratic constituencies she needs to win in November. "Bernie Sanders had an event yesterday in Ohio for Hillary Clinton. There were 150 people there," Trump campaign manager KellyAnne Conway said on CBS "Face the Nation" Sunday. "That's like a second wedding where I come from. This is not a big movement for Hillary Clinton." While the activity of last week and the coming one suggests that the Clinton campaign is concerned about its candidate's progress in reassembling the Obama coalition, the countdown to Election Day could serve to concentrate the minds of Democratic voters. Young voters are notoriously less likely to show up at the polls than older ones, but they confounded conventional wisdom when they repeatedly answered Obama's call in primary elections and general elections. In 2012, Republicans backing Romney were adamant that Obama would never recreate the kind of historic turnout, especially among black voters, that he had managed in 2008 when he leveraged the historic potential of the first African-American presidency. It was only on Election Day, when returns started trickling in from key counties in swing states from Florida to Ohio, that the Romney brain trust learned how wrong they were. But with Clinton's fate on the line, that coalition is now facing its final -- and most daunting -- test. 
Donald Trump is a creature of television. And as a creature of television, he holds strong opinions about what ought to happen when he steps in front of the cameras. For the 2016 presidential debates, he’s weighed in with a variety of programming suggestions: A debate schedule that does not conflict with NFL games. Different moderators. Or no moderators at all: “I think that maybe we should just have no moderator. Let Hillary and I sit there and just debate,” he mused on CNBC’s “Squawkbox” earlier this month. Radical and unlikely as this last idea may seem, it also raises a fascinating question: Why have moderators at all? Why don’t we have debates where candidates just face off, one-on-one, without any questioners? Such a format could be a radical but useful break from the classic debate structures that have undergirded 50-plus years of presidential history. Story Continued Below Format shapes the outcome of debates far more than we realize. Some formats are relatively simple for candidates to maneuver, allowing strong candidates to game the system; others keep them more under control? Debates are certainly not “rigged,” but a standard two-podium format typically favors a very information-dense candidate like Hillary Clinton, while a town-hall format gives much more room for a big personality, like Trump, to dominate. For voters, too, different formats provide different kinds of information, from character to geniality to areas of expertise. The format Monday night is an extremely open one, borrowed from an idea debuted in 2012. Even without heeding Trump’s recommendation, the rules of engagement for this year’s presidential debates grant the candidates the power to conduct an essentially moderator-less exchange if they really want, allowing one or the other to grab the reins and seize control. On the one hand, this format would seem to benefit a loose performer like Trump, who is fully at home in the rough-and-tumble of live TV. On the other, long open exchanges could give Clinton a showcase to demonstrate her superior knowledge of policy and government. It might seem like a play for advantage, but Trump’s proposal for a debate without moderators is merely the latest entry in a long-running political conversation that has been underway since Lincoln met Douglas: what is the best way to design and execute a live campaign debate? It’s a surprisingly unsettled question after all these years—and might be poised for some radical changes. *** As both campaigns prepare for the showdown on Monday night, they should study the first debate from 2012, when Mitt Romney handed Barack Obama the most conclusive drubbing in a presidential debate since Richard Nixon sweated his way to defeat in 1960. The 2012 debates featured an innovation which, at the time, went nearly unremarked-upon in the press: long, open-ended discussion periods that, in effect, left it to the candidates to decide how the dialogue would unfold. Romney prepared specifically for these ground rules and took full advantage on debate night; Obama did not. And though much criticism was directed at moderator Jim Lehrer for approaching his task too passively, in fact, it was Obama’s rigidity in a malleable format that produced such a lopsided result. This exact same format will be used on Monday, as well as in the third debate, on October 19. Clinton and Trump will square off in six thematic blocks of 15 minutes apiece on subjects announced by the moderator in advance: This year, the topics will include “America’s Direction,” “Achieving Prosperity” and “Securing America.” Although the moderator is responsible for introducing topics and ensuring a more or less equal distribution of time, the debaters themselves determine how those 15-minute segments play out. As far back as 1960, debate producers had hoped to install a format that emphasized direct exchange between Kennedy and Nixon—the so-called Oxford-style debate—until campaign handlers vetoed the idea. What happened instead was three decades of a fairly rigid, controlled formula that often reduced the “debates” to parallel news conferences. “The panel's role was hardly more than to designate categories—animal, vegetable, or mineral—on which the two might or might not discourse,” complained one Kennedy-Nixon panelist afterward. Despite the limitations of journalistic panels, the format endured because it imbued the candidates with a sense of security—and kept them from having to confront each other directly. The first Carter-Ford debate in 1976, for instance, contained virtually no cross-talk by the candidates, who addressed each other only by talking to the moderators. Although change has come slowly to presidential debates, it has come. In 1988, for instance, moderators for the first time were allowed to ask an opening question. Everyone remembers Bernard Shaw’s hardball opening question to Michael Dukakis (“If Kitty Dukakis were raped and murdered…”), but Shaw had a similarly gruesome set-up for George H.W. Bush (“If you are elected and die before Inauguration Day…”). The introduction of town hall debates in 1992 wrought a wholly new format, one that has bedeviled candidates ever since. The town hall can generate positive results—as in 1992 and 2004—or it can be dull and un-insightful—as in 1996 and 2008. It can also encourage candidate aggression, as in the 2012 match between Obama and Romney. Whatever the outcome, town hall is probably the least comfortable format for politicians because it is nearly impossible to game in advance. For that reason, campaign negotiators have imposed increasingly burdensome restrictions over the years on how the town hall functions. The once-freewheeling format of 1992 has been reined in considerably, in the vain hope of protecting the participants. The 1990s also marked the debut of solo moderators in place of panels, giving individual journalists an outsized role in setting the debate agenda. Jim Lehrer filled that slot for every presidential debate in 1996 and 2000; since 2004, each debate has been helmed by a different moderator. Another recent format innovation is the table debate, in which candidates and moderator sit at a table instead of standing at lecterns. Table debates can be more conversational than the more formal setup of lectern debates. Furthermore, by placing the debaters in close proximity, table debates encourage—at least in theory—a more civilized level of discourse. For Dick Cheney, table debates were also a practical necessity: with Cheney’s history of heart problems, his advisers did not want to risk having him stand for 90 minutes. What we’re going to see on Monday will be dramatic and is widely expected to be the most-watched debate in American history—and the format itself will be part of the reason why. Two drastically different personalities will, essentially, have six free-for-all segments to go at each other. The more polarized the electorate, the more valuable this kind of format is—it diminishes the role of moderators and panels, who voters increasingly distrust, and gives the candidates the opportunity to guide the conversation. Similar formats have been successful in countries like France and Spain—and the U.S., too. During the 1992 Democratic primaries, Bill Clinton and Jerry Brown appeared on an episode of Donahue in which host Phil Donahue did little more than introduce his guests and let them have at it; the result was a fascinating and unpredictable hour of television. We should be so lucky to have a similar debate on Monday night. *** In the elections to come, strange new debate experiments are in the offing. Producers of primary debates have experimented with the use of crowd-sourced topics, including questions submitted as YouTube videos or via Twitter. This past summer, party leaders in Australia held one of their national debates not on broadcast and cable TV but on Facebook Live. Technological advances promise to inject new life into what many critics see as a sclerotic institution. At their best, these innovations might hold candidates accountable by tapping into real-time voter reactions and concerns. At worst, an excess of experimentation might reduce presidential debates to high-stakes video games. One novel proposal comes from New America senior fellow Lee Drutman, who suggests that we ought to end debates as we know them, and replace them with a crisis-situation simulator: “Film crews could record the entire simulation, then television producers could turn it into a reality-TV special.” Perhaps the candidates can be administered the kobayashi maru; that, too, would receive high ratings. Still, without any of that high-tech sizzle, Monday night will be must-see TV for any voting-age American. It will simply be two candidates on a stage with one moderator, but likely to be more freewheeling than we’d imagine.
Washington (CNN)Ten judges on a powerful federal appeals court in Washington heard more than six hours of arguments Tuesday concerning a cornerstone of President Barack Obama's legacy on the environment: the Clean Power Plan. The Environmental Protection Agency's plan is meant to reduce climate-changing greenhouse gas emissions by targeting existing coal-fired and natural gas power plants with a goal of reduce greenhouse emissions up to 32% by 2030. It would require states to meet specific carbon emission reduction standards based on their individual energy consumption, and it includes an incentive program for states to get a head start on meeting standards on early deployment of renewable energy. Dozens of lawyers from the government, industry and public interest groups packed the US Court of Appeals for the DC Circuit, to hear the divisive case that comes just weeks before a heated presidential election and illustrates how a President's picks for the lower court might impact his own agenda. The plan is currently frozen because last February, the Supreme Court voted to delay implementation until the appeals process could play out. Opponents to the plan claim that the EPA went too far under the law to push the rule. Judge Brett M. Kavanaugh at one point questioned EPA's authority. "This is a huge case," he said and noted that it could "fundamentally" transform the industry. Kavanaugh said the administration's policy is "laudable" but questioned under the separation of powers whether Congress, and not the EPA, had to speak clearly on the issue. Judge Thomas B. Griffith chimed in asking, "why isn't this debate going on in the floor of the Senate?" rather than before a panel of judges. But Judge Patricia A. Millet reiterated at one point that the Supreme Court "has already said" that the EPA has the authority to regulate in the area. Other judges questioned whether by 2030, the rule would be any more transformative to the coal industry, for example, than market forces would be. Judge David S. Tatel asked whether the agency was simply "invoking existing authority." While the morning session in court was dedicated to statutory arguments, in the afternoon the court heard arguments concerning whether it was unconstitutional. The challengers' constitutional arguments did not appear to to get much traction with the judges. On one side is the EPA, 18 states, some power companies and environmental and public health groups who argue in briefs that the rule will "secure critically important reductions" in carbon dioxide emissions from what are by far "the largest emitters in the United States -- fossil-fuel-fired power plants." They argue that the emissions "pose a monumental threat to American's health and welfare by driving long-lasting changes in our climate leading to an array of severe negative effects." The plan is considered important for the US to meet goals set out in a climate treaty signed in Paris last December. On the other side are nearly two dozen states, electric utilities, coal mining companies and the Chamber of Commerce. They say the rule exceeds the agency's statutory authority and goes beyond the bounds set by the Constitution. "EPA's audacious assertion of authority in this rule is more far-reaching than any previous effort by the agency," lawyers for the opposing states argued in court papers. They say that the reduction requirements "can be met only by shutting down hundreds of coal-fired plants, limiting the use of others, and requiring construction and operation of other types of facilities preferred by EPA." In a statement back in February, White House press secretary Josh Earnest said,. "The Clean Power Plan is based on a strong legal and technical foundation, gives states the time and flexibility they need to develop tailored, cost-effective plans to reduce their emissions, and will deliver better air quality, improved public health, clean energy investment and jobs across the country." By the end of the day, after more than a dozen lawyers had approached the podium, and Judge Karen Henderson acknowledged everyone's long day. "We've all been through a marathon," she said. Court filled with Obama appointees During complex arguments before a multi-member court is dangerous to try to determine -- based on questions posed at oral arguments -- how a judge will ultimately rule. It's worth noting however, that Tuesday's case comes before an appellate court that has been transformed during the Obama administration. Before Obama took office the appeals court tilted toward conservative appointees with six judges nominated by a Republican president and three nominated by a Democratic president. There were also two vacancies. Currently, the active judges on the court consist of four GOP appointees and seven Democratic appointees. In 2013, Obama placed four judges on the court, three of them immediately after the Senate changed its filibuster rules. Tuesday's case was heard by all the active members of the court except for Chief Judge Merrick Garland who has recused himself from hearing cases because he has been nominated to the Supreme Court. "The party of an appointing president surely makes a difference in some types of cases -- environmental for example -- more than others," said Russell Wheeler, a visiting fellow at the Brookings Institute. "When the full court meets is when the party of appointing president is likely to matter most because the great majority of decisions are made by three-judge panels, randomly drawn and not necessarily reflective of the overall composition of the court." Because the Supreme Court is currently at a reduced strength of eight the appeals court opinion could be the last word on the subject. A 4-4 tie at the Supreme Court would mean the justices automatically uphold the lower court's opinion. Elizabeth Wydra of the progressive Constitutional Accountability Center says that the appeals court is "exhibit A" of why judicial nominations are crucial to a president's legacy. "President Obama was able to put several brilliant legal minds on the bench, who are much more likely to follow the law where it leads rather than accept the extreme conservative deregulatory agenda pushed by this case," she said. 
Presidential debate moderator Lester Holt pulled two Candy Crowleys, former New York Mayor Rudy Giuliani said Tuesday, accusing of the “NBC Nightly News” anchor of mirroring Crowley’s infamous Mitt Romney fact-check twice on Monday night. In an interview with “Fox and Friends,” Giuliani said he watched the debate two times — once live, “and then I went home and I watched Lester Holt do Candy Crowley at least twice.” Story Continued Below Donald Trump, who had suggested a debate without a moderator ahead of Monday’s faceoff, warned Holt last week not to be like Crowley, who interrupted Romney in 2012 after the then-Republican nominee said it took President Barack Obama 14 days to call the attack in Benghazi, Libya, an “act of terror.” (PolitiFact rated Romney’s criticism “half true,” noting that Obama did say “act of terror” right after the attacks but that the administration did not speak “consistently in the days that followed.") Giuliani took issue with Holt “ignorantly” attempting to fact-check Trump on the constitutionality of stop-and-frisk and the real estate mogul's false assertion that he never supported the Iraq War. A federal judge in New York ruled the application of the practice unconstitutional, not the policy itself, as Holt suggested, Giuliani argued. “The thing that’s wrong is Lester Holt said straight out: Stop-and-frisk is unconstitutional. Lester Holt is not a lawyer,” Giuliani said. “He’s wrong. It was decided in 1959 by Earl Warren. It is still the law of the land.” The former mayor maintained that “every cop does stop-and-frisk in every part of America” but gave Hillary Clinton a pass for siding with Holt “because she failed the bar exam.” “But I’m not gonna allow him to play lawyer and contradict our candidate,” he continued. “And I’d like to know: When did a moderator become a fact-checker? And if you’re gonna be a fact-checker, you better darn be right.” “I’m a lawyer. I’m not a moderator who misrepresents on television,” Giuliani said, after co-Steve Doocy noted that Giuliani was fact-checking Holt. “I’m a lawyer. Am I angry about it? I thought after Candy Crowley we saw the last of it. What Holt did last night — if journalism has ethics, if it has ethics, he violated the rules of ethics. Now if you’re gonna interrupt and you’re gonna correct me in front of 100 million people, you better be right. He is dead wrong.” Giuliani continued this verbal broadside, slamming Holt for being “completely unprofessional” and “totally unethical” and suggesting that “he should have had enough energy to check the sources” regarding whether Trump supported the Iraq War. “I saw the tape, and he opposed the Iraq War before the Iraq War,” Giuliani said, despite numerous fact-checks that note Trump voiced support for the war during a 2002 interview with Howard Stern. “A hundred million last night were misled by Lester Holt and so-called lawyer Hillary Clinton,” Giuliani said.
Washington (CNN)Senate Democrats on Tuesday blocked a Republican bill to fund the government and battle Zika because it did not include money for Flint, Michigan, to address the city's drinking water crisis. The action comes three days before Friday's midnight deadline when agencies are set to run out of money and left congressional leaders searching for a compromise bill that could get enough votes to pass and head off an election season government shutdown. Needing 60 votes to pass, the measure failed 45-55. While 12 GOP senators also voted against the measure -- for reasons ranging from concerns over spending to the bill's lack of language making changes to the Export-Import Bank -- it was the solid block of "nay" votes from Democrats that halted the bill. One possible solution was suggested by Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, who said he might drop flood money for Louisiana and other states to satisfy Democrats who insisted they would not support emergency disaster aid for some states while leaving Flint behind. "We keep hearing that their position is no Flint, no floods. And that's certainly an option worth discussing," McConnell told reporters. Democrats didn't immediately say if they would accept the GOP proposal. "There's no excuse for leaving the people of Flint, Michigan, behind. If they're helping Louisiana, they have to help Flint," Senate Minority Leader Harry Reid said. Senate Republicans, who earlier this month overwhelmingly backed a major water projects bill that included $220 million for Flint, said they would push the Republicans who control the House to do the same. But Democrats said without an iron-clad agreement, the Flint funds would pass the House they would continue to block the short-term government funding bill. "Why do you feel as if you have to punish people in Louisiana who are digging out from a flood," asked Sen. Bill Cassidy, R-Louisiana, who said he didn't object to Flint money going into the government funding bill. Sen. Marco Rubio, R-Florida, who is anxious to clear the Zika funding that will directly aid his state, argued Democrats are "looking for any excuse to shut down the government because they think it will help them in the upcoming election." But Sen. Chuck Schumer of New York, a Democratic leader, said the government funding bill would pass "in an instant" if Republicans agreed to add money for Flint. "Democrats are going to oppose this bill because it pits victims of one crisis against victims of another and unfairly offers a cold shoulder to those in Flint while providing aid to other Americans," Schumer said. 
An exasperated Vice President Joe Biden told the crowd at a Hillary Clinton campaign rally in Philadelphia that “Donald Trump is painfully uninformed” on the issues important to the presidency and expressed disbelief at the GOP nominee’s rhetoric on the economy. “Donald Trump’s is painfully uninformed. No, no, this isn’t for cheering. I want to make an important point,” Biden said, quieting the crowd at Philadelphia’s Drexel University. “And his policies are not very helpful for the country, but what bothers me about this race, and I know I’m sort of a one-man broken record on this, but what bothers me about this race is how palpable his cynicism is about the American people.” Story Continued Below Biden alternated between speaking quietly, jokingly asking rally attendees if they’d seen Monday night’s presidential debate, and raising his voice almost to the level of outrage as he railed against Trump’s past statements on the economy. The vice president slammed the Manhattan billionaire for bragging, as he did Monday night, about not paying federal income taxes, suggesting that such a message did not resonate with hard-working, middle-class Americans. The vice president’s harshest criticism of Trump concerned the real estate mogul’s past statement that the 2007 crash in America’s housing market was good for his business. Of such comments, Biden rhetorically asked the crowd “what in hell is he talking about?” “Look, I’ve been there for eight presidents, Democrat and Republican, I’ve disagreed and agreed. But every president I have served with, including the Republicans, has had a moral center about what it was to be an American,” the vice president said. “Can you imagine Ronald Reagan, the most conservative president we’ve had in a long time, can you imagine him saying, ‘it’s good business to take advantage of people’s misery,’ rooting for that misery? I really mean this. I am not joking. I am not kidding. What does it say about this man?” Biden acknowledged Clinton’s struggles to gain traction with young voters, who polls show are dissatisfied with both major party candidates and have thus gravitated to third-party options like Libertarian Gary Johnson and the Green Party’s Jill Stein. But Hillary Clinton is in lock step with the majority of young people, Biden said, on issues like marriage equality, abortion rights, and reducing the cost of college education. The vice president also told the crowd that he’s spent a significant amount of time throughout this election cycle answering questions from foreign leaders nervous that Trump might win the White House. He said he’s had to reassure leaders from the Baltic states concerned that the GOP nominee might back out of America’s NATO commitments and Australian leaders worried that China’s influence in the Western Pacific might grow under Trump. “Look last night, you got a good look at both the candidates, you saw them both. Hillary demonstrated she’s a leader, she has courage, she cares about the circumstances of the American people, not just the super wealthy,” Biden said. “She thinks everybody should pay their fair share. We simply can’t elect a man who belittles our closest allies, embraces dictators like Putin, a man who seeks to sow division for his own gain and his own benefit, a man who considers bluster and confuses that with strength.”
Hillary Clinton called on authorities in Charlotte, North Carolina, on Friday to release the police video showing shooting of Keith Scott "without delay." The former of secretary of state, who made reforming the criminal justice system an early centerpiece of her campaign, wrote that "we must ensure justice & work to bridge divides." The post was signed with her initial, H, indicating that the post was written personally by Clinton. Story Continued Below Cell phone video showing the shooting released Friday by NBC News and The New York Times does not conclusively show whether the victim was armed when police officers shot him. The video, recorded by Scott’s wife Rakeyia Scott, does not show him being shot although the sound of gunshots is audible. Keith Scott is not clearly visible in the video until after he has been shot, when officers surround his body lying on the pavement. Charlotte police said Keith Scott was holding a gun when officers shot him outside of his apartment on Tuesday. In the video, released by the victim’s family, police officers are heard yelling at Keith Scott to “drop the gun” while his wife shouts “he has no weapon” and “he has no gun.” Attorneys for the family have said that Keith Scott was not holding a gun when he was shot, although police have said they recovered a firearm and photos from the scene appear to show one lying next to the victim’s body. The video offers a different perspective from the dashboard camera and body camera footage that also captured the shooting but has not yet been released. Charlotte-Mecklenburg Police Chief Kerr Putney said Thursday that he did not plan to release his department’s video of the shooting, although he has allowed the victim’s family and attorneys to view it. Keith Scott’s shooting by police, along with that of another black man, Terence Crutcher, in Tulsa, Oklahoma, has prompted demonstrations nationwide. In Charlotte, those protests grew violent Wednesday night into Thursday morning, prompting North Carolina Gov. Pat McCrory to declare a state of emergency. With National Guard troops looking on and a midnight curfew in effect, protests Thursday night were mostly peaceful.
Donald Trump’s former campaign manager, Corey Lewandowski, will continue to be paid severance by the campaign through the end of 2016, prolonging concerns of a conflict of interest for CNN, which controversially hired Lewandowski in June to serve as a political commentator. In addition, CNN shot down reports on Wednesday that Lewandowski was being suspended by the channel. “Corey Lewandowski, who is no longer involved in the campaign, continues to receive monthly severance payments,” Trump press secretary Hope Hicks told The Washington Post Wednesday. “The campaign will continue to honor its contract with Mr. Lewandowski, which stipulates he will be paid through the end of the year. These payments are in no way compensation for services rendered.” POLITICO reported on Tuesday evening that the Trump campaign had paid Lewandowski's firm $20,000 in August, according to campaign filings, for "strategy consulting." As The Washington Post pointed out, the description of the payment as "strategy consulting" appeared to contradict CNN’s claim that Lewandowski was being paid by the Trump campaign only for severance. Campaign employees being paid severance for so long after their departures is unusual, and it's not entirely clear why on the FEC forms the Trump campaign continues to call payments to Lewandowski as "strategy consulting" (we've reached out to the campaign for clarification and will update here accordingly). In an appearance on Fox News Radio, campaign manager Kellyanne Conway stressed that the payment is still part of his severance and pointed out that CNN also employs as commentators people who work for pro-Clinton Super PACs. "He is not part of the campaign, he is a paid adviser on CNN and I think he's excellent in his job, frankly. Corey does not have a formal or informal role with the campaign whatsoever," Conway said. Mediaite on Wednesday reported that Lewandowski was being suspended by the channel following the new statement, but a spokesperson for the cable channel said the report was false, and that Lewandowski would be appearing on air later today. CNN President Jeff Zucker had for months defended the cable channel’s decision to hire Lewandowski. On Tuesday, the cable network head said at a company town hall for staff that the network "needed to bring in voices supportive of the Republican nominee to balance its commentary ranks," The Huffington Post reported. Lewandowski has signed a non-disclosure agreement with the Trump campaign, and as part of that agreement agreed to a non-disparagement clause, according to the Associated Press which extends beyond his time working for the campaign. As POLITICO reported earlier this month, Lewandowski has been playing a wider role in the campaign recently, even if he technically is not an official part of it.
Washington (CNN)Donald Trump's campaign on Tuesday stood by a controversial tweet issued by the candidate's son, Donald Trump Jr., in which he likened Syrian refugees to a bowl of Skittles. On Monday, Trump Jr. tweeted a graphic that likened Syrian refugees to Skittles, which swiftly triggered a wave of criticism. "This image says it all. Let's end the politically correct agenda that doesn't put America first. #trump2016," he tweeted, with a graphic that said: "If I had a bowl of skittles and I told you just three would kill you. Would you take a handful? That's our Syrian refugee problem." Find out all you need to know for the 2016 election on "The Daily DC" podcast The graphic had an official Trump logo that the Republican nominee shares with his running mate, Mike Pence. Despite widespread condemnation, the campaign stood by the tweet and in a statement called Trump Jr. "a tremendous asset to the campaign." "America has become less safe under Hillary Clinton and Barack Obama, and Clinton's planned 550% increase in Syrian refugees is a dangerous proposal that will put American lives at risk," said senior communication adviser Jason Miller. "Speaking the truth might upset those who would rather be politically correct than safe, but the American people want a change, and only Donald Trump will do what's needed to protect us." Kellyanne Conway, Trump's campaign manager, also defended the comparison to CNN's Erin Burnett. "What we do know is that many Americans are concerned with the lack of vetting that's going on. We see what's happening all across Europe ... that has been a disaster," she said Tuesday on "Erin Burnett OutFront." But Mars Candy, which produces Skittles, said in a statement, "Skittles are candy. Refugees are people. We don't feel it's an appropriate analogy. We respectfully refrain from further commentary as anything we say could be misinterpreted as marketing." 'This is disgusting' The graphic's language apparently wasn't a Trump Jr. original, but instead that of former Illinois Rep. Joe Walsh, a former tea party congressman from Illinois and now a conservative talk radio host. Walsh tweeted at Trump Jr.: "Hey @DonaldTrumpJr, that's the point I made last month. Glad you agree." Walsh's tweet included a screenshot of a tweet he made dated August 13. Hillary Clinton's campaign spokesman Nick Merrill retweeted Trump Jr. adding: "This is disgusting." The 2016 campaign has featured heated rhetoric around US policy for accepting refugees. Clinton has called for an increase in the number of Syrian refugees the US should accept and Trump has called for "extreme vetting" of immigrants, as well as a ban on immigrants from countries that are hotbeds of terrorism, such as Syria. One of President Barack Obama's former speechwriters responded to Trump Jr. with a link to CNN reporting about a little boy in Aleppo, Syria, who became the face of the humanitarian crises in Syria. "Hey @DonaldJTrumpJr, this is one of the millions of children you compared to a poisoned Skittle today," Jon Favreau tweeted. Former Obama campaign staffer, Jason Sparks, tweeted at Trump Jr. photos of the Syrian refugee children in the crises and said: "These aren't Skittles, @DonaldJTrumpJr." Musician John Legend, who has been an outspoken critic of Trump on Twitter, wrote: "There's a tiny chance that anyone could be a murderer. Get rid of everyone now!!! #trumplogic" Legend also retweeted a photo of the Aleppo boy, where someone said: "This is not a skittle." And former CIA director James Woolsey, a senior adviser to the Trump campaign, told CNN's Kate Bolduan and John Berman during "At This Hour" that it was a "clumsy analogy" that "doesn't help" the Trump campaign. "But he's not the one running for president," Woolsey added. Last week, Trump Jr. was criticized for making a "gas chamber" reference when complaining about how the treatment his father has received form the media compared to the coverage from Clinton. "They've let her slide on every discrepancy, on every lie, on every DNC game trying to get Bernie Sanders out of the thing," he said. "I mean, if Republicans were doing that, they'd be warming up the gas chamber right now. It's a very different system -- there's nothing fair about it." This story has been updated. CORRECTION: A previous version of this story wrongly identified the state Joe Walsh represented in Congress and misattributed a quote to him. Walsh is a former Illinois congressman. It was Joe Wilson of South Carolina who shouted "you lie" at President Barack Obama. CNN's Jim Acosta contributed to this report.
Raleigh, North Carolina (CNN)Hillary Clinton -- facing a dramatically tightening race and a troubling lack of enthusiasm -- is looking to this steadily changing state as an opportunity to stabilize her path to the White House and force Republicans to play offense. Clinton's challenge: Rebuilding Obama's winning coalition A sign of how seriously the Democratic nominee is taking North Carolina: it's the first place she visited last week when she returned to the campaign trail following a bout with pneumonia. President Barack Obama traveled to Charlotte this summer for his first campaign appearance with Clinton and is expected to return to the state repeatedly in October. The focus on North Carolina -- a state President Barack Obama carried narrowly in 2008 but lost four years later -- comes as polls show Clinton faltering in other battlegrounds such as Florida and Ohio. A win here would almost certainly offset losses in those states and guarantee her the presidency. And the raging culture war over LGBT rights playing out in the state offers her an opportunity to appeal to progressives and encourage them to show up on Election Day. Clinton has reason for some cautious optimism. A Quinnipiac poll released September 8 shows Clinton with a 4-point lead, just outside the margin of error. "It's a coin toss," said J. Michael Bitzer, a political science professor at Catawba College. "We are dealing with a 45/45 split. The electorate is baked, the remaining 10% are folks who will decide at the last minute, and say 'I can't stand either one.' We are in a holding pattern unless something monumental happens." Why Democrats are anxious Republican nominee Donald Trump is fighting hard for the state. He held a rally last week in Asheville and will be back in North Carolina Tuesday. But the election is playing out as the state is grappling with the fallout from House Bill 2, the so-called bathroom bill that requires people to use the bathroom of their biological gender. It also bans municipalities from passing rules barring discrimination on the basis of gender identity or sexual orientation. Since the legislation's passage earlier this year, North Carolina -- with a long reputation as being one of the more progressive southern states -- has seen a blow to its image. The NBA, NCAA, and ACC have pulled major sporting events out of the state, resulting in millions in lost revenues, a substantial economic and cultural blow to a sport-crazy state. State politics upended And the state's politics have been upended. Republican Gov. Pat McCrory is lagging his Democratic challenger and GOP Sen. Richard Burr is in an unexpectedly competitive re-election race. Democrats see the issue as a rallying call to engage the Obama coalition and possibly, moderate Republicans. "I'm running for the LGBT teenager here in North Carolina who sees your governor sign a bill legalizing discrimination and suddenly feels like a second-class citizen," Clinton said at her Greensboro rally. "And if anyone wonders what the costs of discrimination are, just ask the people and businesses of North Carolina." But Carter Wren, a Republican strategist doubts that House Bill 2 or McCrory's standing, will determine the presidential race here. "The polling stuff I have seen on HB2, it didn't cut, everybody had an opinion, but it didn't change how people vote," he said. "It's all about Hillary and Trump and mostly about character, that's what people are questioning more than the issues." Kaine splits with Clinton on some Trump supporters as 'irredeemable' And Clinton is facing the same trouble here that she is nationwide: ginning up enthusiasm -- especially among young voters -- that she'll need to replicate Obama's winning coalition. Even voters here who are enthused by Clinton's candidacy recognize that others aren't that plugged into the race. "Some of my friends are on the fence. They say Trump is horrible, but they are not sure about Clinton," said Cydnee Mebane, 19, who saw Clinton speak in Greensboro. "They say they won't vote or they will vote for a third party. With my generation, we are either apathetic or too smart for our own good." Daisy Goodwin, 65, was initially for Clinton during the primaries in 2008, but flipped to Obama. She expressed fear over what a Trump presidency would look like, and frustration that during voter registration drives, "a lot of people said they aren't going to vote." 'Where is Oprah?' "She should bring Barack and Michelle. That will turn people out and we have to go door-to-door," said Goodwin, a retired beautician from High Point. "And where is Oprah?" Another challenge for Democrats is broadening their appeal among white voters, who have been increasingly voting less Democratic in Southern states, a trend that can't be entirely offset by gains with other demographic groups. While the African American vote remained steady from 2008 to 2012, a notable share of white voters shifted from Obama -- he won 31% of the white vote in 2012, down from 35% in 2008 according to exit polls. Obama: Would be 'personal insult' to legacy if black voters don't back Clinton Still, Trump has clear vulnerabilities. "If I am Trump, my problem is with undecided voters who supported [Mitt] Romney," Wren said. "There are a fair amount of those people who voted for Romney, don't like Clinton but don't like Trump." That's especially true in North Carolina, a state with an influx of new residents drawn to a tech boom in cities like Charlotte and Raleigh. The population growth has swelled the ranks of unaffiliated and more educated voters. Clinton and her allies have flooded the airwaves with millions in ads, targeting veterans, black millennials, suburban white voters and black churchgoers. Nearly $13 million in TV ads have been reserved through November. Priorities USA launched a $400,000 digital ad buy on Facebook, Instagram and Pandora with one ad called "Most Racist Person," where Trump falsely claims that Obama is not an American citizen. This past Saturday, Democratic volunteers from around the state gathered at different campaign offices to get pep talks before they fanned out to register new voters. Democrats have boasted about their superior ground game, rattling off number of offices (33), paid staff (300) and volunteers (thousands). Republicans counter that buildings don't vote. "Office numbers are a false metric and completely miss the point that, as we saw in the primary, Mr. Trump is not a typical politician and attempts to measure the strength of his campaign by old world comparisons like these fail to reflect the enthusiasm and grass-roots support seen by the thousands of supporters and new voters he is attracting to his events and his campaign," said Jason Simmons, Trump's North Carolina state director. Ultimately, the biggest question for Clinton is whether she can pull off the coalition that united behind Obama in 2008. He won at the time by orchestrating one of the most sophisticated and granular mobilization efforts the state has ever seen. Buoyed by a jump in the registration and participation of black and younger voters, the Obama campaign flipped a 13-point Democratic defeat in 2004, to a 14,000-vote win just four years later. On Monday and Tuesday, the Mothers of the Movement -- women who have lost their children to gun violence or at the hands of the police -- will stump for Clinton here. "It was a very strong effort to reach the young people, you have a huge HBCU population down there and we had a very well-organized church strategy," said Rick C. Wade, who was Obama's national black vote director in 2008. "It was the inspiration that Obama represented and I think that's the challenge. How do you get Hillary to connect with those folks?" 
Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump mocked each other in Monday's presidential debate over who is better suited to take on the Islamic State. Trump dismissed Clinton's seriousness about the battle against the terrorist network, also known as ISIS or ISIL, by noting the Democrat had laid out some of her plans on her website. Story Continued Below "I don't think Gen. MacArthur would like that too much," the Republican real estate mogul said. Clinton shot back: "At least I have a plan to fight ISIS." "No, you're telling the enemy everything you want to do," Trump said as Clinton shook her head in amusement. "No wonder you've been fighting ISIS your entire adult life." "Please, the fact checkers, get to work," Clinton responded. The Islamic State is a relatively new terrorist organization, one that slowly emerged in the wake of the 2003 U.S. invasion of Iraq. Clinton is 68 years old. Trump has in the past said he has a secret plan to fight the jihadist group in Syria and Iraq and that he doesn't want to reveal it so as not to give away his strategy. The two presidential candidates were debating head-to-head for the first time at Hofstra University in Hempstead, New York.
A lawyer for Hillary Clinton told a House committee Friday the panel won't be receiving some information it subpoenaed about security arrangements for Clinton's server. Clinton attorney David Kendall sent a letter to House Science Committee Chairman Lamar Smith (R-Texas) saying that the panel's subpoena to Florida-based computer security company SECNAP went too far by demanding details on safeguards in place after Clinton emails from her time as secretary state were removed from the server in 2014. "Documents regarding this equipment are likely to contain sensitive information related to security of the current network and/or server," Kendall added. "Because these documents are unrelated to the Committee's investigation and contain sensitive security information, I respectfully object to the portion of the subpoena seeking their production." A spokeswoman for Smith did not immediately respond to a request Friday night seeking comment on Kendall's letter. Smith has been pressing for records from the FBI and private firms as part of his panel's investigation into the security vulnerabilities of the private system Clinton used to store the tens of thousands of emails she exchanged while secretary. Other House and Senate committee are conducting similar inquiries. When the House Oversight Committee called in computer technicians from the Clintons' main computer contractor Platte River Networks last week, Smith was granted special permission to sit on the dais. He said his panel was being denied information because of resistance from Clinton and her attorneys. "SECNAP counsel confirmed to my staff that the Clinton's private LLC is actively engaged in directing their obstructionist responses to congressional subpoenas. This is a clear obstruction of justice. Americans deserve to know the truth, which is now being blocked by the Clinton organization," Smith said. A former Clinton aide, Justin Cooper, did testify at that hearing, but the questioning of the computer technicians was to no avail since both exercised their Fifth Amendment rights. Asked about Kendall's response to the Science Committee subpoena, a spokeswoman for the panel's ranking Democrat Rep. Eddie Bernice Johnson of Texas had no specific comment, However, the spokeswoman pointed to an earlier statement sharply criticizing the chairman's email-related probe and questioning the panel's jurisdiction over the issue. “I am outraged that the Chairman is recklessly abusing the Committee’s investigatory powers to brazenly do the bidding of the Trump campaign. I am certain that the Science Committee will not uncover any ‘smoking gun’ after this issue has already been thoroughly investigated by the Benghazi Committee at a cost of $7 million in taxpayer dollars as well as by the FBI," Johnson said. "This Committee desperately needs to get back to the work of ensuring continued American leadership in science and innovation and the legitimate oversight of our research and development enterprise.”
Washington (CNN)Two decades later, Hillary Clinton is still haunted by the ghosts of NAFTA. Labor unions and liberal activists are preparing to highlight free trade — an issue central to Bill and Hillary Clinton's political brand in the early 1990s — if she opts to run for president in 2016. Driving their anger: The Trans-Pacific Partnership, a massive new pact that that would usurp the Clinton-era North American Free Trade Agreement's place as the biggest-ever free trade agreement. President Barack Obama's administration has been negotiating the Chile-to-Japan deal for years, and it's increasingly drawing scrutiny from the Democratic base as the talks near completion. The new deal has reminded labor halls across the country of the old one — and that it was their biggest problem with the Clintons. Compounding the problem is that free trade, particularly NAFTA, is an issue that Clinton has vacillated on since her husband's administration. As first lady, Clinton backed NAFTA and spoke highly of it at stops for the administration. But once she was elected to the Senate and later ran for president, her support of free trade -- and her husband's landmark agreement -- began to wane. On the campaign trail, Clinton acknowledged that NAFTA has "hurt a lot of American workers" and advocated for broad reform of trade policy. President Barack Obama's campaign even used the flip-flop against Clinton during the 2008 primary. But after Clinton lost the nomination and agreed to serve as the President's Secretary of State, she began to warm up to free trade, and particularly the TPP. In her memoir, which Clinton's spokesman said was her most updated statement on the TPP, Clinton wrote, "It's safe to say that the TPP won't be perfect. No deal negotiated among a dozen countries ever will be - but its higher standards, if implemented and enforced, should benefit American businesses and workers." That history worries some labor leaders who are prepared to hold Clinton to a standard that includes her support of free trade agreements. Hillary Clinton: Dodging tough questions should be 'disqualifying' in Iowa AFL-CIO President Richard Trumka told CNN the issue of free trade could hang over Hillary Clinton in 2016. Sen. Bernie Sanders of Vermont says he'll make it a centerpiece of his campaign if he runs for president. And union workers across the country - including some who lined up to see Clinton speak at a labor hall in 2014 - are talking about it, too. "I think NAFTA itself will be remembered for as long as this generation draws a warm breath," Richard Trumka said in an interview. "When I talk to people about it, they don't remember that it was a Republican majority that passed NAFTA. They remember that it was President Clinton." Labor leaders see Clinton's 1994 signing of NAFTA, which created a free-trade zone with Canada and Mexico, as the moment when blue collar wages began to stagnate. Trumka said that free trade -- especially the TPP -- is one of the biggest priorities for the AFL-CIO and something that the group will use to gauge their support of candidates in 2015 and 2016. The issue is part of the group's "Raising Wages" priority plan which looks to raise the wages of all Americans. The longtime labor leader, whose relationship with the Clintons goes back decades, said it was up to Hillary Clinton whether the legacy of NAFTA will hurt her campaign. "It all depends on what her position is on trade. If her position on trade is that NAFTA is really a good thing and I want to continue it, it will definitely hurt her," he said. "All politicians, Democrats and Republicans, take about raising wages. But you can't be for raising wages while being for the same old trade policies." That's where the Trans-Pacific Partnership — which liberal activists have taken to calling "NAFTA on steroids" — comes in. 7 things Hillary Clinton says at almost every speech Free trade won't go away in 2016 It isn't only Trumka, though, that will likely apply pressure on Clinton regarding free trade. Two outspoken liberal senators -- both of whom have been followed by 2016 speculation -- have come out strong against the TPP. Sanders, an independent who caucuses with Democrats, came out against the TPP earlier in 2014 and recently wrote a letter that accused the White House of crafting the deal in secret. In an interview, the outspoken senator that while the concept of trade "is a good idea," trade agreements like NAFTA and TPP have been raw deals for American workers. "It was very clear to me that any agreement that forces American workers to compete against desperate, desperate people who are working for pennies an hour is grotesquely unfair," Sanders said, recalling the 1990s when he traveled to Mexico to see the working and living conditions of workers producing goods sold in the U.S. Unlike some labor and liberal leaders, Sanders does not hang NAFTA on Hillary Clinton. "Hillary Clinton was not the president. Bill Clinton was the president," he said. "Hillary will have to speak to her own views on trade." That said, though, Sanders has brought free trade up on every trip he has made to Iowa -- the first-in-the-nation caucus state -- and when asked whether he would make the issue a key part of his possible presidential run he bluntly said: "I will give you a three letter answer to that - the answer is y-e-s." Why many liberals don't trust Hillary Clinton Joining Sanders is Sen. Elizabeth Warren, who told an AFL-CIO audience recently that liberals "believe in trade policies and tax codes that will strengthen our economy, that will raise our standard of living, that will create American jobs because we will never give up on these three words: made in America." Warren has also written a letter to U.S. Trade Representative Mike Froman questioning the deal. The fact that Warren and Sanders are involved means this issue is not going away, especially for Clinton. Both represent the former first lady's left flank and are politicians who don't even need to run for president to dictate some of the issues that become big campaign issues. Clinton is a moving target on NAFTA Bill Clinton still defends NAFTA as a good deal for America. Just last November, at the 10th anniversary of the Clinton Library, the former President said, "NAFTA is still controversial but people will thank me for it in 20 years." Hillary Clinton has waffled on the issue, though. As first lady, Clinton backed NAFTA. "I think that everybody is in favor of free and fair trade," she said during a meeting with union workers in 1996, "and I think that NAFTA is proving its worth." In her 2003 memoir, "Living History," Clinton also writes glowingly about NAFTA, including it among her husband's "legislative victories" and noting it would "expand U.S. exports, create jobs and ensure that our economy was reaping the benefits, not the burdens, of globalization." But when she entered the Senate in 2000 and ran for president in 2008, Clinton's tune on free trade began to change. She conducted a study as senator that found the agreement hurt New York workers' ability to sell goods in Canada and spoke out against NAFTA during her 2008 campaign. "NAFTA and the way it's been implemented has hurt a lot of American workers," Clinton said at a 2007 forum with the AFL-CIO. "Clearly we have to have a broad reform in how we approach trade. NAFTA's a piece of it, but it's not the only piece of it." Clinton lost her race for president, though, and went on to serve as Barack Obama's secretary of state. In the role, she oversaw the President's much noted pivot to Asia. At the center of that move was the TPP. "One of our most important tools for engaging with Vietnam was a proposed new trade agreement called the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), which would link markets throughout Asia and the Americas, lowering trade barriers while raising standards on labor, the environment, and intellectual property," Clinton wrote in her 2014 memoir "Hard Choices." As secretary of state, Clinton also talked up the benefits of the TPP and during a trip to Korea in 2011, she advocated for "as few barriers to trade and investment as possible." When asked for Clinton's current position on free trade and the TPP, a spokesman pointed CNN to what the former secretary of state wrote in her book. Iowans 'absolutely sure' Hillary Clinton is running Republicans have picked up on the problem for Clinton and have started to point out her changes in opinion. Before Clinton went to Michigan last year to endorse candidates, America Rising PAC, an anti-Clinton communication and research group, questioned Clinton's "phony populism on free trade." "A peculiar thing happens every time Hillary Clinton decides to run for President," the group said in a blog post. "Her views on free trade start sliding left and she calls for a 'time out' on free trade agreements." These Republican attacks - and more likely to come - show the political problem Clinton faces. If she runs for President, she will either have to woo labor and liberal leaders by blasting agreements like TPP and NAFTA and risk looking like she is backtracking on her State Department years. Or she can embrace deals that she made at State and risk what has become eager liberal anger. TPP likely to be left for next president For all the comparisons, though, the TPP would actually be a much different -- and more comprehensive -- trade deal than NAFTA was. Older pacts have mostly dealt with moving goods into and out of countries. But in the 12-country Pacific Rim deal, U.S. negotiators are pushing for rules that would help companies -- especially pharmaceutical drug-makers -- extend their patents and copyrights for much longer periods, keeping generic medicines off poorer foreign countries' markets. They're working to create a tribunal that would give corporations a venue to challenge whether governments' rules and regulations are in line with their obligations under the trade deal. And they're crafting chapters on environmental protections, labor rights and the digital economy. They're trying to prevent countries from restricting where data servers can be located, or what data companies can move across international borders. The Trans-Pacific Partnership, like NAFTA, includes Canada and Mexico. But the deal's real pearl is Japan -- a potentially huge market for U.S. food, natural gas and more. It's a wealthy economy that American businesses haven't been able to crack. But Japan is bogged down by its own political challenges. The country's agricultural interests are especially influential in its legislature, and they've resisted opening their ports to American rice, beef, pork and wheat -- which, in turn, has infuriated U.S. farmers. For more than a year, it's been a huge sticking point that has delayed progress on the deal. That's why the Trans-Pacific Partnership debate isn't going away. Trade agreements take years to come together. Even after the presidents and prime ministers announce they've struck a deal, the wording must be scrubbed and translated into each country's language -- a process that takes months. Then legislatures, where anger about their lack of a role in the negotiations has often simmered for years, might insist on changes. Different countries' elections and changing political tides can complicate things even more. For some senators, the minority will be more fun The best-case scenario for Obama is that the Trans-Pacific Partnership could be approved by Congress at the very end of his presidency. And that's if a deal can be struck soon -- which is unlikely. Negotiators already blew their goal of reaching an agreement in 2012. Then they missed their own deadline in 2013. And again in 2014. Much more likely is that the next president will have decisions to make about whether and how to finalize the negotiations -- or, at least, whether to sign the deal. 
Kenansville, North Carolina (CNN)Donald Trump bragged Tuesday there's "nothing like" using other people's money, hours after a report said he used more than $250,000 from his charitable organization to litigate lawsuits against his business interests. Trump, while calling for building safe zones in Syria financed by Gulf states, vaunted the benefits of doing business with "OPM." "It's called OPM. I do it all the time in business. It's called other people's money," Trump said. "There's nothing like doing things with other people's money because it takes the risk -- you get a good chunk out of it and it takes the risk." His comments came on the heels of a Washington Post report published earlier Tuesday, which called attention to Trump's funneling of contributions from the Donald J. Trump Foundation to charities in order to settle lawsuits against Trump. Trump has only sparsely contributed to his foundation. Instead, the foundation is largely funded by outside donors -- not Trump himself. Trump did not make those comments in the context of that report on Tuesday. The Republican presidential nominee has frequently lauded the benefits of "OPM," telling his supporters at rallies that he would put the tactic to use for the country's benefit. Trump has frequently called for other countries to chip in larger amounts to help pay for the US military to maintain its bases around the world, in addition to calling for Gulf states like Saudi Arabia to bear a larger financial burden in the fight against ISIS and in building a safe zone to shelter refugees. Trump has called for building a safe zone at the same time as he has stiffly argued against allowing any more Syrian refugees into the US. Even though refugees undergo numerous screenings and a lengthy vetting process that can take more than a year, Trump has argued they could represent a national security threat to the United States. 
Washington (CNN)New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio said Thursday that Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump is wrong in his assessment of stop-and-frisk, a policy that allows police officers to stop and pat down individuals they deem suspicious. "Donald Trump talks about stop-and-frisk like he knows the facts," de Blasio told CNN's Alisyn Camerota on "New Day." "He has had no experience with policing, no experience with public safety." Trump touts stop-and-frisk practice amid black outreach "He should really be careful because if we reinstituted stop-and-frisk all over this country, you'd see a lot more tension between police and communities," added the mayor, a Democrat who is supporting Hillary Clinton for president. If elected, Trump said Wednesday at a Fox News town hall that he hopes to take the controversial policy nationwide to help stem "violence in the black community." "One of the things I'd do ... is I would do stop-and-frisk. I think you have to," Trump said. "We did it in New York, it worked incredibly well and you have to be proactive and, you know, you really help people sort of change their mind automatically." Trump's comments came in response to an audience member's question about reducing "black-on-black crime." But many people in New York's black community have opposed the practice arguing that New York's police disproportionately used the policy to target and harass people of color. After ongoing protests of the policy, a federal judge ruled in 2013 that the NYPD's stop-and-frisk policy violated citizens' constitutional rights. However, the judge did not order an outright ban on the practice, but called for outside oversight and reform. The city under Mayor Michael Bloomberg appealed that ruling, but those efforts were dropped under de Blasio's administration, and the city is participating in an ongoing reform and oversight process, which is supervised by a federal monitor. CORRECTION: An earlier version of this story misstated whether New York City is appealing the federal judge's 2013 ruling on stop-and-frisk. The city appealed the ruling at the time, but has since dropped that effort and is participating in an ongoing reform and oversight process. 
The man charged with bombings in New York and New Jersey will be taken to federal court in Manhattan soon to face federal criminal charges, Attorney General Loretta Lynch said Wednesday. While federal court complaints against Ahmad Rahami were filed in New York and New Jersey Tuesday evening and he also faces state charges in New Jersey, federal prosecutors in New York are set to take the lead in prosecuting Rahami, Lynch signaled in her remarks to an International Bar Association conference. Story Continued Below "In the near future, it is our intention to bring the defendant to the federal District Court for the Southern District of New York, which has jurisdiction over the Manhattan neighborhood where more than 30 innocent people were wounded—and countless others were gravely endangered – by his bombs," Lynch said in prepared remarks released by the Justice Department. "I have full confidence that the U.S. Attorney's Office for the Southern District of New York, led by Preet Bharara, will succeed in bringing the defendant to justice for his heinous actions. And I know that the U.S. Attorney's Office for the District of New Jersey, led by Paul Fishman, will also seek to hold the defendant accountable for his deplorable actions in their district," Lynch added. The head of the office that handles indigent defense in federal courts in New York wrote to the federal magistrate judge assigned to Rahami's case there late Tuesday, urging that the accused be brought to court Wednesday. The letter suggested that Rahami was being subjected to protracted questioning by investigators without the benefit of legal counsel. Rahami has been under guard at a Newark hospital where he was taken after a Monday morning gun battle with police that left the suspect and two police officers wounded. During her speech Wednesday to the international lawyers' group, Lynch also called for calm in the wake of recent shootings of African-American motorists by police in Tulsa and Charlotte. She said the Justice Department's Civil Rights Division has already opened an investigation into the Tulsa shooting and officials are assessing what happened in Charlotte. Protests overnight in Charlotte blocked an interstate highway there and turned violent, with 16 officers injured as well as several demonstrators. “These tragic incidents have once again left Americans with feelings of sorrow, anger and uncertainty. They have once again highlighted – in the most vivid and painful terms – the real divisions that still persist in this nation between law enforcement and communities of color. And in Charlotte, they have once again led to widespread protest. Unfortunately, we saw several instances of violence," Lynch said in her prepared speech. Lynch noted an American tradition of protest against perceived injustice, but she warned that resorting to violence is counterproductive. "Protest is protected by our Constitution and is a vital instrument for raising issues and creating change. But when it turns violent, it undermines the very justice that it seeks to achieve and I urge those demonstrating in Charlotte to remain peaceful in their expressions of protest and concern," the attorney general added.
His wife’s operatives are hunkered down in debate prep, but Bill Clinton is waging a campaign of his own, trying to clear the name of a foundation that has caused controversy in the 2016 race. The former president views the final glitzy meeting of his Clinton Global Initiative — which he will address on Wednesday in an emotional farewell — as his last big opportunity to counter accusations that the philanthropy served as a vehicle for wealthy foreign donors to curry access with his wife’s State Department. Story Continued Below Between his appearances on stage this week, Clinton was still writing the speech; it will be a “personal reflection” on his 15 years at the Clinton Foundation, according to a person familiar with his thinking. He aims to explain how “CGI helped redefine philanthropy.” He also is expected to make an impassioned argument that the foundation has improved lives around the world — a statement he hopes will serve as a powerful rebuke of the controversy that has turned his post-presidential work into a political obstacle for Hillary Clinton, adding to the damaging perception that the Democratic nominee is untrustworthy. Bill Clinton is not expected to mention Donald Trump or even his wife’s campaign, the source said. Instead, he will aim for an optimistic tone and tell the audience that “when you appeal to the best in people, you get the best. And when you appeal to the worst in people, you get the worst.” But with 48 days left in this contest — and voters in focus groups still expressing concern about what they view as inside dealing for foundation donors seeking special access — many Democrats said they were baffled by the former president’s decision to carry on with the conference at all. Trump has seized on the foundation, accusing the Clintons of selling access. And on Monday, the Republican National Committee said the foundation’s “continued acceptance of foreign contributions while [Hillary Clinton] runs for the White House is an unprecedented and unacceptable conflict of interest that undermines her ability to serve.” The foundation in August announced it would no longer accept corporate or foreign contributions if Hillary Clinton wins the White House and that CGI would come to an end regardless of the election outcome. But even allies worried that this year's conference was an unforced error that served only to cede the spotlight to the wrong Clinton just as the Democratic nominee needs to promote her own case to voters. “They would have been better off postponing it this year,” said one member of the Democratic National Committee and a Clinton ally. “The foundation has been a negative this year, with concerns about donors seeking influence and access — why shine light on it right before the debate?” One source close to Bill Clinton said putting it off simply wasn’t an option. "They had no choice,” the ally said. “These things are set up long in advance and usually get good press. They never thought it would be such a problem.” The former president seemed determined to turn it into an opportunity to change the narrative. Bill Clinton, close allies said, has been furious about what he sees as the “smearing” of his life’s work, the AIDS relief and the global fight on behalf of women’s rights overshadowed by questions of where the foundation gets its money. And both Clintons, sources said, have been frustrated that Hillary Clinton's Brooklyn-based campaign has not done enough to explain the philanthropic work the charity does at home and abroad, or that its mission is moral, not financial. Throughout the week, the former president was determined to use what may be his final solo spotlight to regain the moral high ground. "In real life, if somebody tells a lie about you, and I find out it is [a lie], I like you more and them less,” Bill Clinton told NPR earlier this week. “In political life, if they just keep on smearing you — even if it all comes to nothing — people will like you less and won't hold anybody accountable for what they say." Sitting down with CNBC in the middle of the day Tuesday, he added: “I've learned already in this election, some people were just subject to a presumption of guilt just because they were participating.” Hillary Clinton’s campaign went on offense too; it highlighted a Washington Post report that Trump used $258,000 of his foundation’s money for his personal legal defense. “Today has provided a stark contrast between the potentially illegal activities of the Trump Foundation and how the Clinton Foundation is improving millions of lives here in the U.S. and around the world,” said Clinton spokesman Josh Schwerin. “That's a debate we'll have anytime." The showcase gathering, held annually at the Sheraton near Times Square, typically brings together Fortune 500 CEOs, world leaders, celebrities and nonprofit leaders — a high-wattage assembly that, this year, runs counter to the current populist mood across the country. Even the snacks served catered to the limousine liberal set; vegan “energy squares” made of fig, hazelnut and cacao nibs, and multigrain crisps smeared with almond butter and maple syrup, were served between “breakout sessions.” While Bono and former Victoria’s Secret model Doutzen Kroes took the stage on the opening day alongside leaders like Italian Prime Minister Matteo Renzi, the event seemed slightly more toned down than in previous years — and in some ways more like a Clinton friends-and-family reunion. Some of the participants from previous years, including Goldman Sachs CEO Lloyd Blankfein and Coca-Cola CEO Muhtar Kent, declined invitations this year, a source familiar with the planning said. But former Clinton aide Doug Band attended the opening plenary session. Marjorie Mezvinsky, whose son is married to Chelsea Clinton, flashed iPhone photos of her grandchildren to friends. Stalwart allies including former Secretary of State Madeleine Albright, Planned Parenthood CEO Cecile Richards and longtime Clinton friend Melanne Verveer gamely participated in panels, and expressed regret that the organization was winding down. “The decision has been made,” Verveer, a former Clinton White House aide who now heads up the Georgetown Institute for Women, Peace and Security, said of shutting down CGI. “It’s really bittersweet. There's a sense of nostalgia.” Democrats, meanwhile, have been increasingly incensed at what they see as a double standard applied to the two presidential candidates — especially as more revelations come to light about how Trump ran his own foundation. “No one is saying, ‘Why don’t you put your hotels aside, or your money-making enterprises aside,’” said Dan Pfeiffer, a former top aide to President Barack Obama. “For Hillary Clinton, for some reason, helping deal with AIDS in Africa is something that should be put aside.” From the stage, at least, Bill Clinton was careful not to go down the political, or defensive, road. When London Mayor Sadiq Khan tried to bait him into discussing Trump — “It’s no coincidence that some of those involved in the Brexit campaign are involved in another campaign taking place somewhere else this November,” Khan said — Clinton smiled but kept his mouth shut. Instead, he spent most of his time on stage doing what he can’t do at campaign rallies for his wife: talking at length about his own presidency and his own views of the world. “In my home, I have two beautiful, highly unique samples of large rocks that came out of Bosnia,” he said during one panel. “It’s one of the most geologically interesting places on earth.” Even if the discussion was about old rocks, there was a sense of anxiety hanging over the conference. When asked how she felt about the tightening polls, Verveer winced. “Fingers crossed,” she said.
Donald Trump’s campaign, hoping to counter Hillary Clinton’s air assault, is in talks with veteran GOP ad maker Rex Elsass, according to three sources familiar with the discussions. Elsass, according to one of the sources, met with Trump officials in New York City last week. Story Continued Below Elsass has deep connections to the Trump campaign. He previously served as a top strategist to vice presidential nominee Mike Pence, and in 2012 he worked with Trump campaign manager Kellyanne Conway for Missouri Senate candidate Todd Akin, who came under widespread criticism after making controversial remarks about rape. Elsass is a partner at Strategy Group for Media, a firm that has also counted Jim Murphy, Trump’s national political director, as an employee. Trump’s advertising campaign has been led by Jamestown, a prominent political consulting firm with an anti-establishment edge. Two Jamestown employees, Jason Miller and Larry Weitzner, have taken senior roles in the campaign. Also helping to lead the Trump ad effort is Rick Reed, a veteran GOP strategist who assisted the Swift Boat Veterans for Truth campaign against John Kerry in 2004. Discussions about bringing aboard Elsass come as Trump is getting walloped on the airwaves. On Sept. 12, Smart Media Group, a media buying firm that works with the Republican National Committee, detailed in an email to Trump campaign officials how Clinton was outspending the Republican nominee on TV by an astonishing seven-to-one margin. With polling in many battlegrounds suggesting the race is tight, many Republican strategists are concerned that Trump’s lack of commercial spending could pose problems as the contest enters its final seven weeks. The Ohio-based GOP operative has a long history in Republican politics, having worked for a number of presidential candidates over the years. During this year’s primary season, Elsass advised Rand Paul and, following Paul’s departure from the race, John Kasich. In 2012, he worked for Michele Bachmann and Newt Gingrich. Neither Elsass nor a Trump spokesperson responded to requests for comment.
Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton faced off for the first general election debate on Monday night, against the backdrop of tightening polls and sky-high expectations. Here’s how it went down, by the numbers: Number of interruptions (via Pew Research): 51 times — Trump interrupted Clinton Story Continued Below 17 times — Clinton interrupted Trump Number of times Obama’s name was used: 18 times — Even though his lame-duck status is approaching, President Obama still loomed large over the first presidential debate. Number of times Trump said he agreed with Clinton: 6 — Trump said he agrees with her on child care, the need to improve the relationships between communities and the police, the “no fly, no buy” gun control measure, her stance on cyber security, that nuclear weapons pose the greatest threat to the U.S., and that Clinton is an experienced candidate> Number of times Trump said “wrong” during the debate: 12 The total amount of retweets a nearly four-year-old Trump tweet has received: 81, 633 (and growing) —Proving that Trump lied when he said during the debate that he had never said global warming was a hoax created by the Chinese, the tweet was the most retweeted tweet of the entire debate. The amount of Twitter conversation around Trump: 62 percent The amount of Twitter conversation around Clinton: 38 percent
Donald Trump's campaign said Tuesday that his campaign has pulled in $18 million in online donations in the 24 hours after Monday night's debate with Hillary Clinton. ““As a result of Donald Trump’s huge debate win last night, we had a massive fundraising day bringing in more than $18 million.” the Republican presidential nominee's campaign announced. Story Continued Below The Trump campaign raised $70 million in the month of August. This figure trailed Clinton’s fundraising figures by $42 million. Trump's touting of fundraising marks a shift from Trump's primary strategy, where he touted himself as a candidate who, unlike his rivals, would not be beholden to donors. In the general election, however, Trump has shattered Republican records for fundraising from small donors.
Washington (CNN)Rep. Gregory Meeks said Friday that the opening of the Smithsonian National Museum of African American History and Culture is a testament to the progress the United States has made in race relations. "It is an American story, the American story," the New York Democrat told CNN's Alisyn Camerota on "New Day." "It's great for all Americans when you go look at from the beginning of slavery in America to where we are today." "All Americans get to see the progress and contributions that African Americans made to this great country of ours," he added. President Barack Obama and first lady Michelle Obama are scheduled to attend Saturday's opening ceremony where the President will give remarks. Former President George W. Bush and his wife, Laura, are expected to attend as well. Meeks said the museum will allow visitors to see America's effort to make strides in race issues. "I think that for generations yet unborn, people will then get to see the American story and the greatness of it as how it has evolved and continues to evolve in attempting to be a more perfect union," he said. RELATED: Obama says it would be 'personal insult' to legacy if black voters don't back Clinton The congressman's comments about progress come the same week he spoke out about tension between black communities and law enforcement following the fatal shootings of two black men. Terence Crutcher was shot and killed last week in Tulsa, Oklahoma, after his car broke down. The 40-year-old black man raised his hands above his head just before Officer Betty Shelby fatally shot him. Crutcher was unarmed at the time. Meanwhile, multiple police officers and citizens have been injured in Charlotte, North Carolina, this week during protests after the fatal shooting of Keith Lamont Scott by a police officer. Police say Scott was armed at the time he was fatally shot, but his family claims that he was reading a book in his vehicle when police officers approached and shot him. RELATED: Tulsa police officer charged with manslaughter Meeks told Camerota about wanting Congress to pass laws providing more federal funding to train local law enforcement how to deescalate tense situations with citizens. "There are various bills that have already been written that we need to talk about. We need to have hearings on them and then vote them on the floor," Meeks said. "For example, we have to fund more body cameras. Because what we know is when you have a visual view of what's going on, it helps transparency. Because an issue in a lot of cases is 'Is this a matter of transparency?'" Meeks was also part of a delegation that marched to the Department of Justice Thursday to present Attorney General Loretta Lynch with a letter demanding an investigation into the shootings. "We need the Attorney General to act. We need her to act now," he said Thursday at a news conference. "And the members of the Congressional Black Caucus are not going to sit back and do nothing we're going to make sure we're going to push for legislation." 
Seeking to shake up a tight presidential race, Sen. Harry Reid declared Tuesday on the Senate floor that Donald Trump is a “swindler” who is “not as rich as he would have us believe" — as the Nevada Democrat moved to reprise the 2012 strategy that saw him hammer Mitt Romney repeatedly over his tax returns. Several times on Tuesday, the Senate minority leader called out Trump for declining to release his tax returns, suggesting that it’s because those documents would show that Trump has far less wealth than he’s claimed. Trump has said his net worth is $10 billion. Story Continued Below “He was born with an inheritance but lost his daddy’s wealth. … That’s why Donald Trump won’t release his tax returns. That’s certainly one of the reasons, of course: He is not worth nearly as much as he claims to be. That’s a secret he doesn’t want anyone to know,” Reid said in a scathing speech. “He wants everyone to think he’s this big, rich, rich man.” With just a handful of congressional days in session before the election, Reid is unleashing increasingly heated attacks on Trump and Senate Republicans supporting him. Last week, he called Trump a “human leech” and suggested the business mogul is overweight, dropping the kinds of political bombs that most pro-Hillary Clinton Democrats wouldn’t touch. For Reid, there’s less downside than for almost all other high-profile Democratic surrogates: He’s retiring in September and is looking to make as much of a mark on the race as he can. In a sit-down interview on Monday, he emphasized that Trump cannot sustain a charge in the polls that now has him closer than ever to catching Clinton, declaring that “American polling is such a joke.” “I’ve always been a pessimist; that’s just my nature,” Reid said in his office. “Despite my base pessimism, I’m convinced that this election is turning. What Trump has done in the last couple weeks, you can’t overcome that. You can’t do it.” While Reid has previously lit into Trump for his business dealings, his comments about income taxes on Tuesday are reminiscent of Reid’s efforts to paint Romney as a tax dodger in 2012, when Reid repeatedly came to the floor to declare that Romney did not pay any income taxes. Although his claims were ultimately unproven, Reid has never shown any remorse for his attacks on Romney, and in fact on Tuesday showed that he believes the tactics are effective enough to use again on Trump. Quoting Trump, Reid said that the GOP presidential nominee’s personal wealth fluctuates with the financial markets — which Reid said is cover for a man he said would be “scammer in chief.” “Simply put, Trump is faking his net worth because he doesn’t want us to know that he’s not a good businessman,” Reid said. “Since 2008, Trump has not donated a single penny to his own charity … does he have money to donate? He says he does, but he doesn’t.” The Trump campaign did not immediately respond to a request for comment. And Republicans aren’t exactly rushing to shield Trump from Reid’s attacks; many, in fact, have said that Trump should release his tax returns in accordance with presidential tradition. “I’m not going to comment about the presidential race or what our nominee should or should not do,” Senate Majority Whip John Cornyn (R-Texas) said Tuesday morning. Last week, Trump responded to Reid’s months-long string of attacks on him from the Senate floor, telling The Washington Post that Reid should “start working out again with his rubber workout pieces,” a reference to the devastating eye injury Reid sustained while exercising in 2015. Reid then went on a parade of media hits to strike back at Trump last week. In the interview on Monday, Reid said that because of his injury and his use of a cane, he is “pretty sensitive” to Trump’s mockery of New York Times reporter Serge Kovaleski, who has a disability. “He denigrates people who are handicapped. He says that he thinks I should go out and do some more exercise, suggesting that I should blind myself in my other eye,” Reid said. “I don’t think that’s really so good.”
Hillary Clinton campaign manager Robby Mook said Donald Trump “spiraled out at the end of the debate” Monday night as faced tough questions from moderator Lester Holt and attacks from the former secretary of state. “We saw him to begin to unwind and become unhinged. And as you pointed out, by the end of the debate, that temperament that we're all concerned about, that inability to, you know, think clearly and make good judgments, it just came out,” Mook said of Trump’s performance in an interview on CNN’s “New Day.” Story Continued Below “You know, he just doesn't have the temperament to be president of the United States. You think about if Donald Trump were to sit in the situation room for an hour or 90 minutes and unwind this way,” he added. “I mean, I think it was a huge warning sign. I think that's why, two to one, people think Hillary won this debate.” Perhaps the biggest blow landed by Clinton Monday night came late in the debate, when she attacked Trump’s history of derogatory remarks against women. In a post-debate spin room interview, Trump said he had considered responding by raising Bill Clinton’s history of marital infidelities but opted against it because the couple’s daughter, Chelsea Clinton, was in the room and Trump though such a comment would be disrespectful. Tuesday morning, Mook dismissed that potential line of attack from Trump, as well as the Manhattan billionaire’s threat that he may use it in subsequent debates. The Clinton campaign manager said Trump was reverting to his primary debate form as a bully because he was lacking on substance on the debate stage. “You know, Donald Trump is a great reality television star, that's where his career really went to the next step. This is -- it's such an obvious dodge. He spiraled out at the end of the debate and so, of course, he wants to bully,” Mook said. “And so he wants to talk about the supposed indiscretions. The American people want to hear how someone's going to create jobs, how they’re going to help them afford education and health care. And he came with no plans. He came with no substance and he had no command of the issues. So this is his way of wallpapering that.” “Trump wants to talk about anything but the actual issues that people care about and that's because he didn't prepare,” he added. “He didn't show up ready to talk about the things that matter in people's lives, and it's unfortunate. We'll see what he does next.”
While Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump prepare for their first debate on Monday, aides in both their campaigns are expressing concern over how it will all go down. The Trump campaign’s major concern: the candidate’s limited preparation. The Clinton camp’s biggest worry: that the Republican presidential nominee will be asked softer questions than Clinton. “My biggest concern continues to be a low bar set for him on expectations,” Clinton’s communications director Jennifer Palmieri told reporters during a flight to Orlando, Florida, today, referring to the debate at Hofstra University in Hempstead, New York, on Sept. 26 — the first of three face-offs between the two White House hopefuls. “People accommodate the questions and lower the bar on their questions to suit the candidate in front of them, and that’s what’s happened with Trump in the past. And they ask Hillary Clinton a set of much harder questions,” Palmieri said. “They ask him a set of easier questions because he has not put forward detailed ... material you can parry him on.” Her concern stems from what the campaign considers to have been unfair treatment of Clinton during a recent NBC News national security forum that featured both candidates fielding questions from a moderator and audience members in separate segments. Clinton has been preparing for the debate for weeks, and she has no public campaign events planned for the rest of the week so she can continue studying. Aides say the former secretary of state — who is known for doing her homework — has been poring over briefing books and practicing in mock debates with a Trump stand-in. She has been studying footage of Trump’s past debates. From this, Palmieri said, they believe the Republican nominee tends to do better in multicandidate settings, where he can hang back and pick his moments. The campaign is also concerned about Trump’s unpredictable nature. “You’re not sure who is going to show up. He may be aggressive or laid back,” Palmieri said. And while it is common for campaigns to lower expectations before debates and other high-profile events, sources told ABC News that Trump’s preparation for the 90-minute one-on-one battle has been slim — so much so that his senior staff has become concerned about his lack of focus. While Trump has boasted that he will win Monday’s debate, senior sources said he has not delved into policy or participated in mock debates. During his Sunday meetings in Bedminster, New Jersey — where he huddles with campaign chief Steve Bannon, campaign manager Kellyanne Conway, Roger Ailes and other advisers, including members of his family — the prep has become more of a discussion of topics and themes and not specific in nature. (Those sessions often become storytelling sessions rather than actual, intense preparation, according to senior sources.) Trump, sources said, was given an iPad loaded with footage of old Clinton debates. Unlike Clinton, who is spending almost the entire rest of the week preparing for Monday, Trump has a busy campaign schedule this week, with no large blocks of time carved out for debate prep. Aides said his debate sessions planned for this weekend have been moved to Trump Tower in New York City, away from his Bedminster estate and golf course, to help him focus. The Trump campaign recently added a Saturday evening event in Roanoke, Virginia. ABC News’ Tom Llamas and John Santucci contributed to this report. 
White House Press Secretary Josh Earnest said President Barack Obama will spend Monday night like he does most other Monday nights in the fall, watching TV while he works in the White House residence. Except instead of Monday Night Football, Earnest said Obama’s TV will be tuned to Monday night’s presidential debate. Story Continued Below “I anticipate that this fall Monday evening will be similar to fall Monday evenings in the White House residence, which is that the president will be working tonight with the television on in the background,” Earnest said at the news briefing. “I think the one difference will be instead of Monday night football, there’ll be a little more politics being discussed in the context of the debate.” Asked what advice the president might have for his former secretary of state, Earnest reiterated what Obama told ABC’s Robin Roberts in an interview last week, that Clinton should be herself and explain to voters her motivations for running for office. Asked what advice the president might have for Trump, Earnest replied that “even if we did, I’m confident it would go unheard.” The press secretary said he was not aware of any planned phone calls between Obama and Clinton today and added that the two had most recently spoken two weeks ago. Earnest said the president has high expectations for Clinton based on his “experience of going head-to-head with Secretary Clinton in the context of a debate and she performed quite well in those settings,” adding that “I think the president expects her to do the same tonight.” “This is an important moment in the campaign, and anybody that’s worked on a campaign at any level understands how significant candidate debates are. And it’s an opportunity for the candidates to square off and to speak for themselves in answering questions and describing their experience and their vision and their priorities,” Earnest said. “Look, there hasn’t been a lot of space for that in the context of this presidential election, so this is a rather unique opportunity for that kind of discussion to take place. And I think people are quite interested to tune in and see how the individual candidates handle themselves in this setting.” Regarding polls showing a tightening presidential race, Earnest said the White House has not been monitoring polls but suggested that a tight campaign might generate increased interest from American voters. “If reports about tightening polls convince more people to tune into the debate and educate themselves about the positions taken by the individual candidates and impress upon voters the need to be engaged in the political debate in this country, that’s a good thing.”
United Nations (CNN)President Barack Obama took to the most prominent international stage Tuesday to deliver a stark warning to American voters of the dire global consequences they face should they embrace isolationism and ultra-nationalism in November. Never mentioning Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump by name, the President's final address to the United Nations General Assembly was at heart an impassioned rebuke of the GOP candidate's policies on trade, immigration and multiculturalism -- and a defense of liberalism and tolerance -- delivered 49 days before votes are cast for his replacement. He painted a dark picture of the future awaiting Americans, and the world, if the forces of "aggressive nationalism" or "crude populism" win out. And he specifically inveighed against building a wall -- a centerpiece of Trump's proposal on border security. "A nation ringed by walls would only imprison itself," Obama declared to the assembled representatives of the UN's member states. Gone were Obama's idealistic appeals to bring about a world free of nuclear weapons and an agenda focused on peace, as were his previous UN addresses. The "hope and change" of his argument as a presidential candidate himself was also replaced by exhortations against a future filled with chaos. "Time and again human beings have believed they finally arrived at a period of enlightenment, only to repeat cycles of conflict and suffering. Perhaps that's our fate," Obama suggested. "We have to remember the choices of individual human beings led to repeated world war," Obama said. "Each of us as leaders, each nation can choose to reject those who appeal to our worst impulses and embrace those who appeal to our best. For we have shown that we can choose a better history." He pointed to growing divisions and discontent at home that challenge those decisions, and noted that the shortcomings of globalization had created "an uncertainty and unease and strife" that required acknowledgement, but not turning inward. "I believe that at this moment we all face a choice," Obama said. "We can choose to press forward with a better model of cooperation and integration or we can retreat into a world sharply divided and ultimately in conflict along age-old lines of nation and tribe and race and religion. I want to suggest to you today that we must go forward and not back." It was Obama's eighth and final address to the UN body, which enthusiastically welcomed him in 2009 after he moved to reverse the unilateral approach of his predecessor George W. Bush. In his speech that year, Obama vowed to work within international bodies to confront the world's crises while pushing an agenda combating climate change and nuclear non-proliferation. But in the intervening years, the harsh realities of diplomacy settled in, both for Obama and the UN. The organization's inability to stem suffering in Syria and Ukraine laid bare the continued struggles to combat breaches of international law, while Obama's own work toward combating violent extremists has failed to stop terrorist groups from committing atrocities. Obama's address Tuesday reflected those realities. He drew titters from the collection of world leaders and diplomats in the high-ceilinged General Assembly hall when he noted that "at times both America's adversaries and some of our allies believe that all problems were either caused by Washington or could be solved by Washington. And perhaps too many in Washington believe that, as well." He made scant mention of individual world flash points, choosing instead to offer a more thematic recap of his foreign agenda. "The world is by many measures less violent and more prosperous than ever before. And yet our societies are filled with uncertainty and unease and strife," Obama said. "Despite enormous progress, as people lose trust in institutions, governing becomes more difficult and tensions between nations become more quick to surface." RELATED: Clinton, Trump meet world leaders for very different reasons Obama continued his tradition at the UN of acknowledging areas where the US has fallen short in its practice of democracy, saying his country and other developed nations must set a better example for emerging democracies. Citing the pervasive role of money in politics, entrenched party allegiances and a patchwork of voting laws, Obama said it was up to long-established nations to show the way forward. "Those of us who believe in democracy, we need to speak out forcefully. Because both the facts and history is on our side," Obama said. "We better strive harder to set a better example at home." Obama used his own efforts to help revive a stalled economy as an example of US leadership during his tenure, saying other countries would be wise to follow his lead of going after corruption and unfair tax policies. He also cited the deal with Iran to curtain its nuclear program, and reopening of ties with Cuba and Myanmar, as examples of a successful global approach. RELATED: Global leaders at UN tackle world's worst to-do list But the array of places where Obama's approach hasn't yielded the outcomes he projected during his first appearance here in 2009 were also unavoidable. That includes his inability to negotiate peace between Israel and the Palestinians -- a major topic in his first four UN addresses that was entirely absent during last year's speech. This year, the President took issue with both sides' actions toward one another. He criticized Israeli settlements, saying the only path to Mideast peace will come when the two sides reconcile deeply held differences. Palestinians must "reject incitement and recognize the legitimacy of Israel," Obama said. But he also said peace won't come until "Israel recognizes it cannot permanently occupy and settle Palestinian land." Obama plans to meet Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu on Wednesday to "discuss the need for genuine advancement of a two-state solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict in the face of deeply troubling trends on the ground," according to White House Press Secretary Josh Earnest. Another persisting crisis -- Russia's continued incursion into Ukraine -- also drew Obama's attention Tuesday. "In a world that left the age of empire behind, we see Russia attempting to recover lost glory through force," Obama said. "If Russia continues to interfere in the affairs of its neighbors, it may be popular at home. It may fuel nationalist fervor for a time. Over time, it's also going to diminish its stature and make its borders less secure." Indeed, many of his harshest warnings were aimed at global government practices that damage democracy and liberalism and called for the rejection of strongmen, authoritarian and tribalism. "There appears to be growing contest between authoritarianism and liberalism right now," he told the assembled leaders. "And I want everybody to understand, I am not neutral in that contest." 
Frustration is growing within Donald Trump’s campaign over the Republican nominee’s yawning money gap with Democratic rival Hillary Clinton -- just as the presidential race heads into its final fall stretch. Trump’s top advisers have held a series of tense conversations in recent days about how to close a fundraising hole that’s grown to over $200 million – a deficit that’s led Trump to essentially cede the TV airwaves to his Democratic rival. The discussions, which were relayed by more than a half-dozen sources, have veered into finger pointing, with some participants pinning the blame on the Republican National Committee or on Steven Mnuchin, Trump’s national finance chairman and a newcomer to the political scene. Story Continued Below The shortfall is putting Trump at a substantial disadvantage during the remaining few weeks of the campaign, as focus shifts to the clinical – and costly -- process of bringing voters out to the polls. “Between him dissing the donors in the primary and donors being more concerned about Congress, as they should be, it’s a significant gap for him to close,” said former GOP Rep. Vin Weber, a prominent Washington lobbyist and fundraiser. “I have to believe the Clinton campaign will know how to spend their money effectively during the last 45 days.” Last Thursday, Trump’s top brass, including Mnuchin, chief operating officer Eli Miller, Donald Trump Jr., son-in-law Jared Kushner gathered in Trump Tower with Republican National Committee Chief of Staff Katie Walsh. At one point, Dallas investor Gentry Beach, a Trump fundraiser who has long been one of Donald Trump Jr.’s closest friends, launched into what four sources who were present described as a pointed critique of the RNC, which he said was coming up short. Gentry asked why he didn’t have access to the RNC’s donor data, two of the sources said -- implying that the committee was deliberately withholding critical information. To those assembled, the critique wasn’t entirely new – for weeks, tensions between Trump and the establishment-minded RNC have simmered over resources and the direction of the campaign. While some Trump aides argue that the committee has been less than helpful, many within the RNC are convinced the New York businessman is waging a lackluster campaign. But Kushner, a wealthy real estate executive and New York Observer publisher who has taken on an increasingly influential role in the campaign, pushed back forcefully – telling Beach in no uncertain terms that the Dallas investor didn’t know what he was talking about. Kushner, who is regularly in touch with Walsh and party chairman Reince Priebus, argued that the committee had been proven itself to be responsive. He reserved particular praise for Walsh. In an email, Beach disputed the characterization of the exchange but declined to go into specifics. An RNC spokesperson did not respond to a request for comment. The tensions spilled over into a Monday conference call that stretched on for nearly an hour. Roy Bailey, a Dallas insurance executive and longtime GOP fundraiser who is close to former New York City Mayor Rudy Giuliani, urged the campaign to reach out to the large number of Republican donors who remain on the sidelines. At no point did Bailey explicitly attack Mnuchin, but three sources on the call said his critique was implicit – and clear: The campaign was failing to take the routine, obvious steps. Mnuchin pushed back. Yes, he’d be happy to contact still-uncommitted contributors. But the situation was complex. There were a number of major GOP donors who were aligned with the establishment and simply wouldn’t give to Trump, so why waste the effort? The discussion went on for a while longer, with Bailey arguing that new polls showing a tightening race could get some people to open their wallets. That’s when Woody Johnson jumped in. By that point, the call had gone on for nearly 45 minutes, and Johnson – the billionaire owner of the New York Jets – had had enough. Addressing Bailey directly, Johnson said that the best way to win over uncommitted donors was by contacting them, not sitting on conference calls. Then, the Jets owner abruptly hung up. Bailey did not respond to a request for comment, and a Johnson representative declined to discuss his role on the call. Reached on Friday, Mnuchin disputed the notion that disagreements had cropped up. “The campaign has an amazing relationship with the RNC,” he said. “We have been operating as one unified team for the past five months and achieved amazing success in all aspects of our fundraising.” The flare-up comes at a critical juncture in the campaign, as both sides turn their attention to voter turnout. Clinton has used her formidable financial advantage to significantly out-organize Trump, investing seven times the amount of money on TV ads and opening up dozens more swing-state field offices than her Republican opponent. Fundraising reports released this week painted a stark picture: While Clinton had raised $373 million to date, Trump had taken in $165 million. Particularly concerning for Trump were revelations this week that Las Vegas casino mogul Sheldon Adelson, one of the Republican Party’s biggest donors, had decided to direct just $5 million toward electing the GOP presidential nominee. Adelson, who’d once been expected to invest as much as $100 million in Trump, is instead focusing the vast majority of his political giving on down-ballot races. In the days since Monday’s call, and Johnson’s abrupt signoff, other members of Trump’s finance circle have been stewing over Bailey’s remarks. Many of them believe they’ve made the best out of a bad situation, pointing out that in the face of ongoing resistance from many of the party’s top donors and lacking the infrastructure of past GOP presidential nominees, they’ve managed to fund a national campaign. They also argue that the campaign has made serious strides in fundraising. Next week, it will hold two high-dollar events in New York City, one which will feature Ivanka Trump and the other that will be hosted by Trump and his vice presidential nominee, Mike Pence. And on Tuesday, the day after the first debate, Trump’s fundraisers will convene at Trump Tower to hold a “national call day” in hopes of winning over still-uncommitted donors. The campaign, tapping into Trump’s popularity among blue collar voters, has also developed a vaunted small-dollar operation that has raised around $100 million from contributors who’ve given $200 or less. Some of those helping Trump raise money were quick to defend Mnuchin, an ex-Goldman Sachs executive and former film producer who has far less political experience than his counterparts on previous presidential campaigns. They noted that Trump did not hold his first major fundraiser until late May, long after when nominees typically begin their pursuit of big-dollar donors. "Given the totality of circumstances and the timing of the race, Steve has done a heroic job and he is one of the smartest people I have met on a campaign,” said Anthony Scaramucci, a Wall Street investor and Republican fundraiser who is helping to organize next week’s national call day. “Which is why he was probably smart enough to have never done this before.”
Betty Shelby, a white Tulsa police officer accused of fatally shooting an unarmed black man, turned herself into the Tulsa County Jail early this morning, and is now out on bond. She is accused of fatally shooting 40-year-old Terence Crutcher last Friday night. Shelby was arrested at 1 a.m. CT today for first-degree manslaughter and she was released less than 30 minutes later on $50,000 bond.  Her first court date is scheduled for Sept. 30. "Officer Shelby, although now charged, is presumed to be innocent under the law until a judge or jury determines otherwise," the Tulsa County District Attorney's Office said.  If she is found guilty, first-degree manslaughter carries a prison sentence of at least four years, according to the Tulsa County District Attorney's Office.  Shelby has not been fired from the force, the Tulsa Police Department told ABC News. Now that she’s been charged, the department said it will afford her full due process, and after the trial, the department will complete an internal affairs review and then a determination will be made regarding her employment. She is currently on unpaid leave but was originally put on paid administrative leave until the charge was filed.        After Shelby came across Crutcher's SUV in the middle of a two-lane roadway while it was still running, Crutcher ignored dozens of commands Shelby gave him, according to her attorney Scott Wood. She shot him as he allegedly tried to reach his arm into the open driver's side window. Crutcher's family attorneys maintain that the window was up, pointing to the blood spattered on it when he was shot. According to an affidavit by an investigator with the Tulsa County District Attorney's Office, Shelby reacted "unreasonably by escalating the situation from a confrontation" with Crutcher. Shelby became "emotionally involved" to the point that she overreacted, the affidavit states, adding that she was "not able to see any weapons or bulges indicating a weapon was present."  On Tuesday, days before her arrest, Wood told ABC News that Shelby "is very, very distraught about ... the fact that she has taken a human life. She said the other day in her interview with homicide detectives, 'I was never so scared in my life as in that moment right then.'" "But, at the same time she wants the Crutcher family to know she meant no ill will – this was not something that was done out of hate or anger," Wood added. "She stopped there that day to try and help somebody. Things didn't go the way they should have. He continued, "Her actions were objectively reasonable, and she did what she had been trained to do. I don’t think criminal charges would be justified in this scenario." Wood did not immediately respond to ABC News' request for comment today.  Damario Solomon-Simmons, the attorney for Crutcher family, said it was "apparent" that Shelby had to be charged because "a crime had been committed." "We are happy that charges were brought," Solomon-Simmons said in a press conference. "But, let me be clear. The family wants and deserves full justice, and full justice requires not just charges but a vigorous prosecution and a conviction to those who shot and killed Terence for no reason." "We're going to break the chain of police brutality," he said, calling the charge against Shelby a "small victory." ABC News' Clayton Sandell and Julia Jacobo contributed to this report.
11/19/16, 3:14 PM CET BY Chris Spillane So is anti-establishment message of Nigel Farage, the Labour leader said. 11/19/16, 1:55 PM CET BY Sarah Wheaton Alumni of the Obama White House spent days mourning Trump’s win. Now they’re ready to fight. 11/19/16, 11:37 AM CET BY Chris Spillane Dick Schoof: ‘Chance of attack in the Netherlands is real.’ 11/19/16, 10:38 AM CET BY Chris Spillane Government could focus on starting the process of leaving the bloc sooner. 11/19/16, 10:13 AM CET BY Benjamin Oreskes Diplomats say the president-elect already has a playbook to undermine the global body. 11/19/16, 10:01 AM CET BY Michael Crowley and Nahal Toosi Flynn, Bannon represent ‘Islamophobic’ thinking of the type rejected by Bush and Obama, critics say. 11/19/16, 5:25 AM CET BY Michael Kruse The blue-collar workers who put Donald Trump in the White House are ready for him to deliver. How much time will they give him? 11/19/16, 5:20 AM CET BY Ryan Heath, Tara Palmeri, Harry Cooper and Quentin Ariès  11/18/16, 9:09 PM CET BY Harry Cooper A Polish political party’s links to a pan-European group raise questions about funding. 11/18/16, 6:31 PM CET BY Tom McTague Signs that Britain’s political class is coming to terms with June’s EU referendum. 11/18/16, 6:26 PM CET BY Hortense Goulard Conservative MEP denounced Juncker’s efforts to drum up support for Schulz as ‘outrageous.’ 11/18/16, 5:31 PM CET BY Ivo Oliveira Drawing the top stories around the globe. 11/18/16, 4:55 PM CET BY Cynthia Kroet Italians are likely to reject prime minister’s reform package in next month’s vote. 11/18/16, 4:48 PM CET BY Elana Schor, Kyle Cheney and Louis Nelson The president-elect starts building out his administration with loyalists. 11/18/16, 4:01 PM CET BY Nicholas Vinocur Left-wingers hope that by backing Alain Juppé, they will see off two political enemies. 11/18/16, 3:15 PM CET BY Cynthia Kroet Jens Stoltenberg did not mention the total number or reasons for the requests. 11/18/16, 3:02 PM CET BY Florian Eder and Janosch Delcker Wird Martin Schulz die SPD in den Bundestagswahlkampf führen? Oder schafft er es, doch noch einmal EU-Parlamentspräsident zu werden? Er muss sich bald entscheiden. 11/18/16, 2:34 PM CET BY Anthony Skinner Syrian refugees are pawns in Turkish president’s pursuit of power. 11/18/16, 2:33 PM CET BY Charlie Cooper Shadow Brexit secretary ‘seriously pissed off’ at colleague’s comments. 11/18/16, 2:33 PM CET BY Cynthia Kroet German chancellor is ‘championing the interests of Europe,’ Witold Waszczykowski said. 11/18/16, 12:58 PM CET BY Cynthia Kroet Nikola Gruevski stepped down in January over a wire tapping scandal. 11/18/16, 12:48 PM CET BY Barbara Surk Jens Stoltenberg said he had a ‘good talk’ with the president-elect. 11/18/16, 12:35 PM CET BY Esther King Majority of those who failed to gain international asylum come from the Balkan states. 11/18/16, 11:48 AM CET BY Esther King Immigration is what keeps the country running, says pro-EU Lord. 11/18/16, 10:57 AM CET BY Esther King Conditions at offshore detention center for refugees are ‘cruel, inhuman and degrading,’ said François Crépeau. 11/18/16, 9:36 AM CET BY Esther King Foreign Minister Linas Linkevičius warned that Vladimir Putin could use transition period in Baltics, Syria. 11/18/16, 8:55 AM CET BY MADELINE CONWAY Former ambassador to the UN says there are ways of supporting the opposition that does not involve the use of American military force. 11/18/16, 8:39 AM CET BY Cristiano Lima Her presence is likely to raise fresh concerns about potential conflicts of interest. 11/18/16, 8:35 AM CET BY Bryan Bender The retired lieutenant general’s hardline views on Islam — as well as laudatory statements about Russia — have made him a lightning rod, as did his strident attacks on Hillary Clinton during the campaign. 11/18/16, 5:33 AM CET BY Nicholas Vinocur The center-right’s first ever presidential primary looked all over. Now it’s wide open. 11/18/16, 5:25 AM CET BY Tim King The Günther Oettinger controversies are tainting this European Commission by intimate association. 11/18/16, 12:17 AM CET BY Nahal Toosi Much of Europe is alarmed over what Trump’s presidency could augur. 11/17/16, 11:52 PM CET BY Shane Goldmacher and Andrew Restuccia ‘We feel way ahead of schedule and never in a rush to do the wrong thing,’ said campaign manager Kellyanne Conway. 11/17/16, 9:42 PM CET BY Jacopo Barigazzi Maltese interior minister not impressed with Bratislava’s migration plan. 11/17/16, 9:33 PM CET BY Edward-Isaac Dovere In Berlin, the president warned his successor that his divisive campaign style won’t wear well in the Oval Office. 11/17/16, 8:24 PM CET BY Janosch Delcker US President hopes Trump won’t ‘simply take a Realpolitik approach.’ 11/17/16, 8:21 PM CET BY Hortense Goulard European Parliament president will only accept foreign minister role if he is also the SPD candidate for the top job. 11/17/16, 8:18 PM CET BY Konstantin Richter Germans, of all people, are now called on to be bulwarks of democracy. 11/17/16, 8:06 PM CET BY Paul Dallison and Esther King Euroskeptic party stands accused of breaking rules on spending EU funds. 11/17/16, 7:16 PM CET BY Brent Griffiths  11/17/16, 6:31 PM CET BY Maïa de La Baume Brussels faults Ankara for ‘neglecting and undermining’ democracy and the rule of law. 11/17/16, 6:27 PM CET BY Louis Nelson  11/17/16, 5:47 PM CET BY Cynthia Kroet Jean-Marie Le Pen should receive €15,000 because he was prevented from carrying out his duties. 11/17/16, 4:57 PM CET BY Carter Stoddard Net debt has ballooned to £338 million, and currency fluctuations are partly to blame. 11/17/16, 4:34 PM CET BY Laurens Cerulus In finally passing her surveillance bill, Britain’s PM just made Brexit even more complicated. 11/17/16, 4:13 PM CET BY Hortense Goulard French prime minister called for more European integration amid rising nationalism. 11/17/16, 3:23 PM CET BY Cynthia Kroet Former European Council president joins forces with Flemish singer. 11/17/16, 2:53 PM CET BY Paul Dallison Corey Lewandowski said president-elect will work closely with Theresa May, with no need for UKIP leader as a go-between. 11/17/16, 2:37 PM CET BY Cynthia Kroet Freedom Party leader’s comments on Moroccans living in the Netherlands were ‘unnecessarily offensive.’ 11/17/16, 2:11 PM CET BY Esther King Nigel Farage’s party stands accused of breaking rules on spending EU funds. Iceland Foods has 800 stores around Britain | Adrian Dennis/AFP via Getty Images By Cynthia Kroet 9/23/16, 4:31 PM CET Iceland, the country, is considering legal action against Iceland, the British supermarket chain, over the use of its name, according to U.K. media. The Icelandic foreign ministry said it doesn’t want the retailer to give up its brand, but wants to make sure it does not stand in the way of Icelandic firms that want to register the name “Iceland” in the EU, the Independent reports Friday. A spokesman for the foreign ministry said legal action was “being looked into.” “We are looking for a ‘live and let live’ outcome,” said Jon Asbergsson, managing director of Promote Iceland, an agency linked to the Icelandic foreign ministry. Iceland Foods, which has 800 stores across Britain, has been in business since 1970. “We are not aware that our use of the Iceland name has ever caused any confusion with Iceland the country,” a spokesperson for the chain said. “We didn’t make any objections in the beginning, as we were never going to be running any supermarkets,” Asbergsson said. “But over the course of the years they have been registering the name in several other categories and companies that have Iceland in the name.”  © 2016 POLITICO SPRL Log in to access content and manage your profile. If you do not have a login you can register here.
Washington (CNN)The cast of "The West Wing" is back -- but this time, instead of the fictional Jed Bartlet, they're backing a different Democrat for president. Members of the massively popular NBC drama will appear with Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton at several events in Ohio on Saturday and Sunday. Actors Richard Schiff, Allison Janney, Bradley Whitford, Dulé Hill, Joshua Malina and Mary McCormack will make campaign stops in the Mahoning Valley, Cleveland, Sandusky and Toledo areas on Saturday, and in the Dayton and Columbus areas on Sunday. Joss Whedon's Avengers take shots at Trump in get out the vote video The actors will talk about why they're supporting Clinton and encourage the public to register to vote, according to a campaign statement. This isn't the first time "West Wing" -- the plot of which centers on a Democratic presidential administration -- clashes with real life. Janney, who played White House press secretary C.J. Cregg, made an unexpected appearance in the White House press briefing room in April. The surprised press corps had been expecting actual White House spokesman Josh Earnest for their usual press briefing. The Emmy Award-winning show has been off the air since 2006, but remains popular even a decade later. 
(CNN)Even if their preferred candidate wins, a new poll released Wednesday found that supporters of Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton will feel more relief than excitement. The findings from the Pew Research Center revealed widespread disenchantment toward this year's presidential contest among American voters. Majorities of voters say they are frustrated (57%) and disgusted (55%) with the campaign, dwarfing those who say they are interested (31%), optimistic (15%) and excited (10%). Those lukewarm attitudes even extend to backers of the two major party nominees. Only 25% of Clinton supporters say they would feel excited if she were to win. There was little more enthusiasm among Trump supporters; just 28% would be excited if the GOP nominee triumphs in November. But many more Clinton supporters, 68%, say they would feel relieved if she were to win. Ditto for Trump supporters, 61% of whom say they would also feel relief if he wins. According to Pew, a mere 11% of voters overall say they would feel excited if Trump were to win, virtually the same number (12%) who would be excited if the former secretary of state is victorious. The race between Clinton and Trump represents a battle between two of the least liked major party candidates in history, and Pew's findings are hardly the first to show that voters are largely disappointed with both. A Washington Post/ABC News poll last month found Clinton and Trump to be the two most unpopular presidential candidates in decades. The Pew Research Center report is based on a random sample of 3,941 registered voters who are members of the Center's American Trends Panel. Respondents took the survey between August 16 and September 12 online or by mail, and were originally recruited via nationally representative telephone surveys. Results among registered voters have a margin of sampling error of 2.6 percentage points. 
Donald Trump Jr. defended comparing the candy Skittles to Syrian refugees Thursday, saying he was surprised by the reaction his tweet caused and explained he was simply making a metaphor "for risk and probability." “We have to be careful about those things,” he said in video posted to social media by CNN. Story Continued Below When asked if he’s concerned about being a distraction for the campaign, he said, “I’m not trying to be a distraction, I’m trying to point out things that have to be said, I think,” "People will today make what they want of anything, and they see the worse in everything, and they look for a subtext that doesn’t exist,” he said from a campaign stop in Boise, adding, “For me, you know, I guess I’m a straightforward guy. You know? I don’t deal in micro-aggressions where it takes a special kind of person to find whatever message they’re looking for.” He further defended his controversial remarks by saying, “If a metaphor offends someone, I can understand that and maybe that’s the world we live in today, but I’m not comparing someone to candy, I’m using it as a – it’s a statistical thing. We have to be careful who let into this country. You’ve seen what’s going on in Europe – and this is not just about terrorists, it’s about the rape statistics that have gone on there.” On Monday, Trump, Jr. tweeted a photo of a bowl of skittles captioned, “If I had a bowl of skittles and told you three would kill you. Would you take a handful? That’s our Syrian refugee problem.” A large social media backlash ensued, and he was heavily criticized for likening refugees to the fruit candy. Skittles parent company Wrigley also denounced the tweet.
The campaign for Senate control increasingly looks like a flip-of-the-coin affair — a 50-50 split after the election is not far-fetched. That could be a nightmare in the making for whoever wins the White House. Story Continued Below Any individual senator — from Elizabeth Warren on the left to Ted Cruz on the right — could almost single-handedly block the new president’s Cabinet picks, depending on which party is in power. If you think the past several years of Senate gridlock have been bad, that might look like a joy ride by comparison. “It’ll be a whole new shooting match,” said Sen. John Thune (R-S.D.). “One of the concerns that I have is that [with] the rancor of this campaign, everybody will feel like it’s still open season on whoever the elected president is,” said Sen. Heidi Heitkamp (D-N.D.). “I hope we can get beyond that.” The Senate’s unique power over confirmations means the chamber will be called upon early and often to ratify the Cabinet selections of the new president, whether it’s Hillary Clinton or Donald Trump. The election outcome could have a big bearing on that: What once looked like a potential wave year for Democrats has tightened to the point that an evenly divided Senate has become a real possibility. That would leave virtually no margin for error when it comes to approving the president’s team next year. “We’re looking at a Senate somewhere between 52 and 48. Probably the outside numbers are 48 for one side and 52 for the other,” said Sen. Roy Blunt (R-Mo.), who himself is up for reelection. “It could be a tied Senate.” That outcome would also present a new test for the relationship between Capitol Hill and the White House. The confirmation process has grown ever more partisan over the past 15 years, despite the move by Democrats to weaken the filibuster so that all nominees except those to the Supreme Court can be confirmed by a simple majority. The most likely Senate makeup is 51-49, or 50-50, in which case ties would be broken by the vice president. Democrats fear that even if Clinton wins but Republicans keep the Senate, the GOP would drag its feet on her Cabinet picks and hobble her administration out of the gate. “If you have President Clinton and a Republican-controlled Senate, as we’ve seen with judicial appointments, the majority leader has the ability to obstruct virtually at will,” said Sen. Sheldon Whitehouse (D-R.I.). “By refraining from bringing nominations to the floor, that could single-handedly prevent the president from confirming her team.” Warning shots are already being fired. On Wednesday, Warren, a Massachusetts Democrat, gave a speech at the Center for American Progress that included a sharp signal to Clinton not to pick insiders with ties to the financial industry for her administration. “When we talk about personnel, we don’t mean advisers who just pay lip service to Hillary’s bold agenda, coupled with a sigh, a knowing glance and a twiddling of thumbs until it’s time for the next swing through the revolving door,” Warren said. Moderates are already entertaining what it will be like next year to hold the keys to Clinton’s Cabinet. Five senators from red states are running for reelection, and several from purple states will be up for reelection, and any one of them could accrue effective veto power over nominees who rub them or their state the wrong way. “Senators who are up in 2018 are already talking about it,” said Senate Minority Whip Dick Durbin (D-Ill.). The Senate dynamics surrounding Supreme Court confirmations and legislation probably won’t shift much, since they need 60 votes to move forward. Outgoing Senate Minority Leader Harry Reid (D-Nev.) recently urged Democrats to scrap the supermajority requirement even for bills if they win back the chamber. But it’s unlikely the party would go there, at least for now. Sen. Brian Schatz (D-Hawaii), a stalwart liberal in the caucus, said he is “cautious” about dumping the 60-vote threshold on the legislative filibuster anytime soon. But “if the Republicans are now into almost a decade of a lack of good faith and cooperation, then I think we have to reconsider everything,” Schatz said. He added: “Most of us are not anxious to move in that direction, but if we can’t function, then what is it exactly that we’re protecting?” Republicans say that won’t be necessary. “I do hold out some hope that knowing [ascending Democratic Leader] Sen. [Chuck] Schumer the way I do — he and I work well together — that we can find ways to build consensus,” said Sen. John Cornyn (R-Texas). “It’s clear that voters don’t like the direction of the country now.” Republicans say they hope to play nice on nominees, too — even if Clinton is president. But there’s a lot of bad blood from the Obama era: Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.) kept Attorney General Loretta Lynch waiting for weeks last year and has refused this year to fill a Supreme Court vacancy. Democrats, for their part, changed the Senate’s rules and spent more than a year in the majority confirming lifetime judges over the objections of GOP leaders. GOP senators said in interviews that the best way for the White House to get in sync with the Senate is to begin voting on the least controversial judges and Cabinet positions and get in a rhythm — rather than first take up nominees viewed as partisan or controversial. “The first ones that they send up will set the tone for a lot of that,” said Sen. Bob Corker (R-Tenn.), the Senate Foreign Relations chairman. Selecting “some radical,” he added, “would not be a great way to start the process.” And there are a couple of remaining moderates in the GOP conference, most notably Sen. Susan Collins of Maine. She said that unless there are “integrity” issues with a nominee, she’s inclined to help confirm the person. That could be a lifeline for Senate Democrats if every confirmation vote turns into a squeaker. “I hope we’re not going to get into blocking Cabinet nominees for the sake of blocking them,” Collins said.
Glenn Beck, a former Ted Cruz surrogate, suggested Monday that he’d have been better off backing Marco Rubio in the Republican presidential primary and laced into the Texas senator for throwing his support behind Donald Trump late last week. “For the very first time, I heard Ted Cruz calculate, and when that happened, the whole thing fell apart for me, and it’s my fault,” Beck said on his radio show. Story Continued Below “It’s my fault,” Beck continued. “I should have said: ‘You know who can win? You know who could beat Hillary Clinton? Marco Rubio, and I disagree with him on the Gang of Eight, and there’s about 80 percent that I do agree with him on, and he’s kind of a politician, but he’s a different kind of politician. He’s a young politician. He’s a Hispanic, He can win. Let’s go for it.’" Instead, Beck sought “a truly honorable man” in Cruz — “and that will always let you down,” he said. But while lamenting the fact that Cruz chose to be a politician Friday, Beck said that he believes the Texas firebrand is still a good man. “I’m not gonna condemn him. He is still, I believe, a good man,” Beck said. “He is just a politician first. I’ve never put him into the category of a politician, and that’s my fault. He is a politician.” For his part, Cruz insisted to Beck Monday that he was trying to show the Trump campaign how to earn his vote with his floor speech at the Republican National Convention in which he encouraged Republicans to vote their conscience in November. After Beck noted that Cruz failed to answer a question this past weekend about whether the real estate mogul was fit to be president, the senator explained that the presidential election is a binary choice, a conclusion he reached after whittling down five possible options (Vote for Trump, for Clinton, a third-party candidate, write in a candidate or abstain). “So a man who has principles who says there are lines I will not cross — it’s still a binary choice, so a man who you cannot come on and say, ‘Yes, Glenn, he is fit to be president of the United States,’ I still am encouraged by you to abandon my principles and vote because it’s a binary choice?” Beck asked. “You are encouraged by me to do what you believe is right and honorable in principle,” Cruz shot back, warning of the damage he said Clinton would do to America. Beck, however, wasn’t satisfied. “This is information that you had in Cleveland — and hang on just a second before you respond — you had all of this information. You had this information the day you dropped out of the race and said that Donald Trump is a sociopathic liar,” Beck said. “So you had all this information. Have you spent an enormous amount of time with Donald Trump? Do you have new information that has made you say: ‘Oh, my gosh, he’s now not a sociopathic liar. He is not the guy I very eloquently spelled out for over a year, and now suddenly there’s a reason to believe him.’” Despite his “significant disagreements” with Trump, Cruz said, it’s a binary choice. “I’m asking for new information. I’m asking you for new information,” Beck said. “You knew all the things that you’re saying today. The time to do that would have been the day you pulled out or the day that you gave the speech so eloquently. Why now? What’s new?” Cruz pointed to the Trump campaign’s release of possible conservative Supreme Court nominees, a list that includes Cruz ally Utah Sen. Mike Lee. He suggested he had a hand in the list, noting that the Supreme Court was an issue he raised with vice presidential nominee Mike Pence when he asked the Texas senator what it would take to get him on board. “We discussed the Supreme Court as being one of the great checks protecting the Constitution and the rule of law, and the Trump campaign committing to nominate from that list was an important change that gave me significant reassurance that helped me get to the point of saying yes,” Cruz said. After Stu Burguiere pressed Cruz on why he would believe anything Trump says, he rattled off a series of principles at stake. “Now, with respect to the justices Donald Trump would nominate, I know that he is publicly committing to nominate from a list that is very strong, and if he were to nominate from that list, it would be a major step towards protecting our rights,” Cruz said. “I hope that he would follow through on that commitment. One never knows if one will, but the fact that he is public promising ‘I will nominate from these 21,’ I think creates a dynamic where, compared to Hillary, who is promising to put left-wing ideologues, that’s a clear choice.” Cruz also disagreed with the wide interpretation that his RNC remarks were a swipe against Trump, adding that he’s always been “Never Hillary” but not ever “Never Trump.” He also said he gleaned parts of his speech from what Ronald Reagan said about Gerald Ford and what Ted Kennedy said about Jimmy Carter. “My speech drew deliberately from both of those speeches,” Cruz said. “Both of those speeches at the time were treated effectively as endorsement speeches. One of the unfortunate things about the reaction is Cleveland is that for many who were watching, it was perceived that I was essentially embracing Never Trump. I have never been a Never Trumper.” After Cruz’s appearance, Beck said Cruz would have been better of just telling the truth about why he backed Trump. “He could have come on and said, ‘Look, guys, here’s the thing, my supporters are yelling at me,’ and I know that, because so are mine,” he said. “’My donors, who are all in with the GOP, they’re all saying I’ll never fund — I won’t fund you for the Senate. I won’t fund you for the run in 2020. And I have to make a decision. So the question is do I completely shut myself out of this game or do I play the game as much as I possibly can?’”
Hillary Clinton leads Donald Trump in the nation’s smallest battleground state, according to a new Monmouth University poll of likely voters in New Hampshire released on Wednesday. The poll, which was conducted last Saturday through Tuesday, shows Clinton with a 9-point advantage over Trump, 47 percent to 38 percent. Libertarian Gary Johnson is at 10 percent, Green Party nominee Jill Stein garners 1 percent, and another 3 percent of likely voters are undecided. New Hampshire will only award 4 electoral votes this fall. But the state has outsized importance in the battle for the Senate, and the Monmouth poll shows incumbent GOP Sen. Kelly Ayotte with a slim, 2-point lead over her Democratic challenger, popular Gov. Maggie Hassan, 47 percent to 45 percent. That is well within the poll’s margin of error: plus or minus 4.9 percentage points. And Republicans also have an early lead in the governor’s race, after both parties selected their nominees in last week’s primaries. Republican Chris Sununu leads his relatively unknown Democratic opponent, Colin Van Ostern, 49 percent to 43 percent. In the presidential race, Clinton leads Trump because more Democrats (94 percent) have lined up behind the former secretary of state than Republicans (85 percent) who are supporting Trump. Clinton also leads among independents, 42 percent to 35 percent. Neither Clinton nor Trump is popular, but Trump’s negatives outweigh Clinton’s. Thirty-six percent of likely voters have a favorable opinion of Clinton, while 56 percent view her unfavorably. Trump’s favorable rating is lower: 30 percent favorable, compared to 63 percent unfavorable. It's another in a series of polls this week that show Clinton regaining some momentum after losing ground last week amid the fallout of her "basket of deplorables" comment and pneumonia diagnosis. Monmouth has also showed Clinton leading Trump by 5 points in vote-rich Florida, and within striking distance in Georgia, which has been reliably Republican in recent elections. Both candidates in the Senate race are well liked: Half of likely voters approve of how Ayotte is handling her job as senator, and 38 percent disapprove. Hassan’s approval rating is even higher: Sixty percent approve of the second-term governor’s job performance, and only 31 percent disapprove. Neither candidate in the gubernatorial race is well known, but Sununu — whose father, John, served three terms as governor in the 1980s, and brother, also named John, served a term in the Senate last decade — has higher name ID. Thirty-six percent of likely voters have a favorable opinion of Sununu, 22 percent view him unfavorably, and 41 percent have no opinion of the Republican. But Van Ostern is little known: Twenty-eight percent view him favorably, and only 6 percent have an unfavorable opinion. But roughly 2-in-3 voters, 66 percent, have no opinion of the Democratic nominee. The poll surveyed 400 likely voters.
Washington (CNN)The National Rifle Association is returning to the defense of Donald Trump in the closing weeks of the presidential campaign, a reminder of how fervently the gun-rights group has backed the Republican nominee on television. The NRA is launching a $5 million TV ad campaign Tuesday, the group says, meant to turn out pro-Second Amendment voters at a time when Trump is being attacked for his language about firearms. The gun lobby has aired $7.7 million in television time on Trump's behalf, support that makes it the second-most active pro-Trump advertiser in the general election. But it had not been on the airwaves since late last month. The NRA's Political Victory Fund is tasked with spending half the money on five swing states -- Ohio, Nevada, Virginia, North Carolina and Pennsylvania -- while its Institute for Legislative Action, its lobbying arm, is spending the second-half on national cable. All of the money is going to a harrowing ad that shows what the NRA says would happen if Hillary Clinton appoints her chosen justices to the Supreme Court. "She'll call 9-1-1. Average response time? 11 minutes," says the narrator as a sleeping woman is startled by nighttime footsteps. The woman runs to a nearby safe to grab her weapon, but it's empty. "Don't let Hillary leave you protected with nothing but a phone." The advertisements targets rural voters in battleground states who might be Democrats or disillusioned Republicans, according to Jennifer Baker, an NRA spokeswoman. "It is designed to run up the score with those Trump voters," she said. The NRA's chief political adviser Chris Cox said the ad "underscores" how Clinton's position on guns creates "one set of rules for her, and a different set of rules for the rest of us." Trump has emerged as a proud spokesman for gun rights, though he has at times invited controversy. On multiple occasions, Trump has been attacked for encouraging gun-owners to incite violence against Clinton, though Trump's campaign has said he is being misinterpreted. "I think her bodyguards should drop all weapons. Disarm immediately," Trump said in Miami last week. "Take their guns away, let's see what happens to her." 
Fox News anchor Megyn Kelly is teaming up with "Fifty Shades of Grey" producer Michael De Luca for a new scripted comedy series that will focus on the life of the campaign embeds on the presidential trail. The series, called "Embeds", will feature six half-hour episodes following "five young reporters in way over their heads as they find themselves shaping the future of the country through raucous adventures in an unexpected world of sex, drugs, and swing states on the presidential campaign trail," Variety reports. The project is an amalgamation of new and old media from across the spectrum: SnapChat's Peter Hamby (a former CNN reporter) and Vice News' Scott Conroy co-created and will write the script for Verizon-owned streaming platform Go90. According to Variety, Conroy, who was just hired by Vice as a producer for politics and policy on Vice's new nightly show, will leave Vice News for the project. "Embeds" is not Kelly's first foray into the scripted television world. She is also developing and producing the White House drama “The Residence” for FX alongside actor Kevin Spacey.
Hillary Clinton leads Donald Trump nationally by 6 percentage points among likely voters, according to an NBC News/Wall Street Journal poll released Wednesday afternoon. In a four-way race that includes Libertarian nominee Gary Johnson and Green Party nominee Jill Stein, Clinton tops the field with 43 support. Trump follows at 37 percent, while Johnson and Stein trail at 9 percent and 3 percent, respectively. Story Continued Below In a head-to-head between the two major party nominees, Clinton’s lead expands to 7 percentage points, 48 percent to 41 percent. Four percent of respondents said they would not vote for president, while 3 percent said they were undecided. Among registered voters, a majority of support for Clinton is just that — support for Clinton (as opposed to support against Trump). Half of the registered voters backing Clinton said their vote is more for Clinton, while 44 percent characterized it as more against Trump. On the Republican side, only 41 percent of registered voters said their vote is for Trump (51 percent said it was against Clinton). Registered voters gave Trump the edge as the candidate who would be best in dealing with the economy, but they favored Clinton when it came to dealing with immigration, changing the country for the better, being a good commander in chief and handling nuclear weapons. Both candidates virtually tied on the issue of terrorism and national security, with Clinton claiming a narrow 1-point advantage. Clinton is still stuck with the stigma that she’s dishonest, though more voters believe she’s honest and straightforward now than in June. About 3-in-10 said she is honest and straightforward, a mark 10 percentage points lower than the 41 percent who identified Trump as such. But it’s Clinton who registered voters say has the right temperament, knowledge and experience to handle the presidency. While 56 percent said Clinton has the right temperament and 60 percent said she has the knowledge and experience necessary to handle the job, just 23 percent said the same of Trump on both issues. Voters also said they care less about Clinton’s recent health issues than Trump’s taxes and cited the real estate mogul’s rhetoric toward women, immigrants and Muslims; his temperament; Clinton’s private server during her tenure as secretary of state; and her judgment in Syria, Iraq and Libya as their top concerns. The survey of 922 likely voters was conducted Sept. 16-19 via landline and cellphone. It has a margin of error of plus or minus 3.2 percentage points.
Washington (CNN)A series of high-profile breaches and warnings from national intelligence leaders has elections directors in critical battleground states seeking federal help against possible cyberattacks. Officials in Pennsylvania and Ohio tell CNN they are working closely with the Department of Homeland Security to protect their elections systems from cyberattacks and breaches. Ohio is going one step further. "We even asked the National Guard to attempt to penetrate our databases," said Joshua Eck, a spokesman for Ohio Secretary of State Jon Husted. "We've had a number of really positive tests. It has gone well and we've been able to find vulnerabilities and fix them." A pair of cyberattacks on Illinois' and Arizona's voter registration databases over the summer spurred the Obama administration to ring the alarm bells for states as they prepare for what has already been a chaotic campaign. And top Democrats on the House and Senate intelligence committees publicly accused the Russian government of seeking to alter the election. "Based on briefings we have received, we have concluded that the Russian intelligence agencies are making a serious and concerted effort to influence the U.S. election," Sen. Dianne Feinstein and Rep. Adam Schiff, of California, said Thursday. Russian intelligence agencies behind US election hacks, lawmakers say Cybersecurity experts say the prospect of "rigging" the election, and changing the outcome, is practically impossible. Elections are decentralized: 50 states, plus the District of Columbia, run their own operations, not to mention the thousands of counties across the country that play a major role at the local level. Different jurisdictions use different voting machines, It isn't plausible for hackers to breach them all in one fell swoop -- penetrating one election system in North Carolina has no impact on Colorado. Furthermore, most voting machines aren't connected to the Internet, which inoculates them from outside intrusions. But hackers could still cause plenty of havoc in November, with attacks on registration systems or government websites reporting the results on election night. Many news organizations pull their results from those sites. "Think about the chaos you could cause if you get one TV network calling the election for one candidate, and another network calling the election for the other," said Professor Herbert Lin, a cybersecurity expert at Stanford University. "If your intent is to sow doubt and uncertainty, at least in the short term, affecting the media reporting could be really problematic." DHS running 'Cyber hygiene scans' Homeland Security Secretary Jeh Johnson is the Obama administration's point man on election security, holding meetings with elections officials from across the country, and offering help to states that are interested. DHS is offering "cyber hygiene scans" that will remotely search for vulnerabilities in election systems like online voter registration systems and election night reporting infrastructure. It is also offering to send cybersecurity experts to states so they can conduct more aggressive in-person testing the final weeks of the campaign. Johnson recently laid out other federal resources for states in a memo last week, including a 24/7 center to respond to cyberattacks, and a list of "best practices" on how to secure voter registration databases. Pennsylvania has accepted the DHS help, both the remote scans and the in-person testing, said Pennsylvania Department of State spokeswoman Wanda Murren. Election authorities in Ohio are also accepting federal help. But not every state is happy to have the administration involved. Georgia's secretary of state publicly scoffed at these efforts and accused the federal government of trying to "subvert the Constitution." Georgia Secretary of State Brian Kemp, a Republican, rebuffed the idea, telling Nextgov that the feds might want to "subvert the Constitution to achieve the goal of federalizing elections under the guise of security." However, his office later walked back the comment, saying they were not flatly refusing the assistance. A call for comment from Kemp was not immediately returned Thursday. Florida officials, whose recount debacle in 2000 led to the federal law which ultimately created voter registration databases, declined to say whether they were accepting help from DHS, citing security concerns. What are the threats? Perhaps the most serious vulnerability is the integrity of voter registration systems. Hackers can break in and delete or alter individual voter registration records, creating confusion on Election Day when voters show up to their polling place and their names are mysteriously missing from the rolls, or their address is changed. This summer, hackers broke into a stash of information for about 90,000 voters in Illinois, breaching a database with voters' names, addresses, sex and birthdays. And officials in Arizona took their voter registration system offline after they learned that a Russian hacker had breached their systems. Once hackers penetrate a voter registration system, "the scope could be whatever they want," said Cathie Brown, who served as Virginia's deputy chief information security officer and is a cybersecurity expert with Impact Makers. "Deleting an entire precinct of voters -- that's absolutely possible. The grander the scope, the more likely they'll get caught. But they might not get caught until after they've done the damage." But at least one expert said that state elections directors have been dealing with technological threats for a long time. "The state and local election officials, this whole notion of security is not new to them this is something they deal with all the time," said Tim Mattice, executive director of the Elections Center, which trains state and local elections officials on administering elections. Mattice's organization works with the professional group representing election officials, the National Association of State Election Directors. Mattice said that when DHS offered up help, most people understood them when they said they were making it voluntary and did not want to be viewed as coming in and taking over state-run elections. Ironically, Mattice noted that the focus on technological security got serious after Congress passed the national Help America Vote Act in the wake of the 2000 elections, which mandated that states develop integrated voter registration systems -- effectively placing all the voter data in systems that could be hacked. Asked how hackers got through in Illinois and Arizona despite the layers of security that elections officials already have in place, Mattice said it's the same problem any organization or business faces. "You could ask Target how they got hacked -- these hackers are getting sophisticated," Mattice said. 
Donald Trump's campaign Wednesday criticized the Obama administration's plan to hand oversight of the internet's domain name system to an international body, echoing Sen. Ted Cruz's argument that it could lead to more censorship by countries like Russia and China. "The U.S. should not turn control of the Internet over to the United Nations and the international community. President Obama intends to do so on his own authority — just 10 days from now, on October 1st, unless Congress acts quickly to stop him," Trump's national policy director, Stephen Miller, said in a statement published on the campaign's website. Story Continued Below "The Republicans in Congress are admirably leading a fight to save the Internet this week, and need all the help the American people can give them to be successful. Hillary Clinton’s Democrats are refusing to protect the American people by not protecting the Internet," Miller wrote. "Internet freedom is now at risk with the President’s intent to cede control to international interests, including countries like China and Russia, which have a long track record of trying to impose online censorship," the statement continued. "Congress needs to act, or Internet freedom will be lost for good, since there will be no way to make it great again once it is lost." Cruz, who has famously refused to endorse Trump's candidacy, thanked the GOP nominee in a tweet: "Appreciate @realDonaldTrump’s support of our efforts to stop Obama’s Internet handover & keep the #Internet free." The Texas senator has repeatedly slammed the administration's plan to transfer domain-name oversight to the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers, a global non-profit. Tech companies have supported the plan, and the Commerce Department says it was always envisioned that U.S. oversight of the internet would be temporary. Cruz and other Republicans have called for the internet transition to be blocked as part of the continuing resolution that keeps the government running beyond Sept. 30. Hillary Clinton, in her tech policy platform, says she supports the transition as a "critical step towards safeguarding the internet’s openness for future generations."
President Barack Obama and Donald Trump are alike in at least one regard, according to former CIA Director Michael Hayden. "You know, last week I mentioned there was difference in language between Mr. Trump and President Obama. You know, there's not a whole lot of difference between the Obama administration's retrenchment and Mr. Trump's America First. There are common themes there," Hayden said Wednesday on MSNBC's "Morning Joe" during a discussion of Obama's final United Nations address. Story Continued Below Hayden, who served as CIA director under George W. Bush from 2006-2009 and briefly under Obama, remarked on MSNBC's "Morning Joe" that the last Republican president "probably would have been challenged to make a speech so eloquent as President Obama’s yesterday," while adding that Bush "would have done so much behind the scenes." "I sat in the Oval Office. We had a meeting and he would just turn over his shoulder and say, ‘Get me [former Pakistani President Pervez] Musharraf.’ He actually worked on the issues and invested his personal energy and I should add personal prestige and political capital in risking that in order to make things different in the world," Hayden said. "And sadly, I just don't think we're seeing much of that in the last half a dozen or eight years." Former Bush aide Nicolle Wallace offered her own criticism of Obama's speech, noting that she heard from Middle Eastern leaders would likely describe the president's address as "probably decent and perhaps elegant analysis, but he's not an analyst." "What they heard was the complete lack of any connection to any world leaders. He didn't give a speech in that room as though he were in constant contact with anybody else in the room," Wallace said. "He gave a speech as if he never talked to these people, as though the only contact were public ones and that that was so different not just from George W. Bush, who had better private relationships than some of the conflicts that erupted in public, but ... there hasn't been an American president with fewer or weaker relationships with world leaders." As co-host Joe Scarborough went on to say that history would judge Obama to be a president with few friends on Capitol Hill regardless of party, Wallace chimed in, "He didn't have any friends."
When Hillary Clinton attacked Donald Trump for not releasing his tax returns and allegedly paying zero in federal income taxes, the Republican presidential nominee had just four words to say in response. “That makes me smart,” Trump said from the debate stage at Hofstra University tonight.     He has said repeatedly he is being audited by the IRS and cannot release his tax statements until the review is concluded. But during the first general-election presidential debate, in Hempstead, New York, the real estate mogul vowed to release his tax returns “against my lawyer’s wishes” if Clinton releases emails she deleted from a private server she used while she was secretary of state. “As soon as she releases her 33,000 e-mails that have been deleted, as soon as she releases them,” Trump said tonight, amid cheers and applause, “I will release my tax returns.” The White House hopefuls also clashed repeatedly over their tax plans during the debate, with Clinton accusing Trump of proposing the “most extreme version” of “trickle-down economics.” “The biggest tax cuts for the top percent of the people in county than we’ve ever had,” the Democratic presidential nominee said from the stage. “I call it trumped-up trickle-down because that’s exactly what it would be. That is not how we grow the economy.” Before Trump had a chance to defend his tax policy, Clinton took another jab. “Donald was very fortunate in his life and that's all to his benefit,” she continued. “He started his business with $14 million, borrowed from his father, and he really believes that the more you help wealthy people, the better off we'll be and that everything will work out from there. I don't buy that.” Trump, who released his tax plan earlier this month, has proposed tax cuts across the board, including income tax reductions for the top 1 percent and eliminating federal estate tax as well as gift taxes. Meanwhile, Clinton has called for tax hikes for the wealthiest Americans and closing corporate loopholes that allow the rich to evade some tariffs. Trump fired back, blaming “politicians like Secretary Clinton” for plunging the nation into debt. “We’re a debtor nation,” he said. “We have a country that needs new roads, new tunnels, new bridges, new airports, new schools, new hospitals. And we don’t have the money because it’s been squandered on so many of your ideas.” Clinton suggested that Trump’s alleged failure to pay federal income tax might also be part of the problem. But Trump quickly argued any taxes he would have paid would have gone to waste. “It would be squandered too, believe me,” he said. ABC News' Nicole Phillip, Maggie McNish and Sunny Choo contributed to this report.
Former President Bill Clinton slowly walked toward the podium, newly repositioned at the center of the stage under the spotlight. He diligently thumbed through the pages of a farewell defense, which he had been working on moments before he addressed the Clinton Global Initiative one final time. “It’s been one of the great honors of my life,” Clinton said as he addressed crowd. “You are living proof that good people committed to creative cooperation have almost unlimited positive impact to help people today and give our kids better tomorrows. Now, I have spent the last 15 years of my life working to advance that idea.”   Emails released by the State Department show that some Clinton Foundation donors received meetings with then-Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, which prompted Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump to accuse the Clinton Foundation of being a “pay for play” organization.       But Bill Clinton today shied away from engaging in the politics surrounding his foundation and instead used his platform as an attempt to change the negative narrative that has been seen as a liability to his wife’s presidential bid. Clinton proudly recalled trips around the world, partnering with governments, corporations and influential people to deliver HIV/AIDS medication, fight childhood obesity and provide homes for Haitian families following the devastating 2010 earthquake, among countless other initiatives. The CGI Annual Meeting runs at the same time at the United Nations General Assembly, hoping to attract world leaders who can only attend if they pledge to commit to a cause. “Everybody who comes has to actually make a commitment to do something to make the world a better place. We won’t say there’s a minimum dollar amount, we won’t say there’s a minimum time amount, but they got to do something,” explained the former president. And then he joked, “And I thought we’re about to have a meeting and nobody will come.” Attendance at the annual meeting has dragged a bit since Hillary Clinton announced her presidential bid, as some donors have tried to keep space between the Clinton Foundation and her run for president. In previous years, President Barack Obama has attended and presidential candidates on both sides have come, but not this year. But Bill Clinton did not allow the scrutiny to keep him from giving CGI members a charge to continue their work, even if it would be without him. “Don't give up on what brought you here. You have done something good and noble and worthy and it’s all just beginning,” said the former president. “If we embrace our common humanity over our interesting differences and get up tomorrow in knowing that just if we get caught trying and we do it with somebody else, chances are it will work out better than it ever dreamed. CGI worked out better than I ever dreamed.” Today’s meeting was the twelfth and final CGI convocation, and Bill Clinton announced last month that he would resign from the board of the Clinton Foundation if Hillary Clinton wins the presidential election.
Assistant Attorney General John Carlin, the longest-serving head of the Justice Department's National Security Division who has overseen a flurry of high-profile terrorism and cyber espionage cases, will step down next month, officials said. Mary McCord is set to replace him as acting assistant attorney general on Oct. 15. Story Continued Below Carlin, 43, joined the National Security Division in 2009, only three years after it was established to consolidate the Justice Department's national security and intelligence functions, and was confirmed as head in 2014. He has overseen a robust increase in prosecutions for domestic terrorism, including the Boston Marathon bomber, Dzhokhar Tsarnaev, and steered the first conviction for attempting to construct a radiological device with the prosecution last year of Glendon Scott Crawford, a member of the Ku Klux Klan found guilty of planning to target unsuspecting Muslim-Americans with lethal doses of radiation. Attorney General Loretta Lynch praised his pioneering role. "He oversaw the unprecedented indictment of five members of the Chinese military for cyber-enabled economic espionage and the investigation of the attack on Sony Pictures Entertainment’s computer systems," she said in a statement. "And he forged crucial collaborations with our partners in the intelligence community, law enforcement and the private sector, enhancing our collective ability to detect and deter threats as they arise.” Since 2013, 110 individuals nationwide have been charged as foreign fighters for global terrorist groups, for engaging in violent extremism in the U.S. or for providing material support to the Islamic State, according to the Justice Department. “John Carlin is a dedicated public servant committed to upholding the rule of law, pursuing justice and keeping Americans safe," Lisa Monaco, assistant to the president for homeland security and counterterrorism, said in a statement. "Throughout his distinguished career — most recently as assistant attorney general for national security — John has worked, largely behind the scenes, to do exactly that." Carlin's division played an instrumental role earlier this year in several international computer hacking cases. Su Bin, a Chinese national, was sentenced to 46 months after pleading guilty to working with Chinese military officers to steal military technical data from U.S. defense contractors. Seven Iranian hackers were also indicted for working on behalf of private companies connected with Iran's Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps to deny service to the U.S. financial sector. One of the defendants was also indicted for compromising the industrial control system of the Bowman Dam in Rye, N.Y. Carlin previously served as the chief of staff to then-FBI Director Robert Mueller and was a federal prosecutor, serving as the national coordinator of the Justice Department’s Computer Hacking and Intellectual Property Program and as an assistant U.S. attorney for the District of Columbia. A Justice Department official said Carlin was not prepared to discuss his future plans, but predicted he'd be a big draw for the private sector.
Aid to Syria has been suspended after yesterday's attack on a United Nations and Syrian Arab Red Crescent convoy in the countryside of Aleppo. The convoy was delivering wheat flour, health supplies and other emergency aid to some 75,000 people in Urum al-Kubra in rural Aleppo, according to the U.N. Of the 31 trucks in the convoy, at least 18 were hit. A Syrian Red Crescent warehouse was also destroyed and a health clinic severely damaged, the U.N. said. About 20 civilians and one SARC staff member were killed as they were unloading the trucks, according to a joint statement from the Syrian Arab Red Crescent, the International Committee of the Red Cross and the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies. "The convoys that we had hoped to move across the border to Syria as well as aid inside Syria have been temporarily put on hold. As a result, millions of people across Syria run a very real risk of not receiving the assistance they need because of this callous attack," David Swanson, a spokesman for the U.N. Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, told ABC News. He noted that all parties to the conflict were notified about the convoy and that it was marked with aid signs. "Obviously, we are absolutely outraged that such an attack can take place," he said. The U.N.'s aid coordinator said the attack on the aid convoy could amount to a war crime. "Let me be clear: If this callous attack is found to be a deliberate targeting of humanitarians, it would amount to a war crime. I call for an immediate, impartial and independent investigation into this deadly incident," Stephen O’Brien, the U.N.'s undersecretary-general for humanitarian affairs and emergency relief coordinator, said in a statement after the attack. The Red Crescent in Aleppo confirmed in a statement that Omar Barakat, SARC's director in Urum al-Kubra, was among those killed. Yousef Houran, a lawyer and activist in Syria, said he witnessed aid trucks burning after the attack in Urum al-Kubra. "Bodies of Red Crescent volunteers are still burning inside the cars and no one can get close to them because of repeated airstrikes on the same spot," he told ABC News last night following the attack.  Our thoughts go to families of brave @SYRedCrescent volunteers & staff killed in tonight's terrible attack on aid convoy in rural #Aleppo  Two U.N. trucks carrying flour and food supplies — enough to feed about 185,000 people for one month — have been parked by the Syria-Turkey border, waiting for security assurances in order to make the journey into the besieged eastern Aleppo. These trucks will remain parked until the U.N. re-evaluates the situation on the ground. Today, the four besieged towns of Madaya, Zabadani, Foua and Kefraya were supposed to receive humanitarian assistance, but the U.N. has also put these deliveries on hold indefinitely. After the Syrian military declared the end of the U.S.-Russian-brokered truce last night, airstrikes hit several areas in Aleppo. "We heard from a partner from Aleppo that there were 100 airstrikes in about five hours yesterday," Misty Buswell, Save the Children's regional advocacy director for the Middle East, told ABC News. "It's brutal what is going on right now and there has to be accountability for what happened last night. This is not the first time that we have seen aid being attacked in Syria. This demonstrates the new lows that this conflict has reached. We’re hearing that hospitals are overwhelmed by the number of casualties that are coming in today." At least 38 civilians, including one child and three women, were killed by airstrikes in Aleppo and its western and eastern countryside, according to the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights. Today, airstrikes continued and the observatory said that warplanes dropped 27 barrel bombs on different neighborhoods in Aleppo city. After an International Syria Support Group meeting today, U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry told reporters that "the cease-fire is not dead." The U.N.'s special envoy for Syria, Staffan de Mistura, echoed that statement but warned that the cease-fire is "in danger." The group is due to meet again on Friday. The cease-fire pact focused on reducing violence in the war-torn country and delivering humanitarian aid. The agreement had to be reached before Russia and the U.S. would work together to fight militant groups ISIS and al-Nusra in Syria. After yesterday's attack on the aid convoy, the U.S. Department of State released a statement yesterday saying it would now reconsider the prospect of cooperating with Russia. "The United States is outraged by reports that a humanitarian aid convoy was bombed near Aleppo today," the statement read. "For more than a week, we have urged Moscow to fulfill the commitments it made in Geneva to facilitate the unimpeded flow of humanitarian aid to the Syrian people. And for more than a week, the Syrian regime repeatedly denied entry to these U.N. convoys, preventing them from delivering urgent food, water and medical supplies to desperate Syrian citizens. Only today did the regime finally grant permits for some convoys to proceed. The destination of this convoy was known to the Syrian regime and the Russian federation and yet these aid workers were killed in their attempt to provide relief to the Syrian people. The United States will raise this issue directly with Russia. Given the egregious violation of the Cessation of Hostilities we will reassess the future prospects for cooperation with Russia." Russia and the Syrian government denied that they were behind the attack on the aid convoy. The Aleppo media center today posted photos on Twitter of the destroyed aid trucks.  ????? ????????? ??????? ?? ?????? ?????? ?????? ?????? #??? ???????? ??? ????????? ?????? ????? ???? ?? ?????? ??????.#AleppoAMC pic.twitter.com/ksJfE8gIlC  Nearly 13.5 million people in Syria are in need of humanitarian assistance; an additional 4.8 million have fled their country, and 6.1 million are internally displaced, according to this month's figures from the U.N.'s Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
New York (CNN)President Barack Obama confronted one of his most strained foreign partnerships Wednesday during a final meeting with Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, the pair making a last attempt at patching up their stormy bond before Obama leaves office. Speaking before their session, Obama said he was aiming to ascertain the prospects for peace in the region as he prepares to end his presidency. "Our hope will be that in these conversations we get the sense of how Israel sees the next few years, what the opportunities are and what the challenges are in order to ensure we keep alive the possibility of a stable, secure Israel at peace with its neighbors," Obama said. "These are challenging times. One thing that I would say about Prime Minister Netanyahu is that he is always very candid with us." That candor has become a hallmark of the relationship between Obama and his Israeli counterpart, whom the White House has accused of being less-than-diplomatic in expressing his opposition to US policies like the nuclear agreement with Iran. Obama's 30-minute meeting Wednesday with Netanyahu was likely to be their final opportunity for face-to-face consultations before a new president enters the Oval Office in January. Obama is intent on conferring solid ties with Israel upon his successor, despite the personal animus that developed between him and Netanyahu, as he looks to boost the relationship during the homestretch of a presidential campaign in which he hopes to see Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton prevail. Obama took a step toward solidifying the alliance this month by completing a long-term, $38 billion security aid package for Israel, the largest such agreement ever for a US ally. The aid, Obama said, "allows the kind of certainty in a moment where there's enormous uncertainty in the region. It is a very difficult and dangerous time in the Middle East and we want to make sure Israel has full capabilities to keep the Israeli people safe." In their talks, Obama said he and his Israeli counterpart would discuss challenges in Syria, and said he would get Netanyahu's assessment of conditions in Israel and the West Bank. "Clearly there is great danger of not just terrorism but also flare-ups of violence," he said. "We do have concerns about settlement activity as well." Obama hopes to take steps in his final days in office to promote renewed talks between the Israelis and the Palestinians on peace, though his previous efforts toward reconciliation in the region have fallen short. "My hope is we can continue to be an effective partner in Israel in finding a path to peace," Obama said. But the White House remains opposed to Israel's expanded settlement activity in the West Bank, and has expressed disappointment at Netanyahu's occasional skepticism about the viability of a two-state solution in the region. In the meeting Wednesday Obama raised "profound US concerns about the corrosive effect that that is having on the prospects of two states." "They've never papered over their differences," another senior administration official said of Obama and Netanyahu. In his final United Nations address Tuesday, Obama made scant reference to the Israel-Palestine conflict, saying only that "Israelis and Palestinians will be better off if Palestinians reject incitement and recognize the legitimacy of Israel, but Israel recognizes that it cannot permanently occupy and settle Palestinian land." The passing remark was in stark comparison to the large amounts of time Obama spent on the issue during addresses to the UN earlier in his tenure. The shift reflected the now-frozen peace negotiations, which moved in spurts during Obama's presidency but never materialized into a workable solution. The White House has conceded that talks aren't likely to resume while Obama remains in office but has remained open to the possibility the President could take steps in the next months to ramp up pressure on both sides to work toward a two-state solution. "With respect to Middle East peace, I wouldn't rule out the President taking any particular step on the issue," Ben Rhodes, Obama's deputy national security adviser, said Tuesday. "What I would say is his test has always been, can I make a positive difference by engaging on the Israeli-Palestinian issue? We've tried multiple tactics, none of them have succeeded, given the fact that the parties themselves have been unable to come together." Obama's talks with Netanyahu Wednesday capped a tumultuous personal history, though both displayed a businesslike camaraderie during their photo-op. The low point between the two men came in March 2015, when Netanyahu infuriated the White House by publicly lobbying against the Iran nuclear deal before Congress -- a move the administration lambasted as a breach of diplomatic protocol. Netanyahu returned to Washington last November in an attempt to repair the relationship, meeting with Obama in the Oval Office and addressing both the conservative American Enterprise Institute and the left-leaning Center for American Progress, the think tank with ties to Clinton. Netanyahu on Wednesday invited Obama for a round of golf in Israel once he departs office in January, saying warmly that Obama's "influential voice" on international politics would remain a force "for many decades." "Our alliance has grown decade after decade, through successive presidents, bipartisan Congresses and with the overwhelming support of the American people," he said. "It is an unbreakable bond." 
Whedon, who directed Marvel's "The Avengers" and "Avengers: Age of Ultron," launched "Save the Day," a super PAC whose mission is to get people to vote in the upcoming election. He recruited Avengers actors like Robert Downey Jr. and Scarlett Johansson as well as a dozen other A-listers for a video that stresses the importance of the election while also taking thinly veiled shots at Donald Trump. Those in the three minute long tongue-in-cheek video mention that this amount of celebrities only comes together if it's an important issue that matters to everyone like diseases, disasters, or as Don Cheadle says in the video, "a racist, abusive coward who could permanently damage the fabric of our society." Related: 'West Wing' cast to campaign for Clinton The video doesn't mention the names of either Hillary Clinton or Trump, but at one point "Hamilton" star Leslie Odom Jr. asks, "Do we really want to give nuclear weapons to a man whose signature move is firing things?" The PSA also has the stars jokingly telling those watching that if they vote, Mark Ruffalo will do a nude scene in his next movie. "Wait, what?" says a surprised Ruffalo. "They should just vote because it matters." The "Save the Day" website described itself as "a short-form production company dedicated to the idea that voting is a necessary and heroic act."
United Nations (CNN)President Barack Obama took to the most prominent international stage Tuesday to deliver a stark warning to American voters of the dire global consequences they face should they embrace isolationism and ultra-nationalism in November. Never mentioning Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump by name, the President's final address to the United Nations General Assembly was at heart an impassioned rebuke of the GOP candidate's policies on trade, immigration and multiculturalism -- and a defense of liberalism and tolerance -- delivered 49 days before votes are cast for his replacement. He painted a dark picture of the future awaiting Americans, and the world, if the forces of "aggressive nationalism" or "crude populism" win out. And he specifically inveighed against building a wall -- a centerpiece of Trump's proposal on border security. "A nation ringed by walls would only imprison itself," Obama declared to the assembled representatives of the UN's member states. Gone were Obama's idealistic appeals to bring about a world free of nuclear weapons and an agenda focused on peace, as were his previous UN addresses. The "hope and change" of his argument as a presidential candidate himself was also replaced by exhortations against a future filled with chaos. "Time and again human beings have believed they finally arrived at a period of enlightenment, only to repeat cycles of conflict and suffering. Perhaps that's our fate," Obama suggested. "We have to remember the choices of individual human beings led to repeated world war," Obama said. "Each of us as leaders, each nation can choose to reject those who appeal to our worst impulses and embrace those who appeal to our best. For we have shown that we can choose a better history." He pointed to growing divisions and discontent at home that challenge those decisions, and noted that the shortcomings of globalization had created "an uncertainty and unease and strife" that required acknowledgement, but not turning inward. "I believe that at this moment we all face a choice," Obama said. "We can choose to press forward with a better model of cooperation and integration or we can retreat into a world sharply divided and ultimately in conflict along age-old lines of nation and tribe and race and religion. I want to suggest to you today that we must go forward and not back." It was Obama's eighth and final address to the UN body, which enthusiastically welcomed him in 2009 after he moved to reverse the unilateral approach of his predecessor George W. Bush. In his speech that year, Obama vowed to work within international bodies to confront the world's crises while pushing an agenda combating climate change and nuclear non-proliferation. But in the intervening years, the harsh realities of diplomacy settled in, both for Obama and the UN. The organization's inability to stem suffering in Syria and Ukraine laid bare the continued struggles to combat breaches of international law, while Obama's own work toward combating violent extremists has failed to stop terrorist groups from committing atrocities. Obama's address Tuesday reflected those realities. He drew titters from the collection of world leaders and diplomats in the high-ceilinged General Assembly hall when he noted that "at times both America's adversaries and some of our allies believe that all problems were either caused by Washington or could be solved by Washington. And perhaps too many in Washington believe that, as well." He made scant mention of individual world flash points, choosing instead to offer a more thematic recap of his foreign agenda. "The world is by many measures less violent and more prosperous than ever before. And yet our societies are filled with uncertainty and unease and strife," Obama said. "Despite enormous progress, as people lose trust in institutions, governing becomes more difficult and tensions between nations become more quick to surface." RELATED: Clinton, Trump meet world leaders for very different reasons Obama continued his tradition at the UN of acknowledging areas where the US has fallen short in its practice of democracy, saying his country and other developed nations must set a better example for emerging democracies. Citing the pervasive role of money in politics, entrenched party allegiances and a patchwork of voting laws, Obama said it was up to long-established nations to show the way forward. "Those of us who believe in democracy, we need to speak out forcefully. Because both the facts and history is on our side," Obama said. "We better strive harder to set a better example at home." Obama used his own efforts to help revive a stalled economy as an example of US leadership during his tenure, saying other countries would be wise to follow his lead of going after corruption and unfair tax policies. He also cited the deal with Iran to curtain its nuclear program, and reopening of ties with Cuba and Myanmar, as examples of a successful global approach. RELATED: Global leaders at UN tackle world's worst to-do list But the array of places where Obama's approach hasn't yielded the outcomes he projected during his first appearance here in 2009 were also unavoidable. That includes his inability to negotiate peace between Israel and the Palestinians -- a major topic in his first four UN addresses that was entirely absent during last year's speech. This year, the President took issue with both sides' actions toward one another. He criticized Israeli settlements, saying the only path to Mideast peace will come when the two sides reconcile deeply held differences. Palestinians must "reject incitement and recognize the legitimacy of Israel," Obama said. But he also said peace won't come until "Israel recognizes it cannot permanently occupy and settle Palestinian land." Obama plans to meet Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu on Wednesday to "discuss the need for genuine advancement of a two-state solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict in the face of deeply troubling trends on the ground," according to White House Press Secretary Josh Earnest. Another persisting crisis -- Russia's continued incursion into Ukraine -- also drew Obama's attention Tuesday. "In a world that left the age of empire behind, we see Russia attempting to recover lost glory through force," Obama said. "If Russia continues to interfere in the affairs of its neighbors, it may be popular at home. It may fuel nationalist fervor for a time. Over time, it's also going to diminish its stature and make its borders less secure." Indeed, many of his harshest warnings were aimed at global government practices that damage democracy and liberalism and called for the rejection of strongmen, authoritarian and tribalism. "There appears to be growing contest between authoritarianism and liberalism right now," he told the assembled leaders. "And I want everybody to understand, I am not neutral in that contest." 
(CNN)Sen. Jeff Sessions pilloried former President George H.W. Bush's decision to support Hillary Clinton for president over Donald Trump, saying the Bush family "should remember the loyalty they were given by millions of Americans." Sessions expressed frustration with Republicans who've refused to back Trump in an interview with the Washington Examiner published Wednesday. A long-serving Republican senator, he was among the first members of the so-called GOP "establishment" to throw his support behind the eventual nominee during the primary, and has been a fixture of the Trump campaign since. "They should objectively analyze who is likely to advance best the agenda they favor and the agenda the Republicans who supported them favored. And that's clearly Donald Trump," Sessions said. The Alabama Republican also noted that "millions of Americans, including this one, worked their hearts out for the Bushes in 1988, 1992, 2000, and 2004. And it wasn't Bill Clinton that helped the Bushes get elected. It was the same voters, in large part, that elected Ronald Reagan and stand to elect Donald Trump." The elder Bush is the only member of the family whose support for Clinton has become public. Jeb Bush, whom Trump defeated during the primary, has said he won't support the nominee, and former President George W. Bush has declined to reveal his presidential preference. For Sessions, though, the choice is simple, and he expressed puzzlement about the Bush family. RELATED: Ivanka Trump huddles with female Republican members of Congress in Washington "I think they're not thinking clearly enough about this," Sessions told the Washington Examiner. "They're not ... appreciating half the American people, virtually, that have been supportive of Republicans. A lot of them preferred somebody other than Bush candidates, but they rallied around them when it came to November. So I would hope that we see more rallying." And to other Republicans, like Texas Sen. Ted Cruz or Ohio Gov. John Kasich, who have argued Trump isn't conservative enough to lead the party, Sessions says "that's ridiculous." "At this point in history, it's the William F. Buckley test -- who is the most conservative candidate that can win the presidency? Hillary Clinton or Donald Trump? On taxes, on regulations, on judges, on law enforcement — all these are conservative positions. What is the problem here? I just feel on issue after issue he's been firmly in the conservative, classical Republican conservative view." RELATED: The GOP's next civil war is brewing 
Eric Ueland, a veteran Republican Capitol Hill aide and top staffer on the Senate Budget Committee, is advising Donald Trump's presidential transition team, according to three sources. Ueland is the Republican staff director on the Budget Committee, a position he has held since 2013, when he was hired by Sen. Jeff Sessions, then the panel's ranking member. Ueland stayed on as staff director when Sen. Mike Enzi became chairman of the committee in 2015. Story Continued Below Sessions has emerged as an influential figure in Trump's universe, with several former Sessions aides taking prominent positions in Trump's transition and campaign. Before returning to Capitol Hill in 2013, Ueland was a vice president at the Duberstein Group. He was previously a top staffer for former Sens. Don Nickles and Bill Frist. Ueland and the Trump campaign declined to comment. The Trump transition, which is being led by New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie, is rapidly expanding its pool of policy advisers, with sources telling POLITICO it is setting up a series of policy-specific teams on issues like financial services, taxes and energy. The Clinton and Trump transition must also begin preparing a budget, which would be submitted to Congress soon after the next president takes office. While it's unclear exactly what role Ueland is playing on the Trump transition, his budget expertise is seen as an asset for Trump's team.
11/19/16, 3:14 PM CET BY Chris Spillane So is anti-establishment message of Nigel Farage, the Labour leader said. 11/19/16, 1:55 PM CET BY Sarah Wheaton Alumni of the Obama White House spent days mourning Trump’s win. Now they’re ready to fight. 11/19/16, 11:37 AM CET BY Chris Spillane Dick Schoof: ‘Chance of attack in the Netherlands is real.’ 11/19/16, 10:38 AM CET BY Chris Spillane Government could focus on starting the process of leaving the bloc sooner. 11/19/16, 10:13 AM CET BY Benjamin Oreskes Diplomats say the president-elect already has a playbook to undermine the global body. 11/19/16, 10:01 AM CET BY Michael Crowley and Nahal Toosi Flynn, Bannon represent ‘Islamophobic’ thinking of the type rejected by Bush and Obama, critics say. 11/19/16, 5:25 AM CET BY Michael Kruse The blue-collar workers who put Donald Trump in the White House are ready for him to deliver. How much time will they give him? 11/19/16, 5:20 AM CET BY Ryan Heath, Tara Palmeri, Harry Cooper and Quentin Ariès  11/18/16, 9:09 PM CET BY Harry Cooper A Polish political party’s links to a pan-European group raise questions about funding. 11/18/16, 6:31 PM CET BY Tom McTague Signs that Britain’s political class is coming to terms with June’s EU referendum. 11/18/16, 6:26 PM CET BY Hortense Goulard Conservative MEP denounced Juncker’s efforts to drum up support for Schulz as ‘outrageous.’ 11/18/16, 5:31 PM CET BY Ivo Oliveira Drawing the top stories around the globe. 11/18/16, 4:55 PM CET BY Cynthia Kroet Italians are likely to reject prime minister’s reform package in next month’s vote. 11/18/16, 4:48 PM CET BY Elana Schor, Kyle Cheney and Louis Nelson The president-elect starts building out his administration with loyalists. 11/18/16, 4:01 PM CET BY Nicholas Vinocur Left-wingers hope that by backing Alain Juppé, they will see off two political enemies. 11/18/16, 3:15 PM CET BY Cynthia Kroet Jens Stoltenberg did not mention the total number or reasons for the requests. 11/18/16, 3:02 PM CET BY Florian Eder and Janosch Delcker Wird Martin Schulz die SPD in den Bundestagswahlkampf führen? Oder schafft er es, doch noch einmal EU-Parlamentspräsident zu werden? Er muss sich bald entscheiden. 11/18/16, 2:34 PM CET BY Anthony Skinner Syrian refugees are pawns in Turkish president’s pursuit of power. 11/18/16, 2:33 PM CET BY Charlie Cooper Shadow Brexit secretary ‘seriously pissed off’ at colleague’s comments. 11/18/16, 2:33 PM CET BY Cynthia Kroet German chancellor is ‘championing the interests of Europe,’ Witold Waszczykowski said. 11/18/16, 12:58 PM CET BY Cynthia Kroet Nikola Gruevski stepped down in January over a wire tapping scandal. 11/18/16, 12:48 PM CET BY Barbara Surk Jens Stoltenberg said he had a ‘good talk’ with the president-elect. 11/18/16, 12:35 PM CET BY Esther King Majority of those who failed to gain international asylum come from the Balkan states. 11/18/16, 11:48 AM CET BY Esther King Immigration is what keeps the country running, says pro-EU Lord. 11/18/16, 10:57 AM CET BY Esther King Conditions at offshore detention center for refugees are ‘cruel, inhuman and degrading,’ said François Crépeau. 11/18/16, 9:36 AM CET BY Esther King Foreign Minister Linas Linkevičius warned that Vladimir Putin could use transition period in Baltics, Syria. 11/18/16, 8:55 AM CET BY MADELINE CONWAY Former ambassador to the UN says there are ways of supporting the opposition that does not involve the use of American military force. 11/18/16, 8:39 AM CET BY Cristiano Lima Her presence is likely to raise fresh concerns about potential conflicts of interest. 11/18/16, 8:35 AM CET BY Bryan Bender The retired lieutenant general’s hardline views on Islam — as well as laudatory statements about Russia — have made him a lightning rod, as did his strident attacks on Hillary Clinton during the campaign. 11/18/16, 5:33 AM CET BY Nicholas Vinocur The center-right’s first ever presidential primary looked all over. Now it’s wide open. 11/18/16, 5:25 AM CET BY Tim King The Günther Oettinger controversies are tainting this European Commission by intimate association. 11/18/16, 12:17 AM CET BY Nahal Toosi Much of Europe is alarmed over what Trump’s presidency could augur. 11/17/16, 11:52 PM CET BY Shane Goldmacher and Andrew Restuccia ‘We feel way ahead of schedule and never in a rush to do the wrong thing,’ said campaign manager Kellyanne Conway. 11/17/16, 9:42 PM CET BY Jacopo Barigazzi Maltese interior minister not impressed with Bratislava’s migration plan. 11/17/16, 9:33 PM CET BY Edward-Isaac Dovere In Berlin, the president warned his successor that his divisive campaign style won’t wear well in the Oval Office. 11/17/16, 8:24 PM CET BY Janosch Delcker US President hopes Trump won’t ‘simply take a Realpolitik approach.’ 11/17/16, 8:21 PM CET BY Hortense Goulard European Parliament president will only accept foreign minister role if he is also the SPD candidate for the top job. 11/17/16, 8:18 PM CET BY Konstantin Richter Germans, of all people, are now called on to be bulwarks of democracy. 11/17/16, 8:06 PM CET BY Paul Dallison and Esther King Euroskeptic party stands accused of breaking rules on spending EU funds. 11/17/16, 7:16 PM CET BY Brent Griffiths  11/17/16, 6:31 PM CET BY Maïa de La Baume Brussels faults Ankara for ‘neglecting and undermining’ democracy and the rule of law. 11/17/16, 6:27 PM CET BY Louis Nelson  11/17/16, 5:47 PM CET BY Cynthia Kroet Jean-Marie Le Pen should receive €15,000 because he was prevented from carrying out his duties. 11/17/16, 4:57 PM CET BY Carter Stoddard Net debt has ballooned to £338 million, and currency fluctuations are partly to blame. 11/17/16, 4:34 PM CET BY Laurens Cerulus In finally passing her surveillance bill, Britain’s PM just made Brexit even more complicated. 11/17/16, 4:13 PM CET BY Hortense Goulard French prime minister called for more European integration amid rising nationalism. 11/17/16, 3:23 PM CET BY Cynthia Kroet Former European Council president joins forces with Flemish singer. 11/17/16, 2:53 PM CET BY Paul Dallison Corey Lewandowski said president-elect will work closely with Theresa May, with no need for UKIP leader as a go-between. 11/17/16, 2:37 PM CET BY Cynthia Kroet Freedom Party leader’s comments on Moroccans living in the Netherlands were ‘unnecessarily offensive.’ 11/17/16, 2:11 PM CET BY Esther King Nigel Farage’s party stands accused of breaking rules on spending EU funds. Demonstrators against the arrival of refugees stand guarded by policemen near a refugees camp on August 22, 2015 in Heidenau, Germany | Matthias Rietschel/Getty Images By Hortense Goulard 9/21/16, 12:35 PM CET Updated 9/21/16, 12:45 PM CET Violent acts targeting foreigners and migrants have sharply risen in the eastern part of Germany in recent years, the German government warned in a report to be published on October 3, marking the country’s national unity day. The report cites “countless attacks on refugees and their shelters” in the past year as well as outbursts of violence in Heidenau and Freital, two cities located near Dresden in the state of Saxony. Such attacks are “symbols of a growing hate of foreigners.” Excerpts of the report were published on Wednesday in the Handelsblatt newspaper after the business daily obtained a copy of it. The “worrying trend” could “threaten the peace of the Eastern German society,” said Iris Gleicke according to Handelsblatt. Gleicke is a member of the government in charge of the country’s former Eastern bloc that was under communist rule. Areas in former East Germany remain poorer than former West Germany, with a GDP about a quarter lower than in the West, the report said, adding that differences have largely disappeared since the reunification in 1990. According to statistics, hate crime in the East is well above the rest of the country. In the state of Mecklenburg-Vorpommern, where the far-right Alternative for Germany registered an unprecedented electoral success earlier this month, attacks on foreigners and migrants reached 58.7 per million inhabitants. The average for the western part of the country is 10.5, according to Handelsblatt. Also On Politico Hortense Goulard Also On Politico Hortense Goulard Also On Politico Ivo Oliveira Authorities started tracking violence against foreigners in 2001. It reached its peak in 2015, according to the report. The report also warned that far-right groups have been gaining strength from rising hatred against foreigners, saying that one such terror organization known as the National Socialist Underground has killed 10 people in recent years. The report noted that there are fewer foreigners in eastern Germany than in other parts of the country, underlining the fact that violence and hatred are not the result of the influx of migrants, but rather due to emigration from the East to other, richer parts of the country and a lack of social structures. The report also noted an increase in violent incidents from left-wing radicals in the former East. Left-wing militants “misuse demonstrations [against the far-right] and committed a number of criminal acts, sometimes associated with extreme violence, especially against the police,” it said.  © 2016 POLITICO SPRL Log in to access content and manage your profile. If you do not have a login you can register here.
Washington (CNN)Senate Democratic Leader Harry Reid called Donald Trump a racist on the Senate floor Monday, an escalation in the Nevada lawmaker's war of words against the GOP presidential nominee in recent weeks. "Donald Trump is a racist," he said. Reid's direct comment goes further than the retiring five-term senator was willing to ten days ago during an interview with CNN's Manu Raju. When asked then if he thought Trump is a racist, Reid responded: "All you guys have a job to do. You make that decision. I'm not going to." Previously, Reid excoriated Trump from the Senate floor, calling him a "spoiled brat," "a con artist" and a "human leech who will bleed the country." And at a September 13 news conference Reid ripped Trump for being overweight and over his eating habits, charging that the media "magnified" Hillary Clinton's recent bout with pneumonia. "Take a look at this character that's running for president. He complains about her health. What does he do? He's 70 years old. He's not slim and trim. He brags about eating fast food every day. Look at his health a little bit," Reid said. Sean Spicer, communications director and adviser for the Republican National Committee, told CNN's Wolf Blitzer on Monday that he was "almost speechless" over Reid's remarks. "There is a good thing Harry Reid is retiring because I think the people of Nevada and the people of this country have had it with Harry Reid," he said. "Nevada is continuing to trend for Donald Trump. So if he thinks Donald Trump is a racist, then he thinks the majority of Nevada thinks so, too ,and I think that's pretty sad." Trump responded to the "slim and trim" comment in an interview with The Washington Post: "Harry Reid? I think he should go back and start working out again with his rubber work-out pieces," Trump said, referring to an exercise band that snapped, causing Reid a serious facial injury that impaired his sight. The Trump campaign did not immediately respond to a request for comment on Reid's latest jab. CNN's Daniella Diaz contributed to this report.
Washington (CNN)Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump will take the stage Monday night for the first presidential debate, due to be broadcast live most everywhere. It's one of the most anticipated political events of the year, and if you plan on watching it, here's what you need to know. 5 things to watch at Monday night's Clinton-Trump debate The Commission on Presidential Debates, a bipartisan organization that manages the events, will host the first of three general election presidential debates at Hofstra University in New York on Monday, September 26. CNN will air the event in its entirety on its networks as well as through a live stream on CNN.com. CNN Politics will host a live blog offering instant analysis and reaction as the debate unfolds at the top of the screen. Pence set to attend first presidential debate The debate is due to begin at 9:00 p.m. ET and is scheduled to last 90 minutes, without commercials. If you haven't gotten your fill from that, there will be a vice presidential debate on October 4 and two more presidential debates on October 9 and October 19, with the former hosted by CNN's Anderson Cooper. The commission said this first debate will have six time segments for about 15 minutes each. NBC's Lester Holt will act as moderator and open the segments with a question, then Clinton and Trump will have two minutes each to respond. After their initial answers, they can respond to each other for the remainder of the segment. Hillary Clinton prepares for unpredictable Donald Trump at debate Holt announced the topics he would draw from a week ahead of the debate. They are: "America's direction," "achieving prosperity" and "securing America" -- three ambiguous terms pointing to a focus on the economy and security. 
The top Democrats on the House and Senate Intelligence panels said Thursday that they are convinced, based on briefings, that senior Russian officials are trying to sway or disrupt the U.S. elections. "Based on briefings we have received, we have concluded that the Russian intelligence agencies are making a serious and concerted effort to influence the U.S. election," said Sen. Dianne Feinstein and Rep. Adam Schiff in a joint statement. Story Continued Below "At the least, this effort is intended to sow doubt about the security of our election and may well be intended to influence the outcomes of the election - we can see no other rationale for the behavior of the Russians," they added. The pair placed the blame at the highest levels of Russia's government. "We believe that orders for the Russian intelligence agencies to conduct such actions could come only from very senior levels of the Russian government," they said. The Obama administration has yet to publicly name the culprits behind the breaches of the Democratic National Committee and Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee. But several security firms have identified Russia as the perpetrators, and intelligence officials reportedly have high confidence that Moscow was involved.
USA Today has suspended the column of a conservative commentator for one month after he called for drivers to “run … down” demonstrators protesting police shootings in Charlotte, North Carolina Wednesday night. "USA TODAY expects its columnists to provide thoughtful, reasoned contributions to the national conversation, on all platforms," Bill Sternberg, the editorial page editor of USA Today, said in a statement to POLITICO. "Glenn Reynolds’ Run them down' tweet, in response to a news report about protesters in Charlotte stopping traffic and surrounding vehicles, was a violation of that standard and can be interpreted as an incitement to violence. Reynolds, a law professor at the University of Tennessee who writes twice a week for USA TODAY, has apologized. His column has been suspended for one month." Story Continued Below Reynolds was briefly suspended from Twitter late Wednesday after he sent the tweet in question. “Run them down,” Reynolds wrote in the tweet, which linked to a news story about demonstrators who had stopped traffic on a Charlotte highway. The tweet was criticized as promoting violence against the demonstrators, who are protesting the deaths of black people at the hands of police after police in North Carolina shot and killed Keith Lamont Scott earlier this week. Some of those protests have turned violent, and North Carolina Gov. Pat McCrory called for a state of emergency Wednesday night. Reynolds defended his tweet on his personal blog, and he accused Twitter of being “out to silence voices it disagrees with or something.” Reynolds’ Twitter account was reinstated under the condition that he delete the tweet, he said Thursday. In a statement on USA Today's website, Reynolds apologized for the tweet and said that the comment had been misconstrued. "What I meant is that drivers who feel their lives are in danger from a violent mob should not stop their vehicles," he wrote. "...My tweet should have said, 'Keep driving,' or 'Don’t stop.'" "I have always supported peaceful protests, speaking out against police militarization and excessive police violence in my USA TODAY columns, on my website and on Twitter itself," he added. "I understand why people misunderstood my tweet and regret that I was not clearer."
The White House vetoed legislation on Friday that would allow Saudi Arabia to be sued for any alleged role in the Sept. 11, 2001 terror attacks — setting up what is almost certain to be the first veto override of Barack Obama’s presidency. Obama’s rejection of the Justice Against Sponsors of Terrorism Act was well-foreshadowed; White House officials have repeatedly said Obama has several objections to the measure, including concerns that U.S. officials would face retaliation in the courts by foreign governments. Story Continued Below In a three-page veto message outlining his objections, Obama again stressed those arguments and others made by his administration in recent days. Particularly problematic, in Obama’s view, was the possibility that courts could end up wading into terrorism issues best left to national security and foreign policy officials. “This would invite consequential decisions to be made based upon incomplete information and risk having different courts reaching different conclusions about the culpability of individual foreign governments and their role in terrorist activities directed against the United States,” Obama said. That, the president added, “was neither an effective nor a coordinated way for us to respond to indications that a foreign government might have been behind a terrorist attacks.” Obama again reiterated the White House’s view that the 9/11 bill could lead to retaliation — which could cause “potentially seriously financial consequences for the United States,” he warned — while arguing that the 9/11 bill “threatens to create complications in our relationships with even our closest partners.” “I have deep sympathy for the families of the victims of the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, who have suffered grievously,” Obama said in the veto message. “I also have a deep appreciation of these families’ desire to pursue justice and am strongly committed to assisting them in their efforts.” But he added that the legislation “would neither protect Americans form terrorist attacks nor improve the effectiveness of our response to such attacks.” Those arguments have rung hollow for Congress, which passed the legislation unanimously through both chambers. The Senate passed the measure in May, and the House followed suit earlier this month on the eve of the 15th anniversary of the terrorist attacks. The Senate will move first on a veto override because the legislation, written by Sens. Chuck Schumer (D-N.Y.) and John Cornyn (R-Texas), originated there. Unless there are objections, the override vote can be set up by unanimous consent. Cornyn called not only the veto "disappointing," but also Obama's "refusal to listen to the families of the victims taken from us on Sept. 11." And Schumer called the veto a “disappointing decision” from Obama that will be “swiftly and soundly overturned in Congress.” “If the Saudis did nothing wrong, they should not fear this legislation. If they were culpable in 9/11, they should be held accountable,” Schumer said after Obama officially vetoed the bill. “The families of the victims of 9/11 deserve their day in court, and justice for those families shouldn’t be thrown overboard because of diplomatic concerns.” Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.) said this week his chamber will vote to override the legislation before lawmakers leave Washington to campaign for reelection. McConnell spokesman David Popp reiterated that on Friday, saying the chamber will take it up “as soon as practicable in this work period.” And a coalition of survivors of the 9/11 attacks, as well as the family members of the victims, released a statement saying they were “outraged and dismayed” at Obama’s veto. “No matter how much the Saudi lobbying and propaganda machine may argue otherwise, JASTA is a narrowly drawn statute that restores longstanding legal principles that have enjoyed bipartisan support for decades,” the group, known as 9/11 Families and Survivors United for Justice Against Terrorism, said. “It will deter terrorism and hold accountable those nations that support and fund it.” Key backers of the legislation expect Obama’s veto will be easily overridden, considering the unanimous show of support from Capitol Hill. Still, influential national security voices such as Senate Foreign Relations Committee Chairman Bob Corker of Tennessee, Sen. Dianne Feinstein (D-Calif.) and Sen. Lindsey Graham (R-S.C.) have expressed concerns about potential implications of the legislation – although those sentiments had gained little traction at the Capitol because the bill has such strong support. On Friday, House Armed Services Committee Chairman Mac Thornberry (R-Texas) began circulating a "Dear Colleague" letter urging lawmakers to sustain Obama's veto, echoing many of the administration's objections against the 9/11 bill. "My primary concern is that this bill increases the risk posed to American military and intelligence personnel, diplomats, and others serving our country around the world," Thornberry wrote in the letter circulated among Republican lawmakers. "Many of us have long resisted any attempt to subject U.S. military, intelligence, and diplomatic personnel to criminal or civil courts around the world. These individuals who are carrying out U.S. policy must be protected. Differences should be resolved between governments based on policies, not by individual litigants in the courts." Top congressional leaders such as Speaker Paul Ryan (R-Wis.) and House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi (D-Calif.) have said they share concerns from the White House about JASTA, as it’s been known on Capitol Hill. But they also say a veto override is inevitable; Pelosi said Thursday that the White House has not reached out to her to enlist Pelosi’s help in swaying lawmakers to the administration’s side. “I think that members think that the families should have their day in court, and I think the concerns that the President has expressed are very legitimate,” Pelosi said Thursday. “The families think that they've addressed many of those concerns in the legislation.” The 9/11 bill was a rare point of agreement between Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump -- both New Yorkers who each said they would sign the legislation if they were president. The legislation amends the Foreign Sovereign Immunity Act to prevent countries involved in terrorist attacks on U.S. soil from invoking sovereign immunity, a legal principle that shields foreign nations from legal action. JASTA has long been viewed as focusing on Saudi Arabia’s alleged role in the terrorist attacks. The so-called “28 pages,” part of a 2002 probe that was declassified in July, included some indications that appear to suggest links between a handful of Saudis in the United States and two of the 9/11 hijackers. Nahal Toosi contributed to this report.
Kathy Miller, the chair of Trump's campaign in Mahoning County, Ohio, resigned Thursday, according to a statement from the Trump Ohio campaign. The resignation comes after Miller made racially charged remarks to The Guardian. On Thursday morning, Miller said that there was "no racism" before Obama. She made the inflammatory comments to The Guardian's Anywhere but Washington series, when she said, "If you’re black and you haven’t been successful in the last 50 years, it’s your own fault. You’ve had every opportunity, it was given to you." Story Continued Below She further charged, “You’ve had the same schools everybody else went to. You had benefits to go to college that white kids didn’t have. You had all the advantages and didn’t take advantage of it. It’s not our fault, certainly.” The Ohio campaign statement read, "Our county chairs are volunteers who signed up to help organize grassroots outreach like door-knocking and phone calls, they are not spokespeople for the campaign. I have accepted Kathy Miller's resignation as the Mahoning County chair in light of these inappropriate comments." Miller also referred to the Black Lives Matter movement as "a stupid waste of time" and suggested lower voter turnout among blacks has to do with "the way they were raised." The Ohio campaign statement included what it said was a statement from Miller apologizing for her comments, saying they were inappropriate and that she is not a campaign spokesperson, and was not speaking on its behalf. Tracy Winbush will replace Miller as Mahoning County campaign chair, according to the statement. She will also be the elector for the electoral college.
Utah Sen. Mike Lee on Friday swiftly shot down the idea that he would accept a nomination to the Supreme Court from Donald Trump. "Sen Lee already has the job he wants which is why he is campaigning to represent the great people of Utah again this year," Lee spokesman Conn Carroll said in response to POLITICO, after NBC News reported on a new list of potential Supreme Court nominees that Trump would propose as president. Story Continued Below Lee is one of 10 on the expanded list, which also includes Neil Gorsuch, a judge of the United States Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit; Margaret A. Ryan, a judge of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Armed Forces; Edward Mansfield, an Iowa Supreme Court justice; Keith Blackwell, a Georgia Supreme Court justice; Charles Canady, a Florida Supreme Court justice; Timothy Tymkovich, the chief judge of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit; Amul Thapar, a U.S. District Court judge for the Eastern District of Kentucky; Federico Moreno, a U.S. District Court judge for the Southern District of Florida; and Robert Young, the chief justice of the Michigan Supreme Court. Trump’s decision earned praise from Judicial Crisis Network Director Carrie Severino, who clerked for Justice Clarence Thomas. “Donald Trump continues to take unprecedented steps to demonstrate that he intends to appoint justices like Scalia, Thomas and Alito,” Severino said in a statement. “Conservatives should be very pleased by the steps he has taken, and if he lives up to his promises we will have a Court that truly puts the rule of law ahead of political preferences.” Lee has refused to endorse Trump for president, although he did offer praise for Trump's first list of potential justices unveiled in May, which included his brother Thomas, a Utah Supreme Court justice. "It wasn't just that there were some great names on that list, that was the best, most conservative Supreme Court shortlist I've ever seen," Lee said at the time. "And I was thrilled by that." Seung Min Kim contributed.
Washington (CNN)Massachusetts Sen. Elizabeth Warren tore into Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump on the campaign trail Saturday for lying about President Barack Obama's citizenship and hinting at violence against his Democratic opponent, Hillary Clinton. Speaking to Clinton supporters at Ohio State University, Warren continued her ongoing feud with Trump by criticizing his admission Friday -- after five years of falsehoods -- that Obama was born in the US. "Only when his handlers tied him down and forced him did he grudgingly admit that the man was born in the United States," Warren said. "What kind of a man does that? A man with a dark and ugly soul." Later Friday, Trump, at a campaign event in Miami, cited Clinton's push for greater gun control to suggest the Democrat's Secret Service detail should disarm. "Let's see what happens to her," Trump said. "Take their guns away, OK? It'll be very dangerous." That was the second time in as many months when he appeared to urge violence against Clinton. In August, Trump appeared to suggest that "Second Amendment people" could do something about Clinton if she became president and nominated judges who favored gun restrictions. The Trump campaign later said he only meant to increase political engagement, not incite violence. Warren disagreed. "Trump has repeatedly invited his supporters to commit a horrific act of violence against his opponent, against another human being," Warren said. "What kind of a man does that? A bully. A twisted bully who can't fight his own fights." Warren has been an attack dog of sorts for Clinton ever since she clinched the Democratic nomination, and the real estate mogul has hit back. Trump goes so far as to refer to Warren as "Pocahontas," a reference to her claims of Native American heritage. Warren was but one of many Clinton surrogates hitting the trail in support of her this week. Sen. Bernie Sanders, who, like Warren, appeals to younger and more liberal voters, made two appearances in Ohio on Saturday. 
Rep. John Lewis, a civil rights icon, on Wednesday blasted Donald Trump’s statements about the state of the black community and America’s inner cities. “I don’t know what Mr. Trump is talking about to say that the situation for African-Americans is worse than it’s ever been,” the Georgia Democrat said when asked by MSNBC’s Andrea Mitchell about Trump’s comments. “Is he talking about worse than slavery? Worse than the system of segregation and racial discrimination — when we couldn’t take a seat at the lunch counter and be served? Worse than being denied the right to register to vote, to participate in the democratic process and live in certain neighborhoods and communities?” Story Continued Below Lewis was responding to comments Trump made during a campaign event Tuesday in North Carolina. “We’re going to rebuild our inner cities because our African-American communities are absolutely in the worst shape they’ve ever been in before. Ever, ever, ever,” Trump said. It’s part of a broader case Trump has been making to black voters, arguing that their situation is dire due to Democratic policies and that they should vote for Republicans because their circumstances could not be worse. A surrogate for the New York businessman's campaign said Trump was not suggesting that African-Americans are worse off now than under Jim Crow segregation. "I don't think he's talking about the days of Jim Crow, even the days of the civil rights movement of the '60s and obviously not slavery. But he's saying the African-American community is at times being outpaced by other communities," Joseph Borelli, a New York City council member, told CNN on Wednesday. Lewis wasn't the only prominent member of the African-American community to harshly criticize Trump's comments Wednesday. Cornell William Brooks, President of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, ripped Trump on CNN's "The Situation Room" for ignoring in his comments racial injustices from the slavery and Jim Crow eras. “For anyone to assert that the African-American community is in the worst shape ever, ever, ever … is to demonstrate an insulting degree of ignorance and insensitivity,” he said. “We expect more from our presidential candidates.” Cristiano Lima contributed to this report.
NEW YORK — Staring down tightening polls both nationwide and in the battleground states, Hillary Clinton’s campaign manager Robby Mook on Monday circulated a private memo to donors, supporters and top volunteers that maps out the Democratic nominee’s various paths to the White House in November, paired with his analysis of Donald Trump’s own precarious path. “Here’s the story that no poll can tell: Hillary Clinton has many paths to 270 electoral votes, while Donald Trump has very few. Hillary is nearly certain to win 16 ‘ blue' states, including Washington D.C., which will garner her 191 electoral votes,” writes Mook in the nearly 2,000-word memo that was blasted out in the early evening, and which was obtained by POLITICO. “If we add the five states that FiveThirtyEight.com gives Hillary a 70% or greater chance of winning (Michigan, Minnesota, Pennsylvania, Virginia, and Wisconsin), Hillary only needs 10 more electoral votes." Story Continued Below Writing at a time when Democrats are growing increasingly nervous about the state of the race — and as leading party members like President Barack Obama and Clinton herself are loudly warning that the vote is going to be close — Mook then runs down the possibilities for Clinton to win the remaining 10 electoral votes: taking Florida’s 29 electoral votes, North Carolina’s 15, Ohio’s 18, or any two of Colorado, New Hampshire, Iowa, or Nevada. “Put a different way, of these battleground states, Hillary can win just one (Florida, Ohio, or North Carolina) and win the presidency, which means the six additional states would only add more electoral votes to her total,” he writes. “Donald Trump, on the other hand, must win six of these seven states, including Florida, North Carolina, and Ohio — none of which he can lose." Mook’s analysis tracks with what top party strategists have been saying about the Democrat-Republican split for months, though it clashes with the Trump team’s own inclusion of Pennsylvania in the battleground mix. Clinton, for her part, has also drilled down on that state, calculating that it should go her way but that the Republican’s chances are nearly nonexistent without it. Titled “50 days until Election Day,” the memo serves in part as a way to calm down hand-wringing party members who are increasingly concerned that Trump is gaining on Clinton — her lead in the four-way RealClearPolitics national average is 0.7 points, down from its peak of 7.6 in early August. But the note is also a rallying mechanism, urging supporters to make more calls and knock on more doors in the homestretch. It runs through some of Clinton’s policy positions and some standard knocks on Trump — including quoting GOP House Speaker Paul Ryan, who this summer said Trump’s insistence that a judge of Mexican heritage couldn’t be unbiased in a case involving the candidate is “the textbook definition of a racist comment.” But it doesn’t stray far from Clinton’s public line, except to go hard negative against Clinton’s opponent at a time she is striving to push a more affirmative, not just anti-Trump, message. The missive also identifies some of Democrats’ structural and infrastructural advantages, such as the higher proportions of young voters and people of color in the battlegrounds than in 2012, before — in a tried-and-true campaign maneuver, taking pains to calm backers by dismissing public polls and the media. “You’ve heard us say many times that public polls must be taken with a grain of salt, but here’s why we should just dump out the entire salt shaker: in early September, an ABC/News Washington Post poll showed Hillary leading by eight points. Four days later, Reuters/IPSOS released a poll saying Hillary’s lead was only one point. Here’s my favorite: earlier this month, a CBS/YouGov poll showed Hillary winning Ohio by seven points (46-39) and three days later a Bloomberg Poll came out showing Trump winning Ohio by five (44-39),” Mook writes. “A swing of 12 points in three days? Go figure. Is Ohio a very close contest? YES. Battleground states carry that name for a reason: they’re going to be close, from now until Election Day."
Melbourne, Florida (CNN)Donald Trump declared himself the unquestionable winner of his first debate against Hillary Clinton during a rally Tuesday night, then relived the entire debate before a Florida crowd of supporters, this time with the help of a teleprompter -- and without Clinton baiting him. The Republican presidential nominee ticked down a list of issues he failed to sufficiently hammer Clinton on during their 90-minute bout -- from her foreign policy failures to her use of a private email server during her time as secretary of state. He also insisted on defending two factually incorrect statements he made the previous night. Trump touted unscientific, online post-debate polls as "things of beauty." He also again claimed to be "holding back" during the faceoff because he "didn't want to do anything to embarrass" Clinton. That comment came after blaming debate moderator Lester Holt of NBC News for being tough on him earlier in the day, "For 90 minutes I watched her very carefully and I was also holding back. I didn't want to do anything that embarrassed her," Trump said Tuesday. "For 90 minutes, she argued against change, while I called for dramatic change. We have to have dramatic change." But while he spent much of the debate on the defense, Trump was free to unleash on Clinton without abandon as he rallied thousands of supporters Tuesday night in an airplane hangar. He slammed Clinton for having "defended every major failure she helped create," placing particular emphasis on Clinton's track record as secretary of state. "Iraq and Libya are in chaos," Trump said. "Here in America we've seen one Islamic terror strike after another." Trump pointed to Clinton's decades-old career in the political spotlight -- arguing she has not accomplished enough, and failed too often, in that time period. "I kept saying for 26 years you've been doing nothing," Trump said. "She's the candidate of yesterday. And ours is the campaign and we're the people of the future." Clinton was the first lady of Arkansas and then the United States before she was elected for the first time to public office in 2000 as a US senator from New York. And while Clinton made it through the debate on Monday with relatively few attacks from Trump on the subject, on Tuesday, Trump attacked her over her email practices, including her false assertion she neither sent nor received information marked classified. "Another Crooked Hillary lie," Trump said. "Have you ever seen a greater embarrassment to our country?" Clinton is "an insider fighting only for her donors and insiders," Trump said, touting his outsider status. But Trump also entrenched himself on two issues the debate's moderator, Holt, called out on for being factually inaccurate. He insisted the stop-and-frisk practice used in New York City that a federal judge ruled unconstitutional in 2013 was constitutional. And he argued that he was "against going into Iraq," even though he did not publicly oppose the war before it started, expressed support for it a month before Congress voted to approve military force and even praised the invasion as a "tremendous success." And earlier in the day, as the Clinton campaign sought to highlight disparaging comments Trump made about former Miss Universe Alicia Machado, Trump reiterated his criticism. "She gained a massive amount of weight, and it was a real problem," he said on "Fox and Friends." Trump on Tuesday also returned to his characterization of the press as "the most dishonest people I've ever dealt with" and, as he continued to review the previous night's debate, suggested Clinton's success was tied to the "mainstream media." "Without the mainstream media, folks, she wouldn't even be here. She wouldn't even have a chance," Trump said. But Trump also signaled that he and his campaign took note of his strongest moments in the debate. Trump hammered home his commitment to addressing trade imbalances Tuesday night and pointed to his back-and-forth with Clinton over trade, particularly when he called her out for calling the Trans-Pacific Partnership deal the "gold standard" of trade agreements. Clinton now opposes the TPP trade deal. "The American people rendered their verdict. The post-debate polls as I said to you were so great, but we exposed Hillary Clinton's real position on NAFTA which was by the way the single worst deal as you'll ever see and Trans-Pacific Partnership -- another great disaster that she lied about," Trump said. 
WashingtonSince we last updated the CNN battleground map, Donald Trump has clearly improved his poll numbers both in some national polls and in some critical battleground states. The Republican nominee has also upped his game (as have his allied outside group friends) with television ad spending.  And, yet, Hillary Clinton maintains her advantage on the Road to 270 when it comes to piecing together the electoral math needed to win the presidency. Why two congressional districts could be key to this election With four days to go before the highly anticipated first presidential debate and just under 7 weeks before all the votes are cast, Hillary Clinton still sits above that key threshold in the latest CNN outlook. When you add up all the states either solidly or currently leaning Clinton's way, she has 272 electoral votes in her column in our new estimate. What's changed? -- Iowa (6) moves from from "battleground" to "lean Republican" -- Utah (6) moves from "lean Republican" to "solid Republican" -- Maine's 2nd Congressional District (1) moves from "solid Democrat" to "battleground" -- Nebraska's 2nd Congressional District (1) moves from "solid Republican" to "battleground" Explore the map and make your choices Road to 270: Electoral College map Note: The split congressional district ratings are symbolized with diagonal lines. The state of play Donald Trump has improved his standing in our electoral college outlook due to Iowa (a state Barack Obama won twice) and its six electoral votes moving from the true toss-up "battleground" category into the "lean Republican" category, giving Trump a total of 196 electoral votes either solidly or leaning in his favor.  That leaves 70 electoral votes up for grabs across four states (plus two congressional districts) -- Florida, Nevada, Ohio, and North Carolina.  Maine and Nebraska award individual electoral votes by congressional district in addition to the multiple electoral votes based on statewide results. Both Maine and Nebraska's second congressional district have moved into battleground status in this latest estimate. Maine's second congressional district has moved from "solid Democrat" to "battleground" and Nebraska's second congressional district has moved from "solid Republican" to "battleground," providing an opportunity for a candidate to pick up a single electoral vote in what otherwise might be hostile territory.  Finally, Utah moves back from "leaning Republican" to being solidly being in Trump's column.  There is no doubt that Trump has improved his chances in the last several weeks and that he is extremely competitive in all of the remaining critical battleground states, but Clinton's firewall is not yet showing any significant cracks and that is what makes Trump's path to 270 electoral votes still quite challenging. For all of the endless talk about Florida, Ohio and North Carolina, it is perhaps most important to keep your eye on Clinton's performance in the states that are leaning her way, but not solidly in her camp. Pennsylvania, Colorado, Michigan, and Virginia are the core of Clinton's current stronger and more viable path to 270. If Trump begins to find significant inroads to any of those blue-leaning states, that will set off some alarm bells at her Brooklyn HQ and suggest a more viable path for Trump. It is not enough for Trump to simply win the remaining 70 electoral votes in the battleground states -- that only gets him to 266. He still needs to chip away at Clinton's Democratic leaning firewall. Ohio poised to go down to the line on Election Day That's why we see both Trump and Clinton and their surrogates returning again and again to Pennsylvania, for example. And that's why Clinton and pro-Clinton forces spent more than $16 million on television ads in the Keystone State compared to the $5.3 million we've seen from Trump and pro-Trump forces. In fact, Pennsylvania is the state with the third-highest number of ad dollars spent this cycle, behind only Florida and Ohio. Clinton and Trump will surely continue the fully engaged battle for the votes of Floridians and Ohioans, but until and unless Trump can put one of those Democratic leaning states back on the board as a battleground or even make one lean his way, Clinton's electoral college advantage holds. Solid Republican: Alabama (9), Alaska (3), Arkansas (6), Idaho (4), Indiana (11), Kansas (6), Kentucky (8), Louisiana (8), Mississippi (6), Missouri (10), Montana (3), Nebraska (4), North Dakota (3), Oklahoma (7), South Carolina (9), South Dakota (3), Tennessee (11), Texas (38), Utah (6)West Virginia (5), Wyoming (3) (163 total) Leans Republican: Arizona (11), Georgia (16), Iowa (6), (33 total) Battleground states: Florida (29), Nevada (6), Ohio (18), Maine 2nd Congressional District (1) Nebraska 2nd Congressional District (1), North Carolina (15) (70 total) Leans Democratic: Colorado (9), Michigan (16), New Hampshire (4), Pennsylvania (20), Virginia (13), Wisconsin (10), (72 total) Solid Democratic: California (55), Connecticut (7), Delaware (3), DC (3), Hawaii (4), Illinois (20), Maine (3), Maryland (10), Massachusetts (11), New Jersey (14), New York (29), Oregon (7), Rhode Island (4), Vermont (3), Washington (12), Minnesota (10), New Mexico (5) (200 total) Will Mullery and Tal Yellin contributed to this story.
(CNN)Jeb Bush will be a guest lecturer at Harvard University this fall, focusing on education in "a number of multi-day visits" this semester, the John F. Kennedy School of Government announced Tuesday. The former Florida governor and Republican presidential candidate -- who was known for his wonkish love of policy on the campaign trail -- will deliver his first lecture on Thursday. He'll also co-lecture in a course titled, "The Political Economy of the School," and participate in faculty-led student study groups. After dropping out of the presidential race in February, Bush returned to his position as chairman and president of the board of directors at an organization he started called the Foundation for Excellence in Education. Bush -- a staunch advocate for charter schools, voucher programs and higher education standards -- attempted to make education a defining hallmark of his presidential campaign. Though out of politics, the former governor has occasionally weighed in on the general election race, expressing his opposition to both Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton. He also popped back in the headlines when he made a cameo appearance in the opening segment of the Emmys earlier this month. 
A New York judge has rejected a media request to make public the contents of a 25-year-old court file on Donald Trump's divorce from wife Ivana, saying the courts have no business deciding what information could be useful to voters. The New York Times and the Gannett newspaper chain filed a motion to unseal the records, arguing the move was needed to contribute to public debate over the real estate mogul and Republican nominee's fitness for the presidency. Story Continued Below Manhattan Supreme Court Justice Frank Nervo rejected that argument in a ruling released Thursday. "Were the court to make the confidential records available for journalistic, and thus public, scrutiny, it would impermissibly inject itself into the political process by making the value judgment of what information is useful in determining the present candidate's, or any other candidate's, fitness for office," Nervo wrote. "The court's role in the electoral process is strictly limited to determining whether a candidate complies with the Election Law. The court will not take an action that exceeds that limitation." Earlier this month, lawyers for both Donald and Ivana Trump filed legal papers opposing the unsealing. The GOP presidential nominee argued that New York's legislature has put divorce files off-limits in most circumstances. His ex-wife agreed, but also contended that since she is not running for office, she should not have to sacrifice her privacy even if the court found an enhanced interest in her husband's actions. Her submission to the court noted published reports alleging that she claimed during the divorce that he had raped her. However, Ivana Trump's brief said that was not her view and dismissed those reports as "previous misinterpreted statements and allegations.” The judge agreed with Ivana Trump that there was no reason to intrude on her privacy. "The court is obviously aware that one of the parties, who opposes this motion, is a presidential candidate. The court is also aware that the other party, who also opposes this application, is not seeking public office," Nervo wrote. "If the court were to deprive the candidate party of his rights...on the ground that there may be something in the confidential file that would be useful in determining his fitness for office, that ground does not exist in the case of his former wife, who is not a candidate." A lawyer for the news outlets, David Schulz, said no immediate decision had been made about whether to appeal. "We are pleased with the Court's well-reasoned decision and order," Trump lawyer Marc Kasowitz said. Nervo's conclusion that judges shouldn't try to judge information's utility to voters is not universally shared on the bench. Several judges handling federal Freedom of Information Act lawsuits seeking information about Hillary Clinton's tenure as secretary of state have cited the upcoming election as a reason to speed release of records held by the State Department.
Washington (CNN)It is a staple of Donald Trump's stump speech, intended to show that the country is experiencing a frightening crime wave. "Last year we saw a 17% increase in violent crime in our 50 largest cities," he often says. Trump used to say that it was a 17% increase in homicides in the country's 50 largest cities. He now says that increase is in "violent crimes." Since Trump does not say what he considers violent crimes, it is difficult to check his figures. A yearly survey conducted by the Major Cities Chiefs Association showed that homicide, rape, robbery, aggravated assault and non-fatal shootings increased by about 2% in 65 major jurisdictions. (The chiefs' association list includes large counties such as Los Angeles County and Prince Georges County, Maryland -- outside Washington -- as well as cities such as Pittsburgh, Newark, New Jersey, and Cincinnati that are not among the nation's 50 largest.) But if Trump's claim is that the number of homicides in 2015 was 17% larger than the number of murders in 2014, he is closer to the mark. The major chiefs association survey showed that murders did increase by nearly 16% among its members. And a survey of the country's 30 largest cities done by New York University's Brennan Center for Justice indicated an increase in homicides of 14%. But these numbers do not represent an across-the-board increase in homicides for major jurisdictions, nor that an unprecedented wave of killings is hitting virtually all big cities. In fact, only three cities -- Baltimore, Chicago and Washington -- account for more than half of the national increase in murders, according to the Brennan Center survey. If you take those three cities out of the equation, the number of murders only jumped by about 7% in the nation's largest cities. "I think Trump's figure is more misleading than inaccurate," said Inimai M. Chettiar, the director of the Justice Program at the Brennan Center. Verdict: True, but misleading. 
Protests erupted overnight Tuesday into Wednesday in Charlotte, North Carolina, after a police officer shot and killed an African-American man while looking for another person who had an outstanding warrant. According to local reports, police officers saw Keith Lamont Scott getting out of his car while holding a gun. The Charlotte-Mecklenburg Police Department said Scott posed an imminent danger to officers, and Officer Brentley Vinson, who is also African-American, shot the man. Story Continued Below "As is standard procedure with any officer involved shooting, Officer Vinson has been placed on paid Administrative Leave," the police department said in a statement Tuesday night. Protesters gathered near the scene of the shooting, an area near the campus of the University of North Carolina at Charlotte. Footage from the protests showed people shouting “Black lives matter,” “Hands up, don’t shoot” and “No justice, no peace.” A reporter with a local NBC affiliate posted a video of a journalist injured by a rock hurled in her direction, as the police department deployed its civil emergency unit. At 10:46 p.m., the department’s official Twitter account said that an officer “sustained injuries in an attempt to deescalate agitators during demonstration.” Approximately 12 officers were injured during the protests, according to a later tweet from the department early Wednesday morning. The latest incident comes on the heels of another police-involved shooting in Tulsa, Oklahoma, last Friday that claimed the life of Terence Crutcher, an unarmed 40-year-old man.
North Carolina Republicans are lamenting the unrest gripping their state’s largest city, but, quietly, they also see it as an opportunity for Donald Trump to gain ground in a critical swing state. And they’re asking him to take advantage of it. Story Continued Below “North Carolina Republicans are sending the word to the Trump campaign that once this settles down, a visit to Charlotte, to the Mecklenburg police, to the sheriff and others, is something we really want to see,” said a high-ranking North Carolina Republican, granted anonymity to discuss political calculations during a sensitive moment for the state. “Lawmakers and party officials are sending word to the Trump campaign.” The crisis in Charlotte was sparked by the shooting of Keith Lamont Scott, an African-American man who police say was armed, though no video has been released and the family disputes that claim. Since then, the city has been the scene of violent clashes between police and protesters, with the clashes captured on live, national television. The tumult comes as Hillary Clinton’s once-formidable lead in state polls has faded. A spate of polls out this week show either a tied race or give Trump a slight edge—a sharp contrast from last month, when Clinton was leading by anywhere from 2 to 9 percentage points. North Carolina political operatives are skeptical that, unless the chaos in Charlotte continues for weeks, the issue will make a substantial dent in the race. But Republicans and some Democrats do say that the dynamic creates an opening for Trump to further shore up and energize the GOP base—something he has struggled to do—predicting voters will respond to his campaign’s law-and-order message and his staunch defense of police, even amid national concerns over institutional police racism. A senior adviser to the Trump campaign said only that Trump had been in the state earlier this week and "we have not yet announced the date of our next trip back to the state." “I certainly think unrest feeds into Trump’s narrative that ‘America’s falling apart, we need to make America great again,’” said Tom Jensen, a Democratic pollster whose firm is based in North Carolina. “My sense is, most white North Carolinians who would be really repulsed by what’s going on in Charlotte would be in Trump’s camp. I doubt it moves the needle a lot, but the race is just about tied … something like that is never going to move the race by 3 or 4 points, but it can change the race on the margins, and we’re on the margins.” Thus far, Clinton has largely stuck to tweeting in support of Scott, rather than commenting on the Wednesday night protests. And Trump was vague in a Fox News appearance Thursday morning, lamenting the “lack of spirit between the white and the black,” and going on to assert that amid the chaos “our country looks bad to the world” in a speech later in the day. But moving the needle even a little may be enough in a state where the polls are tight and there’s a history of thin margins. North Carolina, a typically red state that went for Barack Obama in 2008 before swinging back to support Mitt Romney in 2012, is central to Trump’s path to victory, which is narrower than Clinton’s is. Clinton’s summer leads in the state were fueled by support from African-American and college-educated voters in a state that is home to the Research Triangle, the Raleigh-Durham area where universities and high-tech companies are based. But in North Carolina, as in a number of other swing states, her lead has diminished amid scrutiny of her email practices, her health and her overall commitment to transparency. And the protests, Republicans say, may mean more trouble, especially if there are additional nights of strife. “Every time there is a riot, protest, or general disruption of civility it helps Donald Trump,” said Chris Wilson, a Republican pollster who was the director of data, analytics and digital strategy on Ted Cruz’s primary campaign. The Cruz primary campaign had firsthand experience with this: Protests at a Chicago Trump rally ahead of the March 15 primaries—when a list of states that included North Carolina voted—dominated the weekend coverage before those races. Wilson said the net effect was boosting Trump across the board in the final days before the Republican contests (though representatives from Sen. Marco Rubio's campaign, also watching their own internal numbers, have said they didn’t see the same effect). “We certainly saw this in the primaries as the riots [in] Chicago, prior to a scheduled Trump speech, created a significant lift for Trump’s candidacy,” Wilson said. “Not just in Illinois, but also in Missouri and North Carolina.” The unrest also carries risks for Trump, as the charged racial questions surrounding the issue heighten the possibility of a misstatement, one that could undo a recent effort to fight charges that he’s a racist candidate. That is a risk for the bombastic Trump, who has a record of horrifying moderate voters in the wake of tragedies (“Appreciate the congrats for being right on radical Islamic terrorism,” he tweeted, following a shooting at a gay nightclub in Orlando, though he said he didn’t want the “congrats”). And the Charlotte situation carries opportunities for Clinton as well. African-Americans, a crucial part of her base, have been outraged by the shooting, the latest instance of a black man dying in an altercation with police (in this instance, the police officer involved was also African-American). Clinton has been a champion of “Mothers of the Movement,” a group of African-American mothers whose children died primarily in incidents involving law enforcement, and she is a vocal proponent of criminal justice reform. In North Carolina and nationally, her campaign is engaged in extensive outreach to the African-American community. A senior Democratic operative working in North Carolina said the incidents unfolding in Charlotte underscore the risks African-Americans see in a potential President Trump. “It is further alienation, a further concern among African-American voters about Trump’s presidency,” the source said, noting that Trump has a long record of making incendiary comments about minorities. The strategist said Trump’s best-case scenario, politically, is that calls for law and order help him solidify his base—but that doesn’t move the dial with independent and more moderate voters, the source insisted. “I think Donald Trump continues to solidify his 43 percent of the vote, he’s not adding votes, he’s certainly alienating others,” the Democrat said, going on to add, “It just confirms to his base all the things they’re concerned about are real. But shoring up 43 percent of the vote you have is not the way to get to 50.” And Carter Wrenn, a longtime Republican strategist, said it is not a given that Trump’s standing will rise on the other side of the aisle just because of the protests. “If you’re living in North Carolina, you turn on the TV and there’s riots in Charlotte, there’s looting, it gets your attention, but it doesn’t automatically help one candidate over another,” he said. “It depends on how the individual candidate responds. People will watch that. If they think, ‘Gosh, Trump’s got a lot of judgment, he knows how to solve this,' it will help him. If they think, ‘Old Trump just poured gas on the fire,’ it won’t help him at all.”
Washington (CNN)Former "Miss Universe" Alicia Machado said she cried when she heard Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton talk about her during the first presidential debate at Hofstra University Monday. "Well, last night I was with my family, with my mom and with my daughter, we were watching the debate and you know, I was really surprised," she said in Spanish during a phone call with reporters set up by the Clinton campaign. "And I started crying. I started crying because I never imagined that such an important person like her would care about my story, know about my story." Machado was referencing a moment during the debate when Clinton slammed Donald Trump's for his past comments toward women -- which has become a key campaign issue that hits on his vulnerabilities with both Hispanics and women. "And one of the worst things he said was about a woman in a beauty contest -- he loves beauty contests, supporting them and hanging around them -- and he called this woman 'Miss Piggy,' then he called her 'Miss Housekeeping' because she was Latina," Clinton had said. She continued: "Donald, she has a name. Her name is Alicia Machado. And she has become a US citizen and you can bet she is going to vote this November." Trump, seemingly caught off-guard, repeatedly interjected: "Where did you find this?" Clinton, according to aides, had been prepped on Machado's story going into the debate and aimed to use it as a way to counter sexism on Trump's part. The Democratic nominee's campaign quickly turned the exchange into what they hoped would be a lasting moment: They published a video about the former beauty pageant winner shortly after the debate, in addition to holding the press call. "I lament that I could be an uncomfortable person for Mr. Trump, but that's how things were," Machado said in the phone call. "And I know very well what's he's capable of, this man. And that's why I am fighting to make the community understand, now more than ever, that Latinos need to support the US, that we need to return all the beautiful and grand things the US has provided for us." When asked how the back-and-forth has played with Spanish speaking media, a Clinton aide had a one-word response: "H-U-G-E." On Tuesday, Trump refused to back down from his criticism of Machado, telling "Fox and Friends" in an interview that Machado had "gained a massive amount of weight and it was a real problem." "She was the winner and you know, she gained a massive amount of weight and it was a real problem. We had a real problem," Trump said. "Not only that, her attitude, and we had a real problem with her, so Hillary went back into the years and she found this girl -- this was many years ago. And found the girl and talked about her like she was Mother Theresa. And it wasn't quite that way but that's OK. Hillary has to do what she has to do." Beauty queen encouraged to lose weight Machado competed and won the "Miss Universe" title representing Venezuela in 1996 when she was 19 years old -- but then she gained nearly 60 pounds, according to a CNN report at the time. "Some people when they have pressure eat too much. Like me. Like Alicia," Trump said at the time. He was then executive producer of the Miss Universe Pageant. In 1997, rumors surfaced that Machado would be forced to give up her Miss Universe crown -- but Trump said he wouldn't let it happen, according to the CNN report. "We had a choice of: termination or do this," he said at the time. "We wanted to do this." By "this," he meant encourage her to lose weight. Machado told Inside Edition in May that she actually gained closer to 15 pounds and that Trump called her "Miss Housekeeping," because she is Latina, and "Miss Piggy." It made her feel "so fat" that it made her "very depressed," she said. Trump told the New York Times that he pushed her to lose weight. "To that, I will plead guilty," he said." But Machado said that she was affected by the comments. "After that episode, I was sick, had anorexia and bulimia for five years," she said. "Over the past 20 years, I've gone to a lot of psychologists to combat this." On Monday, after the presidential debate, she tweeted in Spanish, "Thank you Mrs. Hillary Clinton your respect for women and our differences make you great! I'm with you!" She later tweeted, "I received my passport ! I'm ready to vote For my country for you @HillaryClinton for my daughter For women workers". CNN's Dan Merica and David Wright contributed to this report.
(CNN)On the campaign battlefield, Donald Trump follows a doctrine of disproportionate force. Even 50 days out from the election, after countless attempted "pivots" to a steadier pose, his impulses -- to meet even a modest political jab, unflattering piece of reporting, or polite interruption with deeply personal attacks -- remain mostly unchecked. He was back at it this weekend with harsh assaults on a former defense secretary and a New York Times columnist. During the long primary season, Trump responded to criticism from his opponents with mocking nicknames and scornful insults. Then it was Hillary Clinton's turn. Along the way, the parents of a slain war hero, a federal judge, reporters, and even a pastor from Flint, Michigan, have been confronted with the same lopsided tactics. Here are some of Trump's most pointed reprisals. Hints that former Defense Sec. Bob Gates has 'a problem' Robert Gates has some concerns with Donald Trump. The former defense secretary, who served under both Presidents George W. Bush and Barack Obama, called the Republican nominee "cavalier" and "willfully ignorant" in a Wall Street Journal op-ed last week. The piece was also frequently critical of Clinton, but called Trump beyond repair. "He's a nasty guy," Trump said Saturday of Gates, whom he also called "an absolute clown." "Probably has a problem that we don't know about." Trump has not elaborated on the nature of the "problem." Earlier in the day, the Republican nominee, in a tweet, assigned Gates a nickname -- "dopey" -- before criticizing him for speaking "badly of his many bosses, including Obama." It wasn't the first time Trump seemed to chalk up their differences to a lack of facetime. "He knows nothing about me" he tweeted. "But look at the results under his guidance - a total disaster!" Describes Flint pastor as a "nervous mess" When Rev. Faith Green Timmons briefly interrupted him, asking that he steer clear of political attacks, during a speech at her church in Flint, Michigan, Trump promptly quit and reversed course. "OK, that's good," he said, almost sheepishly. "Then I'm going back onto Flint, OK?" He did -- and it was. For a few hours. But by the next morning, Trump was lashing out at the pastor, calling her a "nervous wreck." "She was so nervous, she was shaking," he told Fox News. "And I said, 'wow, this was kind of strange.' And then she came up. So she had that in mind, no question about it." Critical women = 'neurotic' On the subject of nervous conditions: Trump responded to New York Times columnist Maureen Dowd, who told CNN on Saturday that the candidate "thought the violence (at rallies) added a frisson of excitement," in a familiar tone. In the first of two tweets, he called Dowd "wacky" and a "neurotic dope." A minute later, she was "crazy." If that looks familiar, it's because Trump has repeatedly used the same language to insult other female critics. In August, it was MSNBC host Mika Brzezinski. "Tried watching low-rated @Morning_Joe this morning, unwatchable!," he tweeted. Brzezinski "is off the wall, a neurotic and not very bright mess! And about a month earlier, when now-former Democratic National Committee Chairwoman Debbie Wasserman Schultz resigned ahead of the party's convention in Philadelphia, Trump chimed in by calling her "highly neurotic." A couple weeks earlier, after Supreme Court Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg called Trump "a faker" -- a comment for which she would later apologize -- he took a similar shot at her mental state. "Her mind is shot," he tweeted. "Resign!" Repeated swipes at the family of slain war hero Trump targeted the parents of Army Capt. Humayun Khan, killed in 2004 by a suicide bomber in Iraq, in a prolonged back-and-forth in the days after the Democratic National Convention. In an impassioned speech on the convention's final night, Khizr Khan, the soldier's father, said to Trump, "You have sacrificed nothing and no one," then offered to lend the GOP nominee a copy of his pocket-sized U.S. Constitution. The barb did not sit well. Trump first suggested that the slain soldier's mother, who stood quietly by her husband's side during his remarks, had been muzzled by her religion. "His wife, if you look at his wife, she was standing there. She had nothing to say," Trump said during an interview with ABC News. "Maybe she wasn't allowed to have anything to say." (A day later, Mrs. Khan explained in an op-ed that she had been silenced only by her grief.) Upset that Khizr Khan appeared on television after his speech, he continued his barrage on Twitter, first writing, "Mr. Khan, who does not know me, viciously attacked me from the stage of the DNC and is now all over T.V. doing the same - Nice!" Then, 17 minutes later: "This story is not about Mr. Khan, who is all over the place doing interviews, but rather RADICAL ISLAMIC TERRORISM and the U.S. Get smart!" Calls reporter a 'sleaze' during a news conference Before he mostly shut out the press and eschewed news conferences, Trump gathered the media at New York's Trump Tower in late May to provide information and answer questions about his fundraising for veterans groups. But the Republican nominee soon maligned the press for not offering what he considered to be proper credit for his charitable giving. ABC News reporter Tom Llamas called out Trump for exaggerating the initial totals. "Mr. Trump, writing a $1 million check is incredibly generous, but the night of the Iowa fundraiser, you said you had raised $6 million," Llamas began. "Clearly you had not. Your critics say you tend to exaggerate, you have a problem with the truth. Is this a prime example?" Trump immediately rejected the math, saying he expected the number would eventually surpass $6 million, then turned on Llamas, eventually calling him "a sleaze." When a reporter asked if a Trump presidency would take on a similar tone, the billionaire businessman responded, "Yeah, it is going to be like this." "You think I'm going to change?" he said. "I'm not going to change." References judge's 'Mexican' heritage after court ruling After U.S. District Court Judge Gonzalo Curiel ordered the since-shuttered Trump University's "playbooks" to be made public, the candidate and his allies launched a series of attacks centered on Curiel's Latino background. "This should have been dismissed on summary judgment easily, everybody says it. But I have judge who is a hater of Donald Trump, a hater. He's a hater," Trump told supporters at a rally in May, saying Curiel is "we believe, Mexican, which is great." Trump spokeswoman Katrina Pierson then suggested on CNN's "New Day" that Curiel's membership in La Raza Lawyer's Association made him biased and tried to tie him to anti-Trump protesters. Slams conservative opponent Bill Kristol over opposition In late May and June, Trump launched a days-long offensive against Weekly Standard editor Bill Kristol, a Never-Trumper who was recruiting a conservative third-party challenger. "If dummy Bill Kristol actually does get a spoiler to run as an independent, say goodbye to the Supreme Court!" Trump tweeted, before doubling down at press conference days later, when he labeled Kristol a "loser," "not a smart person" and "such a fool." Elizabeth Warren as 'Pocahontas' When Massachusetts Sen. Elizabeth Warren sought to match Trump's Twitter fire, using some of the same harsh language he has made a staple of the campaign, he responded in kind -- and upped the ante, repeatedly calling her "Pocahontas," a reference to the 2012 controversy over her claimed Native American heritage. Since Warren emerged as one of his chief antagonists, Trump has been unyielding in his attacks. "I find it offensive that goofy Elizabeth Warren, sometimes referred to as Pocahontas, pretended to be Native American to get in Harvard," he tweeted last week. (Warren, a former Harvard professor, noted in her response that she did not attend the college as a student.) Trump in March interrupted a reporter trying to ask a question about Warren, asking sarcastically, "Who's that, the Indian? You mean the Indian?" Repeated attacks on Megyn Kelly Fox News anchor Megyn Kelly has been targeted repeatedly by Trump after she asked a pointed question about his past remarks regarding women at the first GOP debate last August. Initially retweeting supporters who called her a "bimbo" and other offensive terms, Trump dialed it up a couple days later. "You could see there was blood coming out of her eyes," he told CNN's Don Lemon during an interview about the exchange. "Blood coming out of her wherever." Trump has launched sporadic volleys of invective against Kelly in the months that followed, calling her "crazy" and calling for a "boycott" of her show. The current detente followed a private meeting and then an interview special, but not before Fox News put out a press release labeling Trump's "sick obsession" with Kelly as being "beneath the dignity of a presidential candidate who wants to occupy the highest office in the land." Turning on Ted Cruz -- big league It seems like a while back now, but Trump and his old primary rival Ted Cruz began the political season in a rather chummy pose. The Texas senator refrained from criticizing the billionaire businessman even as Trump mocked John McCain last July for having been captured and held as POW during the Vietnam War. During debates, Cruz mostly kept his distance from the front-runner, repeatedly dodging opportunities to poke him. But as the campaign heated up and the field dwindled, Cruz went on the attack. Trump's response was devastating. Cruz quickly became "Lyin' Ted" and, before it was all over, Trump had threatened to "spill the beans" on the senator's wife and repeatedly peddled a conspiracy theory linking his father to JFK assassin Lee Harvey Oswald. 
Democrats are starting to show cracks in their support for legislation that would allow families of 9/11 victims to sue Saudi Arabia — suggesting White House opposition to the bill may be resonating with lawmakers preparing for the first veto override vote of Barack Obama’s presidency. But to sustain his expected veto, Obama will need to persuade 34 senators to change course and oppose the bill — a very difficult task. The legislation sailed through both chambers with no opposition. And the White House now has scant time to make its case to Capitol Hill, with a veto override vote in the Senate expected this month. Story Continued Below Still, there are glimmers of hope for the administration. Key lawmakers are now making it clear they remain undecided on overriding Obama’s presumed veto — a notable departure from the overwhelming show of support behind the legislation when it unanimously passed both chambers earlier this year. California Sen. Dianne Feinstein, the top Democrat on the Intelligence Committee, indicated this week that she was rethinking her support for the Saudi Arabia legislation amid renewed arguments against the measure from the Obama administration. “I do have some second thoughts with respect to that,” Feinstein said. “I think it could bring on a whole host of unintended consequences.” House Minority Whip Steny Hoyer of Maryland, the No. 2 House Democrat, said Tuesday that “this is not a bill without complex ramifications” and he wanted to see Obama’s formal veto and his rationale for opposing the legislation before making up his mind on overriding it. “I think it would be incorrect for any member to think this is a very simple issue, that it may not have ramifications for the United States in other venues around the world,” Hoyer said. “Having said that, I will reiterate, I share and there is great sympathy among the Senate, the House, bipartisan, to assure that the American families who have suffered great grief and loss have an avenue to address their grievances.” But their public trepidation is going up against relentless lobbying from family members of the Sept. 11 victims, who have proved to be a powerful force. When Republican Sens. Bob Corker of Tennessee and Lindsey Graham of South Carolina began expressing their qualms with the legislation and suggesting that a veto override should be held off until the end of the year, the families fired back, saying the Republicans are asking “far more than the families and survivors should ever be asked to accept.” That ferocious push continued into Tuesday, as Senate Majority Whip John Cornyn (R-Texas) met privately with 9/11 families in his office and Sen. Richard Blumenthal (D-Conn.) held a news conference outside the Capitol with victims of the terrorist attacks. Another enemy working against the White House is simple: time. Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.) said Tuesday he plans to hold the override vote before senators leave Washington to campaign, dramatically cutting down the time the White House has to coax enough senators to sustain Obama’s expected rejection of the 9/11 legislation. McConnell said he assumed the veto will be overridden. The president has yet to formally issue a veto, but he is required to do so by Friday. Because the legislation originated from the Senate, that chamber will move first on an override. Speaking to reporters in New York, where Obama was attending the U.N. General Assembly, White House press secretary Josh Earnest acknowledged that the administration faces a “steep hill” in addressing their own concerns about the 9/11 bill. Yet Earnest suggested that more lawmakers are on their side than public comments would indicate. “As we’ve made this case, members of Congress in both parties have indicated that they are open to the concerns that we’ve expressed. In many cases, they share them,” Earnest said. “And the real question for members of Congress will be whether or not they’re prepared to cast a vote that is consistent with the views and feelings that they expressed in private.” The White House has repeatedly listed several concerns with the measure, including its view that the 9/11 bill could open up U.S. officials to legal retaliation in foreign courts. Earnest has also argued that the legislation could lead to different judges in different courtrooms coming up with varying terror designations about the same country. Illinois Sen. Dick Durbin, the second-ranking Democrat who sits on the Judiciary Committee, said he still had not decided whether he would support overriding Obama’s presumed veto. “I certainly agree with the premise” of the bill, Durbin said. But “some colleagues, in this case Graham and Corker have raised questions about whether or not there ought to be some modifications. I’ve talked with Sen. [Chuck] Schumer, there already have been modifications made.” The legislation, formally known as the Justice Against Sponsors of Terrorism Act, amends the Foreign Sovereign Immunity Act to prevent countries involved in terrorist attacks on U.S. soil from invoking sovereign immunity, a legal principle that shields foreign nations from legal action. That would pave the way for 9/11 families to pursue lawsuits related to the attacks. It’s not a new measure in Capitol Hill; it cleared the Senate last Congress and then resurfaced in the chamber earlier this year. This time, proponents of the legislation note that changes have already been made to the legislation to accommodate concerns from the Obama administration, and in their view, there’s little room left for a compromise. Still, other influential Democrats show signs of taking pause. “I certainly don’t want to shield those who are supporting terrorism,” said Maryland Sen. Ben Cardin, the top Democrat on the Foreign Relations Committee. “On the other hand, I understand the importance of sovereign immunity as it relates to international activities. So I’d like to understand the president’s concerns, whether there are alternative ways to handle this before I make a judgment.” Late Tuesday, Graham said he has been in touch with the White House and Saudi officials but said he was pessimistic on any prospects to come up with revisions to satisfy both the victims’ families, as well as ease the Obama administration’s diplomatic concerns. “It’s either/or politics now,” Graham said. “You’re either for 9/11 families or you’re for Saudi Arabia. It shouldn’t be that way.” Other key Republicans also stressed they were also undecided. “I’m willing to hear [the White House’s] concerns,” said Sen. Jeff Flake (R-Ariz.), a member of the Judiciary Committee, which crafted the bill. The two top senators on the Judiciary Committee — Chairman Chuck Grassley (R-Iowa) and ranking member Patrick Leahy of Vermont — both said they firmly backed the legislation, which emerged from their committee earlier this year before passing the full Senate in May. “It should be 100-0, but I don’t expect that it will be,” Grassley said of a vote to override a veto of the 9/11 bill. “If people don’t want to override the veto, they should’ve expressed their opposition earlier.” Sarah Wheaton contributed to this report.
The Secret Service said today that it is “aware” of the “alleged email hacking of a White House employee” that may have compromised the private passport information of First Lady Michelle Obama along with the communications of several White House staffers. The hacking group DC Leaks posted on its Twitter account this morning what appears to be a scanned copy of the first lady’s passport, along with several White House staffers’ private communications. The Secret Service would not confirm the authenticity of the photo or communications.     However, asked about the tweets in question, Secret Service spokeswoman Nicole Mainor said in a statement to ABC News, “obviously the Secret Service is concerned any time unauthorized information that might pertain to one of the individuals we protect, or our operations, is allegedly disclosed.” “As a matter of policy, we do not provide information regarding investigations,” Mainor said. DC Leaks is the group also reportedly behind the hacking of former Secretary of State Colin Powell's email account. The private cyber-security firm ThreatConnect has reported its suspicion that DCLeaks is a Russian-backed operation, linked to the notorious hacker Guccifer 2.0, who is suspected to be behind the massive hack into the Democratic National Committee. The White House said administration officials are taking a look at the information that has been disclosed and takes any reports about a cyber-breach "seriously," but could not immediately confirm the authenticity of the released information. This is a developing story. Please check back for updates.
Washington (CNN)Spending by super PACs tied to Donald Trump friends such as Ben Carson and banker Andy Beal will help make this week the general election's most expensive yet. Republicans and Democrats will spend almost $28 million on radio and television this week, according to advertising records, as Trump substantially increases his advertising buy for the final stretch. He's spending $6.4 million in nine states, part of what aides have said will be a $100 million television campaign through Election Day. Trump on Tuesday began reserving time on broadcast and cable through November 8. And he's getting help on other mediums, too. Beal, a Dallas billionaire who doubles as a semi-professional poker player, has started his own super PAC that has spent $1 million on pro-Trump newspaper and digital advertisements. With a net worth estimated to be $9 billion, Beal is effectively spurning the other Trump super PACs who had courted him relentlessly. It is unlikely that Beal's group, Save America from Its Government, will do television. But Jacob Cherner, a Beal aide, said he could not put a limit on how much Beal would spend. "I know his interest is intense," Cherner said. Another new group helping Trump in the homestretch. A formerly pro-Carson super PAC, The 2016 Committee, is spending more than $1 million on ads for Trump on African-American radio in Florida, North Carolina, Ohio and Pennsylvania, per records. "If Ben Carson trusts Donald Trump, so can we," the narrator says in one new spot. Republicans all together are spending about $8.5 million on radio and television. Democrats are spending about $19.5 million -- thanks to $11.4 million from Hillary Clinton's campaign, and $7.5 million from Priorities USA, her super PAC. 
(CNN)Florida -- a perennial swing state -- is living up to its reputation ahead of the November election. A CNN/ORC poll last week found Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump almost evenly matched. The survey among likely voters gave Trump 47% to Clinton's 44% -- with a 3.5% margin of error -- wiping out Clinton's bump following the Democratic convention in August. With 50 days until the election, Florida political experts say it's anyone's guess who will come out on top in the Sunshine State. "So if I had to call it today, it would simply be, flip a coin," says USF Tampa political scientist Susan MacManus, a distinguished professor at the University of South Florida. "We're to the point where anything is possible. This is just one of those kind of elections." All eyes are on central Florida's I-4 corridor, historically responsible for swinging elections in either direction. The area stretching from Tampa to Daytona Beach is diverse in politics, age, racial make-up and social economics. The two Florida's are apparent by traveling just 60 miles. George H.W. Bush for Hillary? A spokesman isn't saying The Villages, a master planned senior community centered on manicured golf courses, is staunchly Republican and full of largely white retirees. It's a must-stop for any GOP state, federal or presidential campaign. Trump's running mate, Gov. Mike Pence, visited the community over the weekend. He opened his rally asking, "How many Republicans in The Villages?" followed by a huge roar from a packed ballroom at the conference and activity center. An hour south is Orlando, a city with a Democratic mayor since 2003. It is booming with diversity, including Puerto Ricans on the east side, African-Americans on west side and Vietnamese, hipsters, whites and an LGBT community in the middle. GOP policy guru: Trump can't 'fake his way through 90 minutes' In downtown Orlando on Saturday, a Latin festival filled the air with salsa music and the aroma of Puerto Rican food. It took place on the same grounds of the Dr. Philips Center, where thousands turned out to remember 49 people slaughtered at the Pulse Nightclub in June. Sandra Calixto, a Hillary Clinton supporter who attended the festival, believes Trump is racist. "The main thing is he has discriminated against people with a disability and I have a son with disability," she said. "And for me, he is coo coo." Trump Jr. likens Syrian refugees to Skittles Clinton is outspending Donald Trump on TV ads in the state by a 4-to-1 margin. Clinton spent $38.7 million to Trump's $9.2 million throughout the general election. In the past week alone Clinton bought over $5 million in ads -- Trump spent under $1 million, a clear difference in campaign strategy. The campaigns are also taking different courses in setting up offices across the state. Clinton has 57 offices and over 90,000 volunteers, according to a Democratic National Committee memo. Trump has relied heavily on state Republican field offices instead of setting up his own. Between the RNC and Trump, 60 offices are open with 210 paid staff and thousands of volunteers according to Trump's Florida director Susan Wiles. "I am one of those that doesn't think that brick and mortar matter that much," says Wiles. "There are plenty of places for volunteers to gather." 
Hillary Clinton has added her name to the growing list of people calling on police in Charlotte to release video of the shooting death of Keith Lamont Scott.  Charlotte should release police video of the Keith Lamont Scott shooting without delay. We must ensure justice & work to bridge divides. -H  Clinton had initially planned to visit Charlotte on Sunday, but her campaign announced on Friday night that she was postponing her trip to the following Sunday. "After further discussion with community leaders, we have decided to postpone Sunday's trip as to not impact the City's resources," communications director Jennifer Palmieri said in a statement. "She will plan to visit Charlotte next Sunday, provided circumstances allow." Scott was fatally shot by officers on Tuesday and police reportedly have video that shows that he was holding a gun, though it is unclear if he was pointing a gun in their direction. Scott's family has said he was holding a book, not a gun, while waiting for his son to be dropped off from school. After reviewing the footage, the family's attorney said in a statement that it's "impossible" to detect what Scott is holding and at no point did Scott appear or act aggressively. "After watching the videos, the family again has more questions than answers," Justin Bamberg, a lawyer representing Scott's family, said in the statement Thursday. "When told by police to exit his vehicle, Mr. Scott did so in a very calm, non-aggressive manner. While police did give him several commands, he did not aggressively approach them or raise his hands at members of law enforcement at any time. It is impossible to discern from the videos what, if anything, Mr. Scott is holding in his hands." Family members were privately shown the police video, and they want it to be released publicly. Law enforcement officials have said that they intend to release the video but have not determined the appropriate timing. The city's mayor and police chief have said they believe that the video should be released but suggested that if it was released too soon it could impact the ongoing investigation. The State Bureau of Investigation is leading the investigation. Scott's family released footage shot by his wife that shows his confrontation with police officers and the moments before the shooting as well as the aftermath, but it does not show the shooting itself.  We have two names to add to a long list of African Americans killed by police officers. It’s unbearable, and it needs to become intolerable.   We've also seen the targeting of police officers—but so many serve every day with courage and honor and are committed to reform. 
Donald Trump feels like a man half his age, and Hillary Clinton is “quite delighted” that the topic of the septua- and sexagenarian’s ages haven’t been an issue throughout their presidential campaigns. Both candidates responded to AARP Bulletin for the cover story of its October issue, a copy of which was obtained by POLITICO on Thursday. Trump issued written responses to six of AARP’s 13 questions earlier this month; Clinton answered every question during her face-to-face interview in August. Story Continued Below Trump, 70, and Clinton, 68, were told that age doesn’t seem to be a factor in their campaigns and asked if they feel that’s “a fundamental change in the views of Americans toward aging.” Trump, the Republican presidential nominee, boasted about how young he feels, echoing what he told Dr. Mehmet Oz during an interview last week in which he said when he looks in the mirror he sees a man half his age. Trump’s response also included a knock on the Democratic nominee, who recently took some time off the campaign trail to recover from a bout of pneumonia. “Yes. Many Americans are living longer, healthier, fulfilling lives,” Trump wrote in response to the question. “As I’ve said before, I feel like I’m 35. Stamina and energy are important. As is a positive attitude and joy for how you spend your days.” During her interview, Clinton expressed her delight in the subject of age being a relatively non-factor this cycle. But she also spoke to the importance of available, affordable health care, a signature accomplishment of President Barack Obama, and how she wants that for everyone. “I have been quite delighted at the outcomes of the [campaign] for many reasons, but certainly because there don’t seem to be any arguments about age,” Clinton said. “People can argue about our policies, our experiences, but I think it goes to show that what we are seeing happen is that if you take care of yourself, if you can afford good health care and get it, you can live a full and productive life much longer than people in prior generations did.” “That’s what I want for everybody. I want everybody to feel they are at their best and that they’re able to continue to make a contribution and enjoy life as best as they possibly can,” she continued. “So I appreciate the emphasis on healthiness and wellness, and that’s something that I want to try to promote in the White House and get older people, not just younger people, to be paying attention—to really take advantage of opportunities and to do more. So I’m excited by what I see as a real opportunity for us to break down the barriers that age has historically posed and to really help people to focus on how they can be as healthy and well as possible for as long as possible.”
"We won every poll. Virtually every poll," he told supporters Tuesday afternoon, challenging the media consensus that Hillary Clinton prevailed. Trump also promoted eleven of these so-called polls in a tweet, calling his wins in them "such a great honor."  But the things Trump called "debate polls" -- implying rigorous, scientific polling -- were informal web site surveys that invited anyone to respond. Republican pollster Kristen Soltis Anderson told CNNMoney that the surveys are like "junk food." Meaningful national polls seek a diverse sample of respondents. The goal is to accurately represent the views of the country by accounting for differences in age, gender, party affiliations and other factors. That's not possible when anonymous web users fill out online surveys. People choose whether to participate, and they can vote multiple times, further warping the results. The only thing these surveys can measure, to a limited degree, is enthusiasm -- and some Trump supporters are definitely enthusiastic. But political scientists and researchers say it is a mistake to read much more than that into unscientific survey results. Early Tuesday morning, former Obama strategist David Plouffe tweeted that the online surveys cited by Trump are simply "bogus." Trump's proclivity for unscientific surveys was on display throughout the primary season. He frequently claimed that he "won" debates based on self-selecting polls conducted by web sites like The Drudge Report. Several respected news outlets -- Time, CNBC and Fortune to name three -- posted the surveys after Monday's debate, lending the unreliable practice an air of credibility. While sites like Time may value giving visitors a way to opine about the debate, Trump's embrace of the results ends up embarrassing both himself and the news outlet involved. "These snap polls are just a way to feed the beast until the next batch of appropriately-conducted polls can come out to tell us if voters actually moved. It's like eating a junk food snack between meals," Anderson said. Trump's tweet also cited surveys from obscure web sites like "PolitOpinion." In one case on Tuesday, Trump even cited a poll that did not exist. "I won CBS," he said on "Fox & Friends." CBS correspondent Major Garrett took to Twitter to clarify: "We did not conduct a post-debate poll." CBS did conduct a focus group of undecided voters, and Clinton came out ahead. Trump said on Fox that the survey results "mean a lot" to him, noting that hundreds of thousands of votes were cast on some of the web sites. That's true, but since people can vote multiple times -- and, with the right software, perhaps even more than that -- it isn't necessarily meaningful. Nevertheless, the surveys allow Trump and his aides to rail against media elite reactions to the debate and argue that voters are outsmarting pundits. And that's exactly what the campaign did on Tuesday. "Trump won" was the campaign's dominant social media message, citing the surveys as proof. Some political reporters called out the tactic. ‏"Trump's aggressive promotion of online (easily manipulated, non-scientific) polls saying he 'won' is a calculated effort to create a reality," Emily Flitter, who covers the Trump campaign for Reuters, tweeted. But the co-hosts of "Fox & Friends," who are reliable cheerleaders for Trump, went along with Trump's talking point. Other Fox hosts also picked up on it, even though the network has its own well-regarded polling unit. Fox morning news anchor Martha MacCallum said debate watchers are "leaning toward Donald Trump, and by pretty large margins in most of these viewer polls." She called CNN's poll the "outlier," showing Clinton as the clear winner among debate watchers. In fact, CNN/ORC's poll was one of the few polls conducted by professional researchers immediately following the debate. "Clinton was deemed the winner of Monday night's debate by 62% of voters who tuned in to watch, while just 27% said they thought Trump had the better night," CNN polling director Jennifer Agiesta wrote, based on the findings of interviews with 521 registered voters. "Although the survey suggested debate watchers were more apt to describe themselves as Democrats than the overall pool of voters, even independents who watched deemed Clinton the winner." Related: Post-debate poll: Hillary Clinton takes round one Conflating CNN's scientific poll with unscientific surveys, as both Trump and MacCallum did, is highly misleading. Some web sites, hungry for traffic, glommed on to the Trump-invented controversy. "Majority of snap polls show Trump won debate by a landslide despite CNN's overwhelming victory for Hillary in biggest official survey," The Daily Mail web site said. Unhappy with the results of CNN's scientific poll, Trump criticized the network on Twitter, on Fox and at a campaign event. "We won virtually every poll. Except for CNN. And nobody watches CNN," he said. About 10 million people watched the debate on CNN on Monday night. Overall, more than 80 million people tuned in on television, and millions more live-streamed the debate on the Internet.
New York (CNN)Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump both met with world leaders in town for the United Nations General Assembly on Monday, but the two presidential contenders did so with vastly different goals. Both Clinton and Trump met with Egyptian President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi Monday, as the grueling presidential contest enters its final weeks. The "Jon Stewart of Egypt" takes on Donald Trump Clinton, who served for four years as President Barack Obama's secretary of state, also met with Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe and Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko. While the stakes are high for both candidates, there is likely more on the line for Trump who, as a foreign policy novice, is still looking to prove his chops before the first presidential debate next Monday. Trump used the meetings to try to convince voters that despite his often explosive personality he is qualified to serve as commander in chief. The key for the blunt businessman is the visuals of the meeting, hoping that voters see a president as they observe him with a world leader. "I will say that with all the folks being in New York, I've had a lot of calls from a lot of different people on the basis that I'm doing well and, you know, they seem to think it's important to maybe meet," Trump said Monday on Fox News. "I don't want to comment specifically on who but a couple of people are coming over." He later said, "I've already met with a couple," but refused to say which ones. Clinton used the meetings with the three world leaders, in contrast, to stress her facility with high-level diplomacy gained by years of experience on the world stage. Her meetings are also certain to be watched in various parts of the world for signs of how she would direct US foreign policy as president. Clinton addressed prickly topics with each world leader, according to aides in the room. Clinton touched on North Korea and the rise of China with Japan's Abe, while Clinton addressing the need for a more vibrant -- and free -- civil society with Egypt while she met with Sisi. While reporters were in the room, Clinton told Sisi that she looked forward to talking about the "path we are taking in order to build up a new civil society, a new modern country that upholds the rule of law, that respects human rights and liberties." Trump also met with Sisi on Monday evening in New York where the two discussed "the strategic bilateral relationship between the US and Egypt," according to a Trump campaign statement after the meeting. Sen. Jeff Sessions of Alabama and Lt. Gen. Michael Flynn (ret.), two of Trump's top foreign policy advisers, joined Trump for the meeting. "Mr. Trump expressed to President el-Sisi his strong support for Egypt's war on terrorism, and how under a Trump administration, the United States of America will be a loyal friend, not simply an ally, that Egypt can count on in the days and years ahead," the Trump campaign said. The Republican nominee, who has faced widespread condemnation in the Muslim world for his proposal to ban Muslims from the U.S. and his blanket statements about Islam, also shared his "high regard for peace-loving Muslims," the campaign added. The campaign also said Trump called the US-Egypt relationship "vital to help promote peace and stability in the Middle East." Sisi is the second foreign leader Trump has met with since becoming the Republican nominee. He first met with the Mexican president in Mexico last month. Sitting with Poroshenko, Clinton said she was looking forward to talking about the challenges Ukraine faces, primarily "the very real problems and threats from Russian aggression." Clinton added that she was "anxious to know how we can be supportive of those efforts." Clinton's meetings were announced before Trump's, and a senior advisor to the former top diplomat said Friday that they were less about furthering a political argument than preparing her to hit the ground running immediately if she wins the White House. "If she is elected, she wants to be sure she is prepared (not only) to handle the challenges but to seize the opportunities on Day One," said a senior Clinton advisor granted anonymity to talk about her foreign policy views. "While she has remained a candidate, she is also focused on what it would take to govern if she wins." The meetings also set up possible contrasts that could pose a challenge for Trump given Clinton's lengthy record on the international stage as both secretary of state and first lady. Trump has tried to shore up his foreign policy credentials before, taking a trip last month to meet Mexican President Enrique Peña Nieto earlier this year. The meeting ended awkwardly after Trump said they never talked about his proposed border wall, but Peña Nieto said he told Trump during the meeting that Mexico would not pay for it. Clinton's campaign seized on the public back-and-forth between the Mexican leader and Trump, with the Democratic nominee calling it Trump's "embarrassing international incident." "When you see that he can't even go to a foreign country without getting into a public feud with the president, I think the answer is clear: Donald Trump does not have the temperament to be our commander in chief," Clinton told voters in Ohio after the meeting. For her part, Clinton has decided to forgo the standard foreign tour as a candidate because her aides feel she doesn't need to burnish her foreign policy credentials. Instead, she'll take the opportunity afforded in her home state to hobnob with foreign heavyweights -- and try to score political points. Clinton's meeting with Poroshenko, in the eyes of her aides, attempted to highlight the differences between the Democratic and Republican nominee on policy toward Moscow. Clinton's campaign and other Democrats have accused Trump of cozying up to Putin, who has built his foreign policy on thwarting US goals and failing to confront Moscow over its annexation of Crimea in Ukraine. Clinton's adviser said that she believed that Washington needed to do more to stand up to Russian "aggression" in Ukraine and to allow the Kiev government to defend itself. Currently, the Obama administration has offered logistical help to Ukraine's armed forces but has fallen short of lethal assistance as some Republicans have championed. The official did not say, however, whether Clinton would move toward lethal aid but said that she would take a look at any requests from the Ukrainians. Clinton's meeting with Sisi will make waves in the Middle East because of the recent estrangement between the Egyptian President's government and the Obama administration. Clinton, according to an aide in the room, "emphasized the importance of respect for rule of law and human rights to Egypt's future progress" and "discussed ways to deepen counterterrorism cooperation, particularly in the fight against ISIS." Clinton also used the meeting to call for the release of US citizen Aya Hijazi, who has been imprisoned in Egypt since 2014 after operating a non-profit in the country. Clinton's adviser cautioned that the meeting on Monday did not augur any kind of policy change towards Egypt. But nevertheless, the official said, Clinton does understand the complexity and complications of US relations with Egypt, a nation that is pivotal to the balance of power in the Middle East, is facing its own terror threats and would be critical to any renewed effort at Israeli-Palestinian peace. Sisi assumed power following a coup against the elected Muslim Brotherhood government in Egypt in 2013. Clinton had been secretary of state when the US helped push Egypt's longtime strongman Hosni Mubarak from power after a popular uprising, but was seen as less pro-active than other members of Obama's cabinet in cutting loose a crucial, long-standing US ally. "There are a lot of things that the Sisi government is doing that are concerning," the official said. Trump's positions on foreign policy, among them on Egypt, are more opaque than those of Clinton. But in his terrorism speech in August, he vowed to work with leaders in the Middle East -- including Sisi -- who "recognize that this ideology of death" must be extinguished. Clinton's meeting with Abe comes at a time of increased tensions in Asia following North Korea's latest nuclear weapons test. The meeting will likely highlight Clinton's commitment to US alliances in Japan and South Korea and the US belief that it is up to China to do more to convince its ally in Pyongyang to turn away from its nuclear path. Clinton, according to an aide, discussed "the threat from North Korea" and "relations with China" during the meeting. And Abe brought up the Trans-Pacific Partnership, a massive 12-country trade deal that the Japanese prime minister has backed and Clinton has rejected. There is significant concern among US allies the region about the prospect of a Trump presidency -- not least because the GOP nominee has warned that both nations must pay more to keep US forces in their countries and raised the possibility that Pyongyang's growing threat could force both states to develop their own nuclear weapons, a step neither nation wants to take. CNN's Jeremy Diamond and Tom LoBianco contributed to this report.
Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton say they raised record amounts of money in August for their presidential bids — a total of $233 million just in one month. And wealthy donors are pouring millions of dollars more into outside groups involved in the race for the White House and Senate contests. Many of those groups, along with the presidential campaigns, are due to report the details of their late summertime fundraising and expenses to federal regulators on Tuesday. Here are some takeaways from the reports: —— TRUMP MANAGER SUPER PAC PAYMENT A firm headed by Trump's campaign manager, Kellyanne Conway, received almost $250,000 from a super PAC in late August, the same month the company also was paid $128,000 by the Trump campaign, new documents show. The payment from Make America Number 1 to Conway's The Polling Company was made Aug. 23, more than a month after Conway joined Trump's team and almost a week after Trump named her his campaign manager. That super PAC is funded almost exclusively by conservative billionaire Robert Mercer, who had tapped her to lead the super PAC during the primary, when the group backed Texas Sen. Ted Cruz. Meanwhile, Trump's campaign continued paying its former manager, Corey Lewandowski. He and the campaign parted ways June 20, yet his Green Monster Consulting earned another $20,000 for "strategy consulting" on Aug. 11, the same amount it had regularly been paid. ——— CLINTON SPENDING SPREE Clinton is spending at a faster clip than Trump. The difference meant his campaign started this month with nearly a $10 million cash advantage over hers. Clinton's campaign spent almost $50 million last month, nearly $12 million more than in July, including $33 million that went into advertising. She has blanketed the airwaves with thousands of commercials promoting her candidacy and attacking Trump as unfit for the presidency. And Clinton spent about $5 million on her roughly 800-person payroll. The campaign raised more than $60 million in August; Clinton also helped raise another $81 million last month for the Democratic National Committee and state parties working to elect her. Trump's campaign raised about $42 million and spent almost $30 million in August. Like Clinton, Trump also raised tens of millions of dollars more for the party. ——— MORE BIG CHECKS FOR CLINTON GROUP Apart from the campaign, which faces $2,700-per-person, per-election donation limits, Clinton can count on several super political action committees to promote her candidacy. Donors can give those groups as much as they'd like. The biggest one, Priorities USA, continued to haul in money from wealthy Democratic donors in August. The group raised $23 million last month. And it started this month with $41.5 million in the bank. Nearly half of that came from a handful of big donors. Slim-Fast billionaire Daniel Abraham gave $3 million as did Chicago media billionaire Fred Eychaner. Combined, the two men have given the super PAC $16 million this election cycle. Democratic super donors — both billionaire financiers — George Soros and Donald Sussman gave $2.5 million and $2 million, respectively, and Emerson Collective LLC, a social activism organization headed by Steve Jobs' widow, Laurene Powell Jobs, contributed $2 million. ——— DEMOCRATIC, REPUBLICAN FUNDRAISING The Democratic Party raised $29.4 million last month compared to $23.4 million brought in by the Republican National Committee. Both presidential nominees have been working to raise money for their respective parties — which in turn devote resources to help their White House bids. Despite the similar August fundraising totals, the Democrats burned through far more cash, leaving the party with $11.5 million available as of Sept. 1, compared to the GOP's nearly $41 million. ——— SENATE CASH Billionaires are writing big checks to outside groups focused on the Senate, the August documents show. The Senate Leadership Fund, a super PAC helmed by a former chief of staff to Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, raised more than $28 million in August after months of slow fundraising. More than two-thirds of that haul came from billionaire casino owner Sheldon Adelson and his wife, Miriam, marking their first major investments in the 2016 races. 39.3 The Democratic counterpart to the group, the Senate Majority PAC, raised $11.6 million last month. Its top August donor was Eychaner, who gave $3 million. Close allies of Senate Minority Leader Harry Reid direct the super PAC. Despite having been trounced in August fundraising, overall, the Democratic group has nearly kept pace with the Republican group, the reports show. But brace for a flood of new Republican-boosting ads: The Senate Leadership Fund began this month with $40.2 million in the bank. The Senate Majority PAC had a little more than $12 million in available cash as of Sept. 1. ——— NRA FOR TRUMP One of the most active outside groups backing Trump, the Republican nominee, is the political arm of the deep-pocketed National Rifle Association, which began September with about $10 million in the bank. "The NRA — great people — they endorsed me," Trump said at a rally Tuesday in North Carolina. The NRA Political Victory Fund reported Tuesday that it raised $1.4 million in August, mostly from small donations, while it spent more than $3.9 million. The majority of the group's spending— some $3 million— was on television advertising opposing Clinton, the Democratic nominee, the reports show. According to the Kantar Media's political ad tracker, the group's ads have been concentrated in the battleground states of Ohio, North Carolina, Pennsylvania, Nevada and Iowa. The new reports also show the NRA set up pro-Trump booths at gun shows across the country. ——— FACEBOOK MONEY FOR CLINTON Dustin Moskovitz, a co-founder of the social media site Facebook explained in an essay this month that he would spend $20 million to help elect Clinton and other Democrats. A chunk of that money — $5 million — showed up in the League of Conservation Voters' bank account in August. That made up the majority of its almost $6 million in August fundraising, reports filed Tuesday show. Nearly all of LCV's expenses last month were related to television ads opposing Republican Pennsylvania Sen. Pat Toomey. The group is also canvassing and mailing out pledge cards and other materials backing Clinton, filings show. ——— Keep track on how much Clinton and Trump are spending on television advertising, and where they're spending it, via AP's interactive ad tracker. http://elections.ap.org/content/ad-spending —— Follow Chad Day and Julie Bykowicz on Twitter: https://twitter.com/ChadSDay and https://twitter.com/bykowicz
London (CNN)Flag-waving US political activists took to the streets of London this week in a "Stop Trump" battle bus to urge fellow American expats in the UK to register and vote against the Republican presidential nominee. Waving placards as they drove the red, open-top, double-decker past the Palace of Westminster and St. Paul's Cathedral, the campaigners urged the estimated 200,000 US citizens in Britain to register to vote in the election on November 8. They stopped off at key American hotspots in the city, including the American School, the City of London financial hub and a popular Philly cheesesteak food truck in Spitalfields, East London. The event was organized by Avaaz -- a global "people-powered politics" group based in London that provided iPads for US citizens to register for the vote online at the various stops along the bus route. And they tried to attract participation by handing out cookies and blaring American music by Johnny Cash and others from the speakers. "Millions of Americans live abroad," the group said in a Facebook post. "They could stop Trump from taking over the White House, but only 12 per cent of them vote. This is where we come in." Around 20 campaigners chanted anti-Trump slogans from the bus and called on US citizens to pick Democratic candidate Hillary Clinton. Brooklyn native Dana Lazarus-Cass, 55, who has lived in London for 30 years, said she was going to vote Democrat to counter what she considers Trump's isolationist campaign. "I think Americans who live abroad have a different perspective," she said. "We have a broader view of the world and America's standing in it." Amanda Jones, 27, from Colorado, also said she was voting for Clinton. Pressed on the former secretary of state's policies, Jones seemed mostly motivated by opposition to Trump. James Toles, also 27, is traveling through Europe and has already registered to vote. The New Yorker told CNN, "People who are following Trump, I don't think they even know his politics beyond the (Mexican) border wall, which is absolutely ridiculous." Avaaz's campaign director was pleased with the result of Wednesday's efforts. "Today went really well. We had an amazing reception from the general public, waving and cheering at the bus as we drove through London," Meredith Alexander told CNN. "They clearly feel the same way as we do about the threat Trump poses to our world. We had over 50 US expats come on the bus and register to vote." The Trump campaign did not respond to requests for comment. The Liberty Cheesesteak truck -- which sells the famous rolls packed with grilled cheese and meat -- is run by JP Teti, who moved to London from his home in Philadelphia eight years ago with his wife. The upcoming election dominates the conversations for US expats who queue up Liberty Cheesesteak truck in Spitalfields. Teti said that he isn't voting for either Clinton or Trump, however. "I think that there are certainly talented people in our country and we could put up better choices for leader of our country," he responded. "Most Americans would like to see that." Avaaz is planning similar initiatives in Berlin Friday and Mexico City Sunday. In Berlin, activists intend to demolish a 2.5-meter-high (8.2 feet) wall with an image of Trump painted on it. Invited to comment on the event, Kate Andrews, a spokesperson for Republicans Overseas UK, said registering Americans to vote was an important cause. "We would encourage all Americans abroad, here in the UK and globally, to register to vote," she said. "Regardless of who one casts their vote for in this election cycle, Republicans Overseas UK remains a voice for all expats who support liberty and constitutional values." The organization has not hosted any rallies in the UK for Mr. Trump yet and said reliable polling on how much support he has had not been conducted, but Andrews did point to some of the group's upcoming events of its own: "We plan to host some upcoming breakfasts around the later debates." 
Washington (CNN)Hillary Clinton called Friday for officials in Charlotte, North Carolina, to make public a police video showing the fatal shooting of Keith Lamont Scott. The shooting of Scott, a black man, has sparked protests in the city this week and is the latest incident to fuel a national discussion about lethal police force, particularly against African-Americans. "Charlotte should release police video of the Keith Lamont Scott shooting without delay. We must ensure justice & work to bridge divides. --H," Clinton said in a tweet, the "H" indicating that she personally approved the message. Clinton will travel Charlotte on Sunday, according to her campaign spokesman, Nick Merrill. Details will be forthcoming, he said. Two police videos -- from a dashboard camera and an officer's body camera -- show how Scott died. Police allowed Scott's family to view the videos Wednesday but have so far declined to release the footage to the public. Clinton, Trump navigate politics of police violence On Friday, Scott's family released what it says is a separate cell phone video, recorded by his wife, that shows the moments leading up to his fatal shooting. Clinton calls shootings 'intolerable' Clinton has commented throughout the week on the shootings of Scott and and Terence Crutcher, an unarmed black man who was killed by police last week in Tulsa, Oklahoma. At a campaign event on Wednesday, Clinton said that the police killings of Scott and Crutcher are "unbearable" and "intolerable." "There is still much we don't know yet about what happened in both incidents. But we do know that we have two more names to add to a list of African-Americans killed by police officers in these encounters," Clinton said. "It's unbearable. And it needs to become intolerable." Clinton's campaign manager, Robby Mook, told CNN's "New Day" this week that as president, Clinton would prevent such shootings by building "bonds between communities and law enforcement." Clinton's Republican rival, Donald Trump, has not yet publicly commented on Scott's death. Speaking about the Tulsa shooting, however, he said he was "very troubled" by the incident and suggested the officer -- who has since been charged with manslaughter -- "got scared" or was "choking," slang for a person who fails under pressure. Family releases cell phone video Charlotte-Mecklenberg Police Chief Kerr Putney said Friday he expected police videos of the shooting to be released eventually, when investigators decide that it can be released as part of a package with other information, so that the videos aren't released without context. This differed from his message a day earlier, when he said the public shouldn't expect the videos' release. Scott's family on Friday released cell phone video, recorded by his wife, that shows the moments leading to his fatal shooting by police Tuesday. "Don't shoot him. He has no weapon," Rakeyia Scott can be heard saying. The first portions of the shaky video appear to show a number of police officers surround a vehicle in a parking lot. A man repeatedly yells for someone -- apparently Keith Scott -- to "drop the gun." "He doesn't have a gun. He has a TBI (traumatic brain injury)," Rakeyia Scott says. "He's not going to do anything to you guys. He just took his medicine." Police said an officer shot Scott after he failed to heed commands to drop a gun. His family has said he didn't have a gun. CNN's Jeff Zeleny and Dan Merica contributed to this report.
(CNN)Donald Trump is expanding the list of individuals he would consider naming to the Supreme Court, just days before the first presidential debate, in what appears to be his latest effort to shore up Republican and minority support. Trump's latest additions put a sitting Republican senator who isn't supporting Trump and three non-white judges onto Trump's list of potential Supreme Court nominees, bringing the list to 21 names from the previous 10. The list, which Trump is set to release later Friday, includes: Sen. Mike Lee of Utah, US Court of Appeals Judge Margaret Ryan, Iowa Supreme Court Justice Edward Mansfield, George Supreme Court Justice Keith Blackwell, Florida Supreme Court Justice Charles Candy, US Court of Appeals Chief Judge Timothy Tymkovich, US District Court Judge Amul Thapar, US District Court Judge Federico Moreno and Michigan Supreme Court Chief Justice Robert Young. A Trump campaign aide confirmed the list, which was first reported Friday morning by NBC News. The unusual move to release a list, rather than simply naming the kinds of justices he would seek to nominate, as nearly all presidential nominees, including his rival Hillary Clinton, have done, is part of his efforts to reassure conservatives in his candidacy. Trump has repeatedly reminded conservatives wary of his candidacy of the importance of the President's power to fill Supreme Court vacancies in the wake of Justice Antonin Scalia's death earlier this year and as two justices on the bench are now over 80 years old. Trump's latest additions appear to be continuing reassurance to conservatives. "Donald Trump continues to take unprecedented steps to demonstrate that he intends to appoint justices like Scalia, Thomas, and Alito. Conservatives should be very pleased by the steps he has taken, and if he lives up to his promises we will have a Court that truly puts the rule of law ahead of political preferences," said Carrie Severino, of the conservative Judicial Crisis Network. Mike Lee: thanks, but no thanks Trump's pick of Lee, the Utah senator who is one of the last remaining Trump holdouts among Senate Republicans, appears to be a bid to gain not just Lee's support but also that of Sen. Ted Cruz, the Texas Republican who fought Trump for the GOP nomination until May and refused to endorse him during his speech at the Republican National Convention in July. Cruz has continued to resist entreaties to endorse the Republican nominee, but he did meet last week with Indiana Gov. Mike Pence, Trump's running mate. Cruz's spokesperson did not immediately return a request for comment. Lee, meanwhile, isn't biting. "Sen. Lee already has the job he wants which is why he is campaigning to represent the great people of Utah again this year. This new list does not change Sen. Lee's mind about Trump in any way whatsoever," Lee spokesman Conn Caroll said in a statement. Lee's brother, an associate justice on the Utah Supreme Court, was listed in Trump's initial batch of 11 potential Supreme Court picks. Previous list was all-white Trump's list also brings diversity to his previous all-white cast of potential Supreme Court picks, just as Trump has ramped up his efforts in the last month to appeal to minority voters -- many of whom he has offended during his presidential campaign. Thapar, a US district court judge, was the first South Asian to be named to an Article III federal judgeship in 2007. Moreno, who serves on the district court for the southern district of Florida, is Hispanic and was born in Venezuela. And Robert Young, the Michigan supreme court's chief justice, is African-American. Trump also added a military veteran to his list by naming Ryan, a judge on the US Court of Appeals for the Armed Forces, as another potential pick. 
(CNN)The mayor of Charlotte, North Carolina, publicly asked Friday that the two leading presidential candidates delay plans to visit her city, which has been rocked this week by unrest following a police shooting of a black man. Hours later, Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump's campaigns said they were dropping plans to visit the city in the upcoming days. "We appreciate the support of the candidates. We appreciate that they are concerned about Charlotte," Jennifer Roberts told CNN's Erin Burnett on "OutFront." "At this point, we do have very stretched resources for security and they are working around the clock. If there would be a way to delay those visits in terms of giving us a chance to get our city back to order and back to more of a state of normalcy, that would probably be ideal." Clinton's campaign announced late Friday that she would postpone a visit to the city after having announced that she would go to Charlotte on Sunday. An aide said the campaign had consulted with Roberts' office about the visit, and were told about concerns that a trip would drain vital city resources. A campaign spokeswoman, Jennifer Palmieri, said Clinton will instead visit on October 2. Also late Friday, two Trump campaign officials said they were no longer considering a post-debate trip next week to the city, though they didn't mention Roberts' plea. Trump took to Twitter Friday night to criticize Clinton over her decision to announce, and then reverse, her plans to visit the city. "Crooked Hillary's bad judgement forced her to announce that she would go to Charlotte on Saturday to grandstand. Dem pols said no way, dumb!" he tweeted. Trump, however, visited Baton Rouge, Louisiana, last month, days after flooding devastated the area, opening him to criticism from Clinton that he disrupted the response. The shooting of Keith Lamont Scott has sparked protests in Charlotte and is the latest incident to fuel a national discussion about lethal police force, particularly against African-Americans. Clinton, Trump navigate politics of police violence Clinton called Friday for officials in Charlotte to make public a police video showing the fatal shooting of Scott. "Charlotte should release police video of the Keith Lamont Scott shooting without delay. We must ensure justice & work to bridge divides. --H," Clinton said in a tweet, the "H" indicating that she personally approved the message. Two police videos from a dashboard camera and an officer's body camera show how Scott died, but have not been released to the public. Police allowed Scott's family to view the videos Wednesday. CNN's Jeff Zeleny, Dan Merica, Jim Acosta and Ashley Killough contributed to this report.
Russian President Vladimir Putin’s party has won national parliamentary elections with a significantly increased majority, a result that cements Putin's total control over the country's political life and which potentially grants him the ability to change Russia's constitution. With 93% of the vote counted, the party, United Russia, was shown to have taken 343 of 450 seats in the lower house of parliament, a sizable increase on its previous 238 seats. The vote was marked by an exceptionally low turnout of just 40 percent, illustrating a sense among many Russians that the election was of little importance in a country where the Kremlin determines all major policy decisions and elections are seen as stage-managed.   Russia’s Communist Party came a close third, while the anti-Putin opposition failed to break the 5% barrier to enter parliament, losing its only lawmaker there. The win gives United Russia a two-thirds majority that allows it to amend the constitution. United Russia's head, Prime Minister Dmitry Medvedev declared victory and Putin congratulated the party, saying it showed "political maturity" among Russians. The outcome was not surprising. With the country strongly behind Putin -- whose approval ratings stand around 80 percent -- and the opposition effectively sidelined, the vote had been described by some observers as the “dullest” election in Russian history. The only surprise was the scale of United Russia's win, overcoming polls suggesting it would have a poor showing. That was in stark contrast to the last time Russians voted for their parliament in 2011, when significant vote-rigging prompted huge street protests. Tens of thousands marched in Moscow demanding Putin’s resignation in what was the biggest popular challenge to his rule that the Russian leader has faced. Such upheavals seem now all but impossible, underlining the vivid shift in Russia’s political atmosphere since then. Eager to avoid a repeat of 2011’s trouble, this time the Kremlin has sought to create an impression that the vote would be clean. It removed the head of Russia’s elections commission -- pejoratively nicknamed the “wizard” for his ability to make the numbers add up in Putin’s favor, and replacing him with a respected human rights defender. Confident the country’s beleaguered opposition was without traction among the public, authorities had also opened up a small breathing space for them during the elections allowing them to field more candidates and to take part in TV debates. Those moves led many to predict the elections would not see significant amounts of voting fraud. With popular sentiment aggressively pro-Putin and most Russians convinced of the impossibility of political change, there appeared little need for vote rigging. How true that was was still being debated on Monday. Following the vote across Russia's 11 time zones, it was clear that the vote had been far from pristine, with growing reports of cheating and numerous videos appearing to show ballot-stuffing, but there were few claims that the violations had had any decisive impact. While threatening to annul some results where cheating was recorded, the head of Russia’s elections commission, Ella Pamfilova, said was sure the vote had been legitimate, the TASS state news agency reported. Although the vote may prove to be cleaner than in the past, critics said it was not fairer. Under Putin, the Kremlin has neutered Russia’s political debates, creating a pseudo-opposition and marginalizing actual opponents by jailing or blocking them from running, largely barring them from television, and harassing their campaigns. The parliament itself has become a rubber-stamping body, directed on how to act on most issues by the Kremlin and offering no opposition on major decisions. Before today the unauthorized opposition, the so-called “nonsystem opposition”, had only one lawmaker in the parliament, and its leaders and activists have been continuously harassed and occasionally physically attacked. This year, as part of the experiment to lend greater legitimacy to the elections, anti-Putin parties were given greater leeway. That step, however, seemed to reflect the Kremlin’s confidence in its position rather than any newfound political liberalism. With the country wrapped in nationalist sentiment following Crimea’s annexation and intensified repression of dissent, there is virtually no desire for major political change. Yabloko and Parnas, the two leading parties running on anti-Putin platforms, both failed to get above the 5%, with the early results suggesting that Russia's parliament would now not have a single openly anti-Putin lawmaker in parliament. With the final result never in doubt, there was a sensation of the system going through the motions and the majority of Russians appeared to opt out of the vote, viewing it as of little relevance. Many Russians said they can’t remember a more lackluster election run. Even the Kremlin official tasked with managing the vote, Vladimir Volodin, has described United Russia’s campaign as “sterile”, telling the business paper RBC that he believed the tactic was not to produce enthusiasm for the party but just to bring off a technically irreproachable campaign. The apathy was reflected in a record low turnout, at 40.37% the lowest since Putin took power in 2000 and 20% lower than in the contested election in 2012. In Moscow, the turnout was just 33%. In the days prior to voting, a startling number of Russians were not even aware the elections were happening. The sharp drop in participation compared with 2011, suggested that Russians' beliefs in what was politically possible in the country had narrowed considerably. At polling stations in Moscow on Sunday, many voters said they expected the vote to be cleaner than in previous years, though few expected it would be totally without fraud. Many, even those voting for the ruling party, were ambivalent about whether the vote showed Russia had democracy. Asked whether he felt Russia was democratic, one man pulled face and made a half-and-half gesture with his hand. “Does Russia have democracy?,” Vyacheslav Aleksandrovich, 63, said before voting. “Maybe. Probably we have some kind of democracy. I don’t know, I haven’t seen any other kind.” Others were more definite, saying that although they did not believe they had full-fledged democracy, it was important to vote to keep what elements of it still exist in Russia. “At the very least, it opposes the trend of authoritarianism that has appeared in Russia recently,” Lev Karakhan, a television producer accompanied by his children said after voting.
Colorado Springs, Colorado (CNN)Indiana Gov. Mike Pence told a church group here Thursday that there is "far too much of this talk of institutional bias or racism within law enforcement" during a conversation about faith. Pence was answering a question posed by Bishop John Brannon who asked about how Pence as vice president could personally unite the nation. Pence referenced recent police shootings of black men in Tulsa, Oklahoma, and Charlotte, North Carolina, saying, "It's a very troubling time for us." The Charlotte shootings, which led to violence and unrest in that city this week, have sparked discussions of lethal police force against African-Americans. Pence mentioned faith as his first means to reunite the country and reduce violence, but then said he thought there was too much talk of how law enforcement officers conduct themselves. "Donald Trump and I believe there's been far too much of this talk of institutional bias or racism within law enforcement. That police officers are human beings. In difficult and life threatening situations, mistakes are made and people have to be held to strict account," Pence said. The governor reiterated his belief that it is a challenging time to be in law enforcement and doubled down that "we ought to set aside this talk about institutional racism and institutional bias." He finished his answer by saying it's time to "move away from the rhetoric of division and embrace the rhetoric of unity." The governor expressed his opinion that when tragedies happen, voices of division come forward instead of voices of unity, though he did not directly mention President Barack Obama's leadership. Asked Wednesday about the police shootings in Charlotte and Tulsa, Trump did not address the Charlotte incident but said he was "very, very troubled" by the shooting of Terence Crutcher, an unarmed black man, in Tulsa on Friday night. 
Lingering questions about Hillary Clinton, her email arrangement and alleged pay-for-play with the family foundation during her four years at the State Department are not a distraction, spokesman John Kirby emphasized Wednesday. During a sit-down on "Fox & Friends," Kirby faced off with questions about the situation on the ground in Syria and the issue of vetting refugees to the United States before co-host Brian Kilmeade posed a question about Clinton and then took a step back to ask the rear Navy admiral what he thought about such questions. Story Continued Below "How much harder is your job being that you had all these things to handle as well as trying to justify what Hillary Clinton did over the last four years? Most of your job is questions about her four years," Kilmeade asserted. And it must be -- you must be saying to yourself -- can I just do this job? How much of a distraction has this been?" "Look, the job’s hard enough, being a spokesman is tough in any environment. And there's a lot going on in the world," Kirby responded. "What we've tried to focus on with respect to this particular issue is our responsibilities at the State Department and explaining the policies and regulations that were in place then, the ones that are in place now, and how we're trying to improve going forward." Noting that Secretary John Kerry "has been very, very open and forthright about admitting we can do a better job with our records management at the State Department," Kirby added, "We want to be more transparent." "You sure? I mean, just don't jump to conclusions," Kilmeade said. "We know we can do a better job with records management. And he's hired a former ambassador to come in and do nothing but help us be better at transparency," Kirby continued. "Look, I don't view it as a distraction. It's part of my job. When you stand up there every day, that's what you gotta do."
Ivanka Trump met privately with House Speaker Paul Ryan, R-Wisconsin, Monday in New York City, sources confirmed to ABC News. Trump, who requested the meeting, attended Ryan's speech at the Economic Club of New York before the two had a scheduled meeting.     Ryan shared some of his experiences from the 2012 presidential campaign trail and Trump provided Ryan with an update on her father's presidential campaign, according to a source. Ryan has not crossed paths with Trump or his family since the Republican National Convention. He has been running a parallel election-year campaign touting the House GOP "Better Way" policy agenda and raising money for Republicans in the House and Senate, setting fundraising records. Last week, he suggested Trump should release his tax returns. Ivanka Trump, who is one of her father's closest confidantes, has kept in touch with Hill Republicans throughout the presidential campaign on policy issues. She also joined her father in Washington, D.C. for his meetings with House and Senate Republicans in early July. "She was good," Rep. Peter King, R-New York, told reporters at the time. ABC's John Santucci contributed to this report.
(CNN)President Barack Obama on Sunday suggested sexism in society could be hurting Hillary Clinton's White House bid. "There's a reason why we haven't had a woman president; that we as a society still grapple with what it means to see powerful women," Obama said at a DNC fundraiser in New York City. "And it still troubles us in a lot of ways, unfairly, and that expresses itself in all sorts of ways." Obama used his short speech at the event to praise Clinton while simultaneously ripping into Republican nominee Donald Trump. "It's an infomercial. It's a reality show," Obama said of the Manhattan businessman. "This guy is not qualified to be president." The remarks from Obama come just one day after he made an impassioned plea to African-American voters at the Congressional Black Caucus gala in Washington, D.C., urging them to work to stop Trump. He said it would be a "personal insult" to his legacy if black voters did not turn out on Election Day for Hillary Clinton. The fundraiser was held at the home of Audrey and Danny Meyer, who is the CEO of Union Square Hospitality Group in New York City. About 65 attendees were in the room and contributed $25,000. The co-chairs contributed $100,000, while the chairs raised or contributed $250,000. CNN's Allison Malloy contributed to this report.
Donald Trump has pulled ahead of Hillary Clinton among likely voters in a trio of swing states, according to a Fox News poll released Wednesday evening. In a four-way race that also includes Libertarian Gary Johnson and Green Party candidate Jill Stein, Trump leads Clinton 43 percent to 40 percent in Nevada, 45 percent to 40 percent in North Carolina and 42 percent to 37 percent in Ohio. Story Continued Below Johnson polled at 8 percent in Nevada and at 6 percent in both North Carolina and Ohio. The only state in which Stein registered any support was Ohio, where she polled at 2 percent. President Barack Obama won all three states in 2008 and took Ohio and Nevada in his 2012 reelection campaign. All three are essential for Trump, who faces a relatively narrow electoral path to the White House relative to Clinton. The Fox News poll is good news for the Trump campaign after a fresh NBC News/Wall Street Journal poll released earlier Wednesday showed Clinton with a 6-point lead nationwide. The Fox poll also shows Republican Senate candidates in each state with leads over their Democratic opponents. The biggest advantage of the three belongs to incumbent Ohio Sen. Rob Portman, who leads former Ohio Gov. Ted Strickland 51 percent to 37 percent. Another incumbent, North Carolina Sen. Richard Burr, leads Democrat Deborah Ross by 6 points, 43 percent to 37 percent, while GOP Rep. Joe Heck leads Democrat Catherine Cortez Masto by 7points, 43 percent to 36 percent, in the race to fill outgoing Senate Minority Leader Harry Reid’s Nevada Senate seat. In North Carolina’s gubernatorial race, Republican Gov. Pat McCrory holds a small lead despite the still-swirling controversy surrounding his decision to sign into law a bill perceived by many to be discriminatory against transgender individuals. The incumbent GOP governor leads his Democratic challenger, North Carolina Attorney General Roy Cooper, by a 3-point margin, 46 percent to 43 percent. The Fox News poll was conducted Sept. 18-20 via both landlines and cellphones. It reached 704 likely voters in Nevada, 734 in North Carolina and 737 in Ohio. The margin of error in all three states was plus-or-minus 3.5 points.
Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton holds a huge lead over rival Donald Trump among Hispanic voters, according to a new Wall Street Journal/NBC poll out Thursday. Among likely Hispanic voters, Clinton earns 65 percent of support compared to Trump’s 17 percent, the poll finds. Libertarian candidate Gary Johnson earned 9 percent while Green Party candidate Jill Stein has 2. Story Continued Below A vast majority of Hispanics surveyed – 8 in 10 – have negative views of the Republican nominee. Seven in 10 have “very negative” feelings of Trump, according to the poll, while only 15 percent have a somewhat or very positive view of him. The results come as little surprise. Early in the campaign, Trump came under fire for calling Hispanic immigrants “rapists” and criminals, for vowing to build a wall along America’s southern border and making Mexico pay for it and for kicking well-known Mexican-American journalist Jorge Ramos out of a press conference. More recently, he has pivoted on his stance on illegal immigration, saying that he’s open to softening laws on illegal immigration while also declaring there will be no amnesty for undocumented immigrants. The survey of 300 registered Hispanic voters was conducted between Sept. 15 and Sept. 20, with a margin of error of plus or minus 5.66 percent.
(CNN)President Barack Obama sharply criticized Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump for saying earlier this week that the black community is in the worst shape it's "ever been in before." "I think even most 8-year-olds will tell you that whole slavery thing wasn't very good for black people," Obama told ABC News in an interview that aired Friday on "Good Morning America." "Jim Crow wasn't very good for black people. What we have to do is use our history to propel us to make even more progress in the future." Obama's comments reflected the wide gulf between the President and Trump that came into greater focus this week as race again became a top issue in the 2016 campaign following fatal police shootings of African-American men in Oklahoma and North Carolina. Speaking before a mostly white audience Tuesday in Kenansville, North Carolina, Trump spoke of the need to "rebuild our inner cities." "Our African-American communities are absolutely in the worst shape that they've ever been in before. Ever. Ever. Ever," Trump said. The speech was part of a high-profile push by the Trump campaign to plug gaps in poll numbers with minority voters, and also to win over white voters turned off by divisive rhetoric from Trump that critics have repeatedly labeled as racist. Still, the effort has stumbled. By proposing the expansion of the controversial "stop-and-frisk" program as a way to improve urban policing -- and by engaging in a public re-litigation of the baseless "birther" controversy that critics labeled racist -- Trump spent much of the last week doing damage control with the same voters he'd hoped to attract. All the while, Obama has positioned himself as one of Trump's most vocal critics -- and rival Hillary Clinton's biggest cheerleader. Speaking to reporters gathered in the Oval Office last Friday, Obama sarcastically dismissed Trump's "birther" capitulation. "I was pretty confident about where I was born, I think most people were as well," he said. "My hope would be the presidential election reflects more serious issues than that." And the president made a more earnest effort to rebut Trump when he spoke at the Congressional Black Caucus gala on Saturday, and said that he would consider it a "personal insult" to his legacy if black voters didn't turn out for Clinton. Newest absentee, registration numbers promising for Clinton "If I hear anybody saying their vote does not matter, that it doesn't matter who we elect -- read up on your history. It matters. We've got to get people to vote," Obama said. "I will consider it a personal insult -- an insult to my legacy -- if this community lets down its guard and fails to activate itself in this election. You want to give me a good sendoff? Go vote." At the event, Obama also criticized Trump for using hyperbolic language when discussing African-Americans, and suggested that Trump visit the Smithsonian's new National Museum of African American History and Culture for perspective. "You may have heard Hillary's opponent in this election say that there's never been a worse time to be a black person. I mean, he missed that whole civics lesson about slavery or Jim Crow," he said. "But we've got a museum for him to visit, so he can tune in. We will educate him." Obama speaks at the museum's opening Friday. 
The hacker website that leaked Colin Powell's politically embarrassing emails struck again Thursday, this time releasing what appears to be the personal emails of a White House staffer working with Hillary Clinton’s campaign — and what purports to be an image of Michelle Obama’s passport. An initial scan of the messages appear to show chatter mostly regarding event planning details, such as requesting an invoice for a stage used at a Clinton campaign event. In one exchange, the advanced planning team expresses concern that the media might notice a group of protesters at one event. Story Continued Below The emails appear to be taken from the staffer's personal Gmail account, and span from February 2015 to July of this year. A Secret Service spokeswoman said the agency was “aware of the alleged email hacking of a White House employee.” “The Secret Service is concerned any time unauthorized information that might pertain to one of the individuals we protect, or our operations, is allegedly disclosed,” spokeswoman Nicole Mainor told POLITICO. “As a matter of policy, we do not provide information regarding investigations.” White House spokesman Josh Earnest declined to discuss the leak at his daily briefing. “Administration officials are taking a look at the information that’s been disclosed,” Earnest told reporters. “Obviously we take any reports about a cyber breach seriously, particularly if it may include some sensitive information.” Attorney General Loretta Lynch told reporters that the Justice Department is "aware of those media reports." "It is something that we're looking into," she said. According to a LinkedIn page, the staffer has worked as an advance associate for the White House since April 2015. The staffer also appears to work with the Clinton campaign as an event organizer. The email dump was posted late Wednesday on the purported anti-secrecy site DC Leaks, which security experts have connected to the suspected Russian cyberattack campaign targeting U.S. political institutions and state election offices. Most notably, the site has also posted the pilfered private emails of Powell, as well as the alleged communications of other Clinton campaign workers and a few Republican lawmakers who have been critical of the Russian regime, including Sens. John McCain and Lindsey Graham. Early on Thursday, the DC Leaks Twitter account posted the purported image of Michelle Obama's passport. The emails may have been stolen during a previously reported cyberattack campaign that targeted at the personal email accounts of at least 26 Clinton campaign staffers and volunteers. Digital forensic experts have tied that digital assault to the same Russian hacking group that is believed to have also infiltrated other top Democratic institutions, including the Democratic National Committee. Eric Geller contributed to this report.
With Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton set to square off for the first time in Monday night’s presidential debate, a new Monmouth University poll shows the former secretary of state’s nationwide lead shrinking. Trump trails Clinton by just four percentage points, 46 percent to 42 percent, among likely voters nationwide in the poll released Monday afternoon. That four-point advantage is down from the seven-point edge Clinton enjoyed in the previous Monmouth poll, released in August. Story Continued Below The four-way poll also included Libertarian Gary Johnson, who polled at 8 percent among likely voters, and the Green Party’s Jill Stein, who polled at 2 percent with that group. Ahead of Monday night’s debate, 75 percent of those polled said they intend to watch, although just 12 percent said it is either “very likely” or “somewhat likely” that the debate will have an impact on which candidate they support. Eighty-seven percent of respondents said there is no chance that the debate will affect their support for a particular candidate. On the question of which major-party candidate possesses the correct temperament to be president, those polled favored Clinton (58 percent) over Trump (35 percent). But respondents were split equally at 48 percent between the two candidates when asked which would better handle the issue of the economy and jobs. Respondents were similarly split on the issue of terrorism on U.S. soil, with 48 percent favoring Clinton and 45 percent picking Trump. The Monmouth University poll was conducted from Sept. 22-25 via landlines and cell phones, reaching 802 registered voters with a margin of error of plus-or-minus 3.5 percent. Of the 802 respondents, 729 were deemed likely to vote in November’s general election. The margin of error for that group was plus-or-minus 3.6 percent.
Washington (CNN)New Jersey governor and Donald Trump surrogate Chris Christie called Hillary Clinton "a disgrace" after she connected recent police shootings to "systematic racism" -- hours after the GOP nominee said he was "very troubled" by a recent incident in Oklahoma. "She's a disgrace. She's a disgrace and those comments are a disgrace," Christie said Wednesday on "The Laura Ingraham Show." "It's typical of Hillary Clinton. She knows nothing but the mouth never stops." Trump, however, has also displayed a tendency to speak about events before all the facts are made clear. He notably called the explosion in New York City over the weekend a "bomb" 30 minutes after the incident, despite a lack of official confirmation. Ingraham played comments Clinton made Tuesday on "The Steve Harvey Show" following the shooting of Terence Crutcher, a 40-year-old unarmed black man shot dead by police in Tulsa, Oklahoma. "And we've got to tackle systemic racism -- this horrible shooting again," Clinton said. "How many times do we have to see this in our country? In Tulsa, an unarmed man with his hands in the air? I mean, this is just unbearable, and it needs to be intolerable. And so maybe I can, by speaking directly to white people, say, look, this is not who we are." Trump, speaking Wednesday in Cleveland Heights, Ohio, at a minority voter outreach event, also expressed concern about the shooting. "I must tell you, I watched the shooting, in particular in Tulsa, and that man was hands up, that man went to the car -- hands up -- put his hand on the car. To me, it looked like he did everything you're supposed to do," Trump said. "And he looked like a really good man -- and maybe I'm a little clouded because I saw his family talking about him after the fact ... but he looked like somebody who was doing what they were asking him to do." Christie -- speaking hours after Clinton condemned the shooting death of Keith Lamont Scott in Charlotte, North Carolina -- said the former secretary of state doesn't know enough about policing to draw any conclusions. "The fact is she has no idea what happened in North Carolina," he said. "The same way, as you very aptly pointed out Laura, people jumped to conclusions in Ferguson, which caused riot conditions in Ferguson, because of politicians dumping gasoline on a fire." The Clinton campaign has said she hopes to develop national best practices for police to help them manage situations like those in Tulsa and Charlotte. But Christie, a former federal prosecutor, said Clinton had "no experience in law enforcement except for being interviewed by them." "I'm just appalled, and as someone who spent seven years in law enforcement, she's exactly the kind of politician that law enforcement loathes, loathes her," Christie added. "Because she jumps to conclusions for political gain and doesn't care what careers or lives she ruins in the process." 
(CNN)Iranian President Hassan Rouhani accused the United States Thursday of "a lack of compliance" with the nuclear deal agreed between Tehran and world powers last July. Speaking to global leaders at the United Nations General Assembly in New York, Rouhani then attacked the US for what he described as "illegal actions," referring to the US Supreme Court decision in April to allow US victims of terror to claim nearly $2 billion in compensation from Iran's central bank. The decision allows impounded Iranian assets to be distributed to more than 1,000 US survivors of terror attacks for which the US deems Iranian groups responsible. Rouhani blamed the ruling on the influence of "Zionist pressure groups" in Washington. Success of 'moderation' But the Iranian President, who faces an election in May and has been sharply criticized by hardliners for making concessions the US to accomplish the nuclear pact, did offer some positive words about the agreement. The ability of Iran and world powers to negotiate the deal indicates "the success we can achieve through moderation, constructive interaction, dialogue -- the policy that brought an end to a long, complicated and unnecessary crisis by adopting a win-win approach," he told the gathered international luminaries. He added that "it was a political deal that also represents a creative method ... to resolving international challenges." But Rouhani still lit into the US at one point for its "lack of compliance" with the terms, saying that "represents a flawed approach that should be rectified forthwith." And he warned Washington that any failure to implement it "will further erode the credibility of the US in the world." US rejects accusations The US rejected the accusation that it is failing to keep up its end of the bargain. "The United States has and will continue to implement its commitments under the deal with good faith and without exception," said a US State Department official, who added America has "unequivocally met" its terms and has "made absolutely clear that we are committed to full and effective implementation of our sanctions-related commitments." After Iran agreed to limit its nuclear activities, years of tough economic sanctions were lifted under the deal, allowing Tehran's oil to be sold internationally. Iran has been frustrated that it has not seen more of an economic benefit stemming from the deal, with many countries still wary of doing business with the country. Spread of terror Rouhani's critique didn't stop there, blaming global powers' post 9/11 security strategies for "the genesis of borderless violence and terrorism" in the world. Speaking in New York 15 years after the mass terror attack, he said that "no one imagined that this occurrence would lead to larger disasters resulting in a devastating war in the Middle East and the spread of insecurity across the globe." Inside 9/11: The day that never ends He pointed to the plight of the Syrian, Iraqi, Yemeni, Afghan and Palestinian people, while calling on neighbors to "stop bombing each other and accept responsibility for past mistakes". Saudi Arabia Iran's President also pointed his finger at regional rival Saudi Arabia, warning that the country must "cease and desist from divisive policies" if peace is to be found in the Middle East. "If the Saudi government is serious about its vision for development and regional security, it must cease and desist from divisive policies, spread of hate ideology, and trampling upon the rights of neighbors," Rouhani told world leaders. Senate rejects bid to block US-Saudi Arabia arms deal Shi'ite-led Iran and the Saudi Arabian Sunni monarchy are on opposing sides of the Syrian conflict, with Iran sending forces and advisers to back Syrian President Bashar al-Assad while its rival supports Syrian rebel groups. They are also divided over Yemen. The Saudis have accused Iran of backing the Houthi rebels, who seized power from the government in March. At least 30 Yemeni civilians were killed Wednesday in Saudi-led airstrikes in the port region of Hodieda. 
Mike Pence defended his running mate Donald Trump’s call for nationwide stop-and-frisk policies that they claim have been effective in preventing crime despite concerns it could exacerbate ties with minority communities. “It’s on a sound constitutional footing,” Pence said on "Fox News Sunday," after acknowledging that one federal court struck down the practice after statistics revealed it targeted overwhelming numbers of African-American and Hispanic residents in New York. Story Continued Below The Indiana governor, describing an “avalanche of violence” wracking Chicago, said the policy gives police authority to search those “they think may be involved or about to be involved in criminal activity.” Pence sidestepped a question about Trump’s claim that lax vetting of immigrants somehow contributed to last weekend’s terrorist attacks in Minnesota, New York and New Jersey. The attackers implicated in those incidents were both admitted to the United States as children. Pence didn’t say how tougher vetting would have helped prevent those attacks, but he said: “We need common sense back in our immigration policies.” Pence also referenced a Turkish immigrant implicated in a Friday shooting north of Seattle that left five dead as he made his call for changes in immigration policy. “We don’t know the motivation of the permanent legal resident in Washington state who took five American lives last night,” he said.
Washington (CNN)Syria's prolonged and bloody civil war "haunts" President Barack Obama, he told an interviewer this month, though he isn't naming any specific policy change he believes could have stemmed the suffering there. Speaking with presidential historian Doris Kearns Goodwin for Vanity Fair, Obama said the grim situation in Syria "haunts me constantly." "I would say of all the things that have happened during the course of my presidency, the knowledge that you have hundreds of thousands of people who have been killed, millions who have been displaced, (makes me) ask myself what might I have done differently along the course of the last five, six years," he said. Obama's efforts to ease the humanitarian crisis in Syria have largely fallen short since an uprising against President Bashar al-Assad turned violent five years ago. The latest attempt with Russia to broker peace in Syria is unraveling amid mutual recriminations. "The conventional arguments about what could have been done are wrong," he said. "But I do ask myself, 'Was there something that we hadn't thought of? Was there some move that is beyond what was being presented to me that maybe a Churchill could have seen, or an Eisenhower might have figured out?'" "That's the kind of thing that tends to occupy me when I have the time to think about it," he said. "Usually, I'm pretty good about sorting through the options and then making decisions that I'm confident are the best decisions in that moment, given the information we have. But there are times where I think I wish I could have imagined a different level of insight." Obama 'skeptical' of policy changes Over the course of the civil war, Obama has considered taking strikes against Assad's positions as a consequence for the regime's use of chemical weapons on civilians, and has weighed arming various rebel factions who are battling the government. In the interview, Obama said he was "skeptical" taking those actions could have made any real difference in the war. Syria's crisis consumed much of the President's time this week at his final United Nations General Assembly, where he worked to convince his foreign counterparts to step up their commitments for accepting refugees from the war-torn country. He said during a special session on the refugee crisis that the world had come up short in its response. "We all know that what is happening in Syria ... is unacceptable," he said. "And we are not as unified as we should be in pushing to make it stop." But in those remarks, and during his interview with Vanity Fair, Obama didn't lay out any specific changes to his approach in Syria to bring an end to the country's strife. His spokesman said Thursday that Obama would continue making choices based on the national security interests of the US. "The President's Syria policy has been second-guessed by many, many people. I think the President acknowledged in the interview that he himself has reviewed the decisions that he has had to make with regard to US policy in Syria," Press Secretary Josh Earnest said. "And as he has reviewed those decisions, he's concluded that each time he made a decision that was squarely within the national security interest of the United States and even advanced our national security interests." 
If I hadn’t seen the last fifteen months of this campaign, I’d have no problem in asserting who won this first debate on Monday night. It was Hillary Clinton, whether the issue was the way she looked on stage, or got the better of Donald Trump in most exchanges, or her calm, somewhat more presidential demeanor. So what’s my hesitancy in proclaiming her the winner? It has to do with Trump’s not failing badly. He did not show himself to be “unfit” for the presidency, which was Clinton’s main accusation against him. In the countless other occasions—from his announcement speech on—the ordinary rules of politics would have decreed that Trump’s campaign was wounded, crippled, dead. His supporters—and every stage in the campaign has showed them to be far more numerous than had been thought—do not hear him the way those of us who’ve covered campaigns do. The insults, the sneers? That just shows he’s the one person who can get up in the grill of the elites, the establishment, the people who have ignored us, ridiculed us, left us behind. And what of his lack of knowledge (demonstrated once again in his talk about nuclear proliferation on Monday night)? It doesn’t matter, because he’s got the right instincts to upend a corrupt system. Story Continued Below If he’s blustery, self-confident to the point of arrogance, dismissive of subtleties, then that’s a sign that he’s a bold, fearless advocate, as he showed again Monday night. Measured by that standard, did anything in this debate suggest that he is “unfit” for the job, as so many newspaper editorials and condemnations by traditional Republicans have argued? Clinton did bring up the 50 GOP national security experts who have rejected him, but Trump simply replied by citing a list of high-ranking military officers who are supporting him. And what of other standard measure? Atmospherics? She was clearly happier to be on stage than he was; his water consumption suggested a subtle Marco Rubio impersonation. Demeanor? It’s hard to imagine any of those wavering college-educated women finding his constant constant interruptions appealing. On the respective vulnerabilities? He launched one brief attack on her 33,000 emails and then … the issue went away. By contrast, she laid down attack after attack on his taxes, his business ethics, his treatment of women, and the “birther” issue, which he linked to outright racism. And his “defenses”—that he ”took advantage of the laws of the nation” in his dealings with contractors, in his explanation of his missing taxes—were somewhere between unconvincing and incoherent. It’s telling that one of his more effective segments came in talking about crime, when he argued that “the people that are most affected by what's happening are African-American and Hispanic people. And it's very unfair to them what our politicians are allowing to happen.” Moreover, her calmer demeanor enabled her to level some remarkably harsh attacks; calling his birther argument flat out “racist:’ charging he’d “stiffed” many of those who’d worked for him. (She managed a more human touch by noting how happy she was that her father, a middle-class draper, never worked for Trump.) Finally, at the very end of the debate, moderator Lester Holt confronted Trump with his statement that Clinton did not have the “look” of a president—a clear implication that this was a matter of gender. When Trump tried to shift the ground to a question of “stamina,” a smiling Clinton was ready. “Well,” she said, “as soon as he travels to 112 countries and negotiates a peace deal, a cease-fire, a release of dissidents, an opening of new opportunities in nations around the world or even spends 11 hours testifying in front of a congressional committee, he can talk to me about stamina.” That worked very well. I have little doubt that Clinton will be proclaimed the winner of this debate; by any traditional measure, she was. But if this campaign so far has proven anything, it’s that traditional measures have measured very little about what has happened. And I’m very leery about applying traditional measures to this debate.
(CNN)The Clintons are building a compound in Chappaqua, New York. Hillary and Bill Clinton have bought the house next door to their current home in Chappaqua, New York, for $1.16 million, according to deed information on the 33 Old House Lane home. The 3,631-square-foot home, which was previously owned by architect Charles Chepigin, was sold to the Clintons on August 11, according to the documents. The Clintons currently own the the 5,300-square-foot home at 15 Old House Lane, a property they bought in 1999 as Bill Clinton was leaving the White House and Hillary Clinton was running for Senate in New York. That home was purchased for $1.7 million. By purchasing the new home, the Clinton's now own the entire cul-de-sac at the end of the road in the leafy New York suburb. The purchase makes it easier for the United States Secret Service to protect the former president and possible future commander in chief. Months ago, gawkers were able to drive up to the Clinton's gate and take photos. Reporters assigned to Clinton regularly position outside the home. But the New Castle Town Board voted in August to designate the lane a local-traffic-only street, meaning that there is no parking allowed on either side of the drive. Shortly after that decision, agents protecting Clinton barricaded the street and began to screen cars at the start of the cul-de-sac. The Clinton's new home was listed by Douglas Elliman, a large real estate firm with a location in Chappaqua. The listing boasted about how the home was "located close to town on a unique cul-de-sac." Housing decisions are not uncommon for presidential candidates, but they have also landed some in hot water. Republican Mitt Romney wanted to demolish his 3,100-square-foot home in La Jolla, California, before the 2012 election in order to build a 11,000-square-foot mansion with a car elevator. The plans were put on hold until after the election and a neighbor had appealed the building decision to the California Coastal Commission because, in his view, the new home would have exceeded zoning limits. After the election -- which Romney lost -- the Coastal Commission rejected the appeal. 
The Obama administration's latest attempt to pacify Syria through diplomacy is failing in spectacularly bloody fashion, raising serious doubts among officials, analysts and others about whether pursuing more talks is worth it. But there's at least one prominent group urging the administration not to give up on negotiations. Story Continued Below As Syrian and Russian forces laid waste to the northern Syrian city of Aleppo on Tuesday, nearly 60 House Democrats sent a letter to President Barack Obama calling on him to "persevere in this diplomatic path." "There is simply no realistic alternative to a diplomatic and political resolution of the Syrian civil war that takes into account the interests of Syria's diverse communities as well as the interests of all nations in a peaceful, stable Middle East," states the letter, a copy of which was obtained by POLITICO. The missive appears to try to counteract a growing sense in some corners that if the United States is serious about stopping the fighting it must put some military muscle behind its pleas to Russia, the top international patron of Syrian President Bashar Assad. The lead signatories were Reps. John Conyers, Seth Moulton and Tim Walz, all miiltary veterans. More than 50 U.S. officials have already called on Obama to use military strikes to weaken Assad and protect Syrian civilians. But Obama has given no indication he's open to entangling the U.S. military in another Middle East war. The Syrian conflict has lasted more than five years, attracting an array of groups including terrorist networks, and estimates of the dead range up to half a million. The Democratic president's diplomatic team, led by Secretary of State John Kerry, insists it will keep pursuing negotiations with the Russians despite the collapse this month of a short-lived cease-fire and extraordinary acrimony between Washington and Moscow at the U.N. Security Council. Kerry pointed out to reporters Monday that although the U.S. and Russia are not talking "right now" — presumably a reference to just a few days of silence — Russia and Syria were attacking rebel-held areas in Aleppo anyway. As a result, Kerry is unwilling to give Moscow and Damascus a permanent cold shoulder. "We're still focused on a political solution," said Mark Toner, a State Department spokesman. Kerry's diplomatic dependency has led to grumbling by Republicans. Just last week, GOP Sen. John McCain of Arizona, who chairs the Senate Armed Services Committee, called Kerry "intrepid but delusional." Sen. Bob Corker (R-Tenn.) and Rep. Ed Royce (R-Calif.), who respectively chair the Senate and House foreign affairs committees, have raised doubts about the reliability of the Russians or the Syrians when it comes to talks. Corker said Friday he was “saddened for the people of Syria who are being murdered" but that "this was always to be the outcome of negotiations since Russia has known all along that there was nothing to back up empty words from the United States.” There are no notable GOP calls for the administration to send combat troops to Syria, but Royce and others have pushed Obama to impose sanctions on Russia for its aid to the Syrian dictator. "There is no hope for diplomacy as long as Assad sees a military path to victory," Royce said in a statement to POLITICO on Tuesday. "Imposing stiff sanctions on Assad’s war machine and its enablers will allow us to push for peace from a position of strength." The House Democrats' letter came about with support from left-leaning groups including the Friends Committee on National Legislation, a Quaker organization, and Just Foreign Policy. The letter writers urge Obama to think beyond Syria when it comes to diplomacy, suggesting he look for peaceful ways to end the war in Yemen and to resolve the conflict between the Turkish government and Kurdish separatists.
NEWARK, N.J. — Gov. Chris Christie’s former campaign manager — now a top aide to Donald Trump — was aware of the George Washington Bridge lane closures before they occurred and knew their intended purpose, according to the admitted mastermind of the political revenge scheme. Former Christie ally David Wildstein said in federal court on Monday that he told the governor’s longtime lieutenant, Bill Stepien, about the idea of using local access lanes as a political “leverage point” years before they occurred. Stepien was a deputy chief of staff to the governor at the time. Story Continued Below The two discussed the concept again — that lanes would be closed to create a traffic jam and punish a local mayor — when the plan was about to be set in motion, said Wildstein, a secretive political operator and former schoolmate of Christie who was appointed by the governor to a position at the authority. Stepien, by then the manager of Christie’s 2013 reelection campaign, asked about a cover story, Wildstein said. “Mr. Stepien asked about what story we were going to use, and I told Mr. Stepien we were going to use the cover of a traffic study,” he said. Stepien, who was hired this year as a national field director for Trump, has not been charged in the incident and had not been previously implicated. Christie distanced himself from Stepien after details emerged about the scheme. While Christie is currently serving as the chairman of Trump’s transition team, he has said he did not have a role in Stepien’s hiring by the Trump campaign. Wildstein, who was the director of interstate capital projects for the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, told jurors in U.S. District Court on Monday that he first came up with the idea of closing some local lanes to the bridge years before they occurred. The Port controls the bridge, considered to be the world’s busiest. Wildstein, who has already pleaded guilty, said he visited the bridge in March 2011. It was the first time he got an overhead view of the upper level toll booths and spotted three local lanes leaving Fort Lee. Wildstein said he thought right away about Fort Lee Mayor Mark Sokolich, a Democrat who was being courted for a possible endorsement of the governor’s reelection campaign. “I noticed the traffic moving more quickly through those lanes, and I immediately thought this could be a potential leverage point with Mayor Sokolich down the road,” Wildstein said from the witness stand. He said he told his then-boss, Port Authority Deputy Executive Director Bill Baroni, about what he saw and how the lanes could be used. Baroni was with him for the visit, he said. “Mr. Baroni responded that he saw what I saw and he understood — he agreed with me — that this was a potential leverage point,” Wildstein said. Wildstein later told Stepien, then a deputy chief of staff to the governor who ran the Office of Intergovernmental Affairs. After Stepien left to run the governor’s campaign later that spring, Wildstein told his replacement, Bridget Anne Kelly, about the idea. Baroni and Kelly are both on trial for closing the lanes in what prosecutors say was an act of political retribution against Sokolich for refusing to endorse Christie. Both were indicted last May on charges of conspiracy, fraud and civil rights violations. Kelly emailed Wildstein on the morning of August 13 to say it was “time for some traffic problems in Fort Lee.” Wildstein, who responded within a minute to say “got it,” said he immediately knew what she meant. “I understand that to mean that it was time to change the lane configuration at the upper level of the George Washington Bridge in order to create traffic in the borough of Fort lee,” Wildstein told jurors under questioning by prosecutor Lee Cortes. Wildstein said he spoke to Baroni that morning to say he heard from Kelly. He said they were both surprised she wanted to put the plan in place so late in the election season. “Mr. Baroni was a little surprised it was coming in this late,” Wildstein said. “He asked how I was going to do that. I told him I was going to think about it and we’d talk about it later.” Wildstein spoke to Kelly by phone at 5:48 p.m. that night. “She told me the reason was to send Mayor Sokolich as message,” he said as Kelly, sitting on the opposite side of the court room, looked down. “The indication was that mayor Sokolich needed to fully understand that life would be more difficult for him in the second Christie term than it had been in the first.” She later discussed with him that they wouldn’t have any communications with Fort Lee officials after the lane closures started, and that all complaints would be sent to Baroni’s office and not responded to. They called the approach “radio silence.” “The purpose was to create as big a traffic jam as possible,” Wildstein said. Wildstein said it was Baroni’s idea to close the lanes in September, not August. He said Baroni was concerned traffic might be much lighter with people on vacation and school out, and said Wildstein should figure out what day school started in Fort Lee. The answer, he informed Baroni, was Sept. 9. “He smiled and said, ‘fantastic,’” Wildstein said. Kelly also agreed, he said, and he went to work setting the scheme in motion. Wildstein continued to testify Monday afternoon and could be on the stand for several more days. Christie has denied any knowledge or involvement in the lane-closing incident. But Wildstein’s attorney says there is evidence to prove the governor knew about the plot when it was occurring, and prosecutors on Monday endorsed that theory, saying the governor was told of the traffic gridlock and the mayor’s unanswered complaints on the third day of the lane closings. Kevin Marino, an attorney for Stepien, said his client has committed no wrongdoing and that that a 16-month investigation by prosecutors confirmed that. “Despite what Mr. Wildstein apparently feels compelled to say now, Mr. Stepien had no role in planning, approving or concealing his ill-advised scheme to close access lanes to the GWB,” Marino said in a statement on Monday afternoon. “To the contrary, as Mr. Wildstein has himself acknowledged, Mr. Stepien expressly advised him that Mr. Stepien was running a campaign; told him that he was not, and did not wish to be, involved in Port Authority business; and asked that Mr. Wildstein not involve him in such business. “Mr. Wildstein's sad and self-serving accusations from the witness stand may help him avoid prison for his admitted crimes, but they will not help the jury or the public learn the truth.” An internal investigation that was commissioned by the governor had found that Stepien misled Christie about what he knew about the lane closures, saying that Wildstein had approached him beforehand. The report has been widely discredited as a whitewash. Marino wrote a letter in 2014 saying that it wasn’t the case that he kept Christie in the dark about the contact, and that he had disclosed to the governor that Wildstein spoke to him. “There is no dispute that at that December 12, 2013, meeting, Mr. Stepien informed the governor that the proposed ‘lane realignment’ was one of Mr. Wildstein’s ‘50 crazy ideas,’” Marino wrote in the letter. Later in the day, Wildstein said that he told William “Pat” Schuber, a sitting member of the Port Authority's board, about the lane closures before they occurred. Wildstein said that he met with Schuber — a former Republican assemblyman and Bergen County executive — for breakfast on August 30, 2013, at the River Edge Diner. That was just 10 days before the closures began, and Wildstein said he’d already done much of the planning. An attorney for Schuber, Salvatore Alfano of Bloomfield, said Wildstein fabricated his testimony. NOTE: This article has been updated with the statement from Stepien's lawyer and with additional details of Wildstein's testimony. CORRECTION: This story initially stated that Wildstein visited the bridge and identified the lanes in 2013. It was 2011.
NEW YORK — Wall Street rallied on Tuesday as investors appeared to cheer Hillary Clinton’s strong performance in the first presidential debate and rest a bit easier about the prospect of Donald Trump winning the White House. U.S. stock futures rose sharply immediately following the debate, which most pundits and surveys suggested the Democratic nominee won handily. The Mexican peso soared. The currency tends to drop as Trump’s chances rise, with investors betting on the GOP nominee making good on his promise of new trade tariffs. Stocks continued to climb during the day, with the Dow Jones Industrial Average up 133 points, though some of that was in response to a very strong consumer confidence number. Story Continued Below Market analysts say positive reaction to the debate is not because Wall Street adores Clinton or her policies on taxes and spending. Instead it’s that many do not know what to expect from a Trump presidency and fear the impact of new protectionist trade policies and possibly unpredictable foreign relations. Wall Street’s biggest fear is uncertainty. “We’re seeing a bit of a ‘relief rally’ today. Equity markets are higher, and the peso, one key anti-Trump barometer, has rebounded from its multi-year low hit yesterday,” said Jack Ablin, chief market strategist at BMO Private Bank. “Investors assumed that Trump would cement a lead from the debate, but Hillary stayed on message, Donald did not.” Thus far in 2016, markets have not shown very strong reactions to the ebbs and flows of the campaign, as many investors assumed a Clinton win. Most of Wall Street focused on the Federal Reserve over the past several weeks, wondering whether it would raise interest rates at its September meeting. But with that meeting now past, and the Fed still on hold, investors and traders are paying closer attention to the 2016 race and taking the prospect of a Trump win more seriously, greeting news of his rise in the polls with bouts of selling. “There was certainly a reaction in the futures, and that was clearly related to the debate,” said Jim Paulsen of Wells Capital Management. “Traders clearly decided before the debate that a Trump win would be bad and a Clinton win would be good.” But Paulsen cautioned not to read too much into Tuesday’s market action. “Overall, there’s not much evidence of a big election impact on the markets, because there has been so much else going on with global growth, earnings and the Fed.” One area where a 2016 effect clearly shows up is in the currency markets, particularly the peso versus the U.S. dollar. The peso plunged 8 percent in the three weeks leading up to Monday night’s debate as Trump rose in the polls to a virtual deadlock with Clinton. After the debate, the peso rallied over 2 percent against the dollar, suggesting investors viewed Clinton as the winner. Trump continued his attack on Mexico as an unfair trading partner during the debate and once again ripped the North American Free Trade Agreement as a disaster and the worst trade deal in history. “Our jobs are fleeing the country. They’re going to Mexico. They’re going to many other countries,” Trump said at the outset of the debate. “The NAFTA agreement is defective. Just because of the tax and many other reasons.” Trump also again threatened new taxes on Mexican imports, something that could lead to fewer exports from the country and thus a weaker economy and currency. Clinton, by contrast, is viewed by many on Wall Street as generally favorable toward trade — despite her avowed skepticism about the Trans-Pacific Partnership — and unlikely to unleash new protectionist policies. So when Clinton does well, markets tend to rise along with the peso. “Most people viewed Hillary as the winner of that debate, and markets clearly want Hillary to win rather than Trump; you can tell that from the way it trades,” said Steve Massocca, managing director at Wedbush Securities in San Francisco. “People are very concerned about Trump’s trade policies being bad for the economy, and then there is the crazy factor. He comes across as having an irresponsible attitude at times and thin skin that would make him more reactionary than a president would ordinarily be.” Massocca and others noted that while Wall Street does not look favorably on all of Clinton’s proposed tax increases — especially on the wealthy — she is a very well-known quantity, having been in public life for decades, including as a senator from New York. She has also raised millions of dollars from Wall Street and given highly paid speeches to Goldman Sachs and other banking groups. In addition, many big investors believe Clinton will likely be constrained by at least one side of Capitol Hill as president. That would mean more of the same kind of economic policies seen since divided government began after the 2010 midterm elections. “Somewhere along the way, everyone decided Clinton meant stability and Trump meant volatility and uncertainty,” said Paulsen. “And if it’s Clinton, there won’t be all that much she can do and it will be like Obama for the last six years.” Trump has also spooked some investors by referring to the current market as a “big, fat, ugly bubble” and suggesting it is going to burst in the near future. He has also taken the unusual step of publicly and repeatedly criticizing Federal Reserve Chair Janet Yellen, something presidential candidates and presidents generally stay away from, given that the central bank is supposed to be largely insulated from the daily grind of partisan politics. The fear is that as president, Trump could be extraordinarily involved in monetary policy, possibly damaging both the economy and financial markets. Trump supporters argue that his presidency would actually be very good for stocks and the economy, with large tax cuts for corporations and individuals and a reduction in regulations that businesses often complain choke off stronger growth. He’s also pledged to bring back the more than $2 trillion in cash U.S. companies currently have overseas while spending hundreds of billions on infrastructure, all of which could be stimulative to the economy and good for stock prices. Trump tried to make that case in the debate on Monday night. “My tax cut is the biggest since Ronald Reagan,” he said. “I’m very proud of it. It will create tremendous numbers of new jobs. But regulations, you are going to regulate these businesses out of existence,” he said to Clinton. “I’m really calling for major jobs, because the wealthy are going create tremendous jobs. They’re going to expand their companies. They’re going to do a tremendous job.”
Donald Trump is a racist, Senate Minority Leader Harry Reid said on the Senate floor Monday afternoon, and the media has been negligent by refusing to label him as such. “Virtually every time Donald Trump says or does something discriminatory -- and that's often -- the media relies upon a catalog of buzzwords to describe his actions,” Reid (D-Nev.) said Monday. “The press uses words like hateful, intolerant, bigot, extremist, prejudice, to name but a few. Yet there's always one word that many of the press conspicuously avoid: racist. They never label Trump as a racist. But he is a racist. Donald Trump is a racist.” Story Continued Below In his Senate floor remarks, Reid said “racist is a term I don’t throw around lightly,” and detailed a handful of the allegations of discriminatory behavior leveled against the GOP nominee. The Nevada senator recalled the housing discrimination lawsuit filed against Trump in the 1970s, when his real estate company was sued for steering minority applicants away from buildings with mostly white tenants and marking their applications with a “c” or the number nine. He also quoted a former employee of one of Trump’s Atlantic City, New Jersey, casinos who recalled an edict from the Manhattan billionaire that black employees be pulled off the casino floor whenever he visited. Reid said Trump’s racism has “reached new heights” during his White House bid. He ticked off Trump’s support for the so-called “birther” movement, his proposal to temporarily ban Muslims from entering the United States and his comment — uttered when he first announced his candidacy — that Mexican immigrants "are bringing drugs, they’re bringing crime, they’re rapists, and some, I assume, are good people.” He also highlighted Trump’s attacks against U.S. District Court Judge Gonzalo Curiel, who the Manhattan billionaire has accused of bias in presiding over a fraud case against him because of the judge’s Mexican heritage. House Speaker Paul Ryan (R-Wis.) called Trump’s attacks “the textbook definition of a racist comment.” “Here we are seven weeks from Election Day, and the speaker of the house and Senate Republican leader are both endorsing this racist man. We probably should not support a man for president who by their speaker's own admission is a textbook definition of a racist,” Reid said. “Think of the example he's setting for our nation's youth. Republicans are normalizing this racist behavior. This will be their legacy, one of them. They got plenty to add to that.” “It's time for Republicans to stop closing their eyes to Donald Trump's racism, and it's time for reporters and journalists to be honest with the American people,” Reid added. “They owe America the truth. Through his words and deeds, Donald Trump is a racist.”
Monday night was Donald Trump's introduction to the general-election debate stage. On display was the Republican presidential nominee as a dichotomy; there was the, albeit briefly, measured Trump who forwent his usual “Crooked Hillary” for “Secretary Clinton” as he addressed his Democratic rival. And, defying expectations, he did not address her husband's marital indiscretions, later saying he abstained out of respect for Chelsea Clinton, who was in the room. In his second form, the businessman displayed his usual bombast and penchant for attacks, showcasing style perhaps over substance. Members of his campaign team were trying to lower debate expectations of Trump, leaking to reporters that he was shunning policy briefings and not standing at faux lecterns for 90 minutes at a time in preparation. They instead praised his freewheeling style and confidence and criticized Hillary Clinton for being overly prepared. "I thought my prep was very good. I think my prep was very good. And I really enjoyed it," Trump told ABC News' Tom Llamas last night. Trump, while forceful in his attacks, appeared to miss key opportunities to contrast himself with his opponent. During the 90-minute debate, Trump never mentioned the 2012 attacks in Benghazi, even after Clinton invoked Libya and his comments about her private email server were sparse. Such attacks on key issues are typically practiced during debate prep sessions; according to his advisers, Trump never participated in a mock debate. During a phone interview this morning on "Fox & Friends," the hosts asked Trump if he had any regrets about his performance. "Do you regret not bringing up the emails as much? You brought it up at one point," host Ainsley Earhardt asked. She followed up by asking why he did not expand his attacks on Clinton's email server or the Clinton Foundation. "I would have liked to have done that," Trump responded. "But the question weren't — I mean, don't forget you are asked a question as to progress or something, and it's hard to get off to Benghazi sometimes the way the questions were framed. You know, you start off open a totally — the opposite of Benghazi, and so Benghazi can't get brought up, but it was a very interesting evening. I thought it was good." He landed blistering attacks on Clinton on trade, one of his signature issues, effectively highlighting her weaknesses in supporting, then denouncing the Trans-Pacific Partnership. But he seemed to falter when questioned about his past actions. When asked what took him so long to accept the fact that President Barack Obama was born in the country, Trump reverted to the lie that the Clinton campaign pushed the birther issue before the Democratic primaries eight years ago. Trump's answer to the question caused some voters to lower their approval rating of him, according to a focus group hosted by veteran pollster Frank Luntz. "I was the one that got him to produce the birth certificate, and I think I did a good job," Trump said during the debate. In another misstep, he admitted during a heated exchange with Clinton on tax returns that he did not pay federal taxes. "Maybe he doesn't want the American people, all of you watching tonight, to know that he's paid nothing in federal taxes," Clinton said. "Because the only years that anybody has ever seen were a couple of years when he had to turn them over to state authorities when he was trying to get a casino license, and they showed he didn't pay any federal income tax." "That makes me smart," he retorted. But Trump, ever the showman, delivered several quick-witted exchanges that elicited laughter from the audience. "Now, in all fairness to Secretary Clinton, yes, is that OK?" he asked, looking her for approval. As she nodded, he added, "Good. I want you to be very happy. It's very important to me."
San Francisco (CNN)Hillary Clinton has moved away from the donor circuit after an August of nonstop fundraising, ceding that role to her running mate Tim Kaine, who's getting some celebrity help as well. Since September 1, Kaine has headlined 25 fundraisers in 12 states and Washington, DC, while Clinton has only held eight. Kaine continued his fundraising blitz on Wednesday in California with multiple events in the Bay Area, including a luncheon featuring two long-time Republican donors. Thursday, he's in Houston for an event that features singer Michael Bolton. This is Bolton's second fundraiser for Clinton; he appeared at an event during the Democratic primaries. The Texas Tribune first reported Bolton's appearance. The Houston event is part of Kaine's cash-raising spree. Kaine appeared Wednesday at the Atherton home of Jillian Manus, a Republican donor, philanthropist and businesswoman. The event will be co-hosted by HP CEO Meg Whitman, who ran for California governor as a Republican in 2010. Whitman endorsed Clinton in August, writing in a statement that she would vote for and donate to Clinton. According to average ticket prices and attendance figures provided by the Clinton campaign, Kaine has raised over $16 million in September, as of Wednesday. Clinton has raised around $13 million by the same standard. Clinton also canceled her trip to California earlier this month after she was diagnosed with pneumonia. The change comes after an August where both Clinton and Kaine focused more on fundraising than they did on campaigning. The Democratic duo headlined 70 fundraisers in August (37 for Clinton, 33 for Kaine). The events raised over $80 million, according to CNN's estimate. Clinton aides say that August will be the high-water mark for Clinton personally headlining events. While she will continue to headline events, one aide said more of the load would continue to fall on Kaine. The change is one that donors have long expected and were somewhat surprised it didn't happen in August. Even if Clinton was a more prolific fundraiser in August, Kaine hit the ground running on the fundraising circuit after he was named Clinton's running mate in July. To date, the former Virginia senator has headlined 58 fundraising events and raised closed to $30 million. Clinton still remains a far bigger draw than Kaine, with many of her fundraisers costing tens of thousands of dollars to attend. But Kaine has headlined his share of top dollar fundraisers. An event at the Los Angeles home of Cynthia and Charles Hirschhorn on Tuesday raised $1.4 million. Charles Hirschhorn, a movie producer who worked on "Bull Durham" and "Dirty Rotten Scoundrels," was housemates with Kaine in their student days at Harvard Law School. On Monday, Kaine headlined a "Latinos for Hillary" event at the Los Angeles home of actress Eva Longoria. Kaine also headlined an event Tavern on the Green, the historic New York restaurant in Central Park, where five donors paid a whopping $500,000 to dine with the VP candidate. In all, the intimate event raised $2.5 million. Kaine, a former chairman of the Democratic National Committee, was tapped as Clinton's running mate, in part, because of his ability to raise the money needed to compete in a presidential election. While other factors like his preparedness and ability to win over white working-class voters were key factors in Clinton's decision to pick Kaine, aides said in July that the Virginia senator was the best fundraiser being considered. 
Hillary Clinton came out swinging against Donald Trump today after the first presidential debate of the general-election season, criticizing his post-performance gripes, questioning his wealth and suggesting a "strong probability" the GOP nominee has not paid federal income taxes in years. "He actually bragged about gaming the system to get out of paying his fair share of taxes," Clinton said while campaigning in North Carolina today, referring to an exchange from Monday night's debate. "In fact, I think there's a strong probability he hasn't paid federal taxes a lot of years." She added, "When I confronted him with the reasons why he won't release his tax returns and I got to that point where I said, 'Well, maybe he's paid zero,' he said that makes him smart. Now, if not paying taxes makes him smart, what does that make all the rest of us?" Clinton, who took several days off the campaign trail to prepare for the candidates' first face-off, also said her opponent was ill-prepared. "He made it very clear that he didn't prepare for that debate," she told the crowd of roughly 1,400. "At one point he was kind of digging me for spending time off the campaign trail to get prepared. But just trying to keep track of everything he says took a lot of time and effort." Trump called in to "Fox & Friends" this morning, at one point saying he thought he had microphone issues during Monday night's debate. But he later said it must have been working well enough to pick up his breathing when it sounded as if he was sniffling. Clinton reacted this morning aboard her campaign plane, saying, "Anyone who complains about the microphone is not having a good night." Asked by reporters whether she thinks Trump will skip the remaining two debates next month — as he and some of his surrogates have suggested — she said she'll be there, no matter what. "Well, I'm going to show up. He gets to decide what he's going to do," Clinton said. "But I will be there in St. Louis and then after that in Las Vegas. She added, "If I'm the only person onstage, well, you know, I'm the only person onstage." At her campaign event in Raleigh, North Carolina, today Clinton took a veiled swipe at Trump's wealth. "One of my guests was Mark Cuban," Clinton said, referring to him as "a real billionaire."
Donald Trump won’t be winging his debate performance Monday, but the Republican presidential nominee also hasn’t been cramming his head with microchips and binders like Hillary Clinton, his campaign manager said Friday. “Of course not. He need not wing it,” Trump’s campaign manager, Kellyanne Conway, told Fox Business. “There’s a difference between being spontaneous and just, you know, being yourself at the debate stage.” Story Continued Below Trump and Clinton will square off Monday in New York at Hofstra University for the first presidential debate. While Clinton has taken time off the trail for debate prep, Trump has largely eschewed the traditional debate prep process. His campaign, however, maintains that the real estate mogul will be prepared for Monday's bout. “I don’t think he’s locked up in a cabin for two weeks like other people have been — or currently are — cramming their heads with microchips and binders, but he’s a brilliant man,” Conway said, taking an obvious shot at Clinton’s preparation. Conway said no one is playing Clinton in mock debate sessions because “we all know Hillary Clinton very well, so those of us who are intimately involved with this process feel confident that we understand Hillary Clinton’s record, we understand her vision — her lack thereof — for the country.” Clinton’s performance at NBC’s commander in chief forum earlier this month “wasn’t her best night,” Conway continued, adding that it was “a very typical debate performance or forum performance for Hillary Clinton.” “She’s easily flummoxed,” Conway said. “She did not see Bernie Sanders coming in the primaries this year, she did not do well in debates against Barack Obama in 2008, and she never saw — she never anticipated our comeback in the last five weeks.” Conway also blasted Clinton for asking supporters this week why she isn’t leading Trump by 50 points. Her remark was “a very honest moment” for Clinton but appeared “a little bit desperate,” said Conway, who went on to ask, “Who in the world tells people, ‘Why am I not 50 points ahead of Donald Trump?’” “She cannot believe — it’s so beneath her to be running against Donald Trump for president of the United States. She simply can’t get him out of her mind,” Conway said. “Why is every subject and predicate out of her mouth ‘Donald Trump’? So, you know, that’s the person you’re going to see in the debates, someone who very much has her head occupied by him.”
When Donald Trump took his campaign to High Point, North Carolina, Tuesday, his topics ranged broadly from trade to immigration to terrorism. In other words, none of the hot-button issues that are currently roiling the political landscape in the battleground state that’s looking increasingly essential to his hopes of winning. Unlike the presidential contest in nearly every other swing state, North Carolina’s is framed this year by two local battles overshadowing almost everything else. Story Continued Below There is House Bill 2 — the so-called bathroom bill which has energized young liberals and older conservatives in what’s viewed by many as a battle for the soul of the state. Then there is the furor over voting rights, which has provided Democrats with a major organizational and energy boost among African-Americans. “The intensity that you see on the national level is on steroids in North Carolina, because not only do you have this presidential race where they’re both here all the time, you also have a highly-charged governor’s race and Senate race with the issues of HB2 and voting rights litigation all rolled up into one,” explained Bruce Thompson, a Raleigh attorney and a longtime, high-profile Hillary Clinton supporter in the state. “There cannot be another state that has that kind of intensity. It comes up in every conversation. It’s not just the insiders talking about it. It comes up on the sidelines of my daughter’s field hockey games." The two issues form a unique backdrop in a place that suddenly occupies a pivotal role on a hardening electoral map. Top Clinton aides can’t envision a scenario in which Trump loses North Carolina but wins the White House. In a memo circulated to donors on Monday evening, Clinton campaign manager Robby Mook framed the state’s 15 electoral votes as something close to a must-win for Trump. The Trump campaign is acting accordingly, with three straight weeks featuring visits to the state from the GOP nominee, including his rally Tuesday. His allies are hoping the polarizing politics surrounding HB2 and roughly 35 legal showdowns in Raleigh this month about voting rights will rally conservatives to his side, putting a GOP-leaning state squarely in his column, and stamping out Democrats' Southern advances in one of Clinton’s most frequently visited states. Democrats believe the local fireworks provide Clinton with an unprecedented chance to juice up enthusiasm among young voters, college-age whites and African-Americans — the groups she’s relying on to capture the state. The contentious governor’s race has set the tone, with GOP Gov. Pat McCrory and Democratic Attorney General Roy Cooper locked in a contest that’s been so defined by McCrory’s signing of HB2 that Democrats have mulled how to saddle Trump with the governor’s baggage — a twist on the mechanics of the presidential race in other swing states, where Democrats have framed Trump as drag on down-ballot candidates. “It may be that what’s keeping North Carolina in play is that Hillary could be getting Cooper’s coattails,” said one veteran Democratic operative in the state. The Trump campaign did not respond to several requests for comment. The “bathroom bill” issue — which is controversial largely because of its provision that individuals may only use government-funded restrooms corresponding to their gender at birth — has become a defining one for Clinton, whose campaign has made a habit of seizing on local controversies in whichever state she’s visiting since the early days of her primary. North Carolina has seen businesses and some local entertainment staples flee since the bill’s passage in March, with few departures as politically stinging as the Atlantic Coast Conference’s decision to pull its college football championship game from Charlotte or the NCAA's move to ax seven in-state events — including men’s basketball tournament games. Wired Magazine this week estimated that the bill had cost North Carolina nearly $400 million already. "They are huge things that are happening within the state and I think not only is it going to help us,” added Clinton’s states director, Marlon Marshall. “It’s going to help Democrats up and down the ticket.” According to an Elon University poll released Tuesday, 60 percent of likely voters said North Carolina’s national reputation is worse as a result of the passage of HB2. Clinton’s in-state forces have used the headlines to highlight what they say is Republican-led intolerance that has led to economic harm — a case that’s animated the highly educated white voters in the Research Triangle area who could carry her to victory. Speaking last week in Greensboro, where some of the basketball games would usually be played, Clinton hammered the message home: “Look at what’s happening with the NCAA and the ACC,” she said. “This is where bigotry leads, and we can’t afford it." The Democratic nominee has also weighed in on the voting rights fight that’s been raging since the state implemented rules eliminating same-day registration and requiring an ID in 2013, calling such regulations “a blast from the Jim Crow past” in early September as she campaigned in Charlotte. Clinton’s in-state team has four lawyers working on staff to bolster her voter protection program, and Democratic attorneys there have been engaged in this fall’s fight since 2014. But the dispute returned to the forefront earlier this month after a series of legal rulings about the state’s voting laws — including one from the Supreme Court that restored one-stop early voting — pushed the onus onto the state’s counties to construct plans for approval by the Republican-led State Board of Elections. Democrats then piled lawyers in to work with the local proposals, guaranteeing they had legal representation in each of the more than 30 counties where there was a fight over the plan. Ensuring that voters can take advantage of one-stop early voting could help Clinton enormously with the state’s large population of rural African-Americans who are not registered voters. And it gave the Clinton campaign a chance to rally black voters in the cities around the idea that the restrictions were racially motivated in the first place. “There will be more early voting in North Carolina than there was in 2012,” explained Marshall, making the case that the very presence of more early voting will be a motivator. “That’s a way to energize our base, and get them to show up to the polls." Trump, for his part, has also drilled down on North Carolina. The attention has paid off: He’s within 1 percentage point of Clinton according to the POLITICO Battleground States polling average. According to the new Elon poll, when including voters leaning toward one of the candidates, Trump and Clinton were deadlocked at 45 percent, with Libertarian Gary Johnson pulling 7 percent of the vote. Unlike Clinton, Trump's focus in North Carolina has been on an anti-trade deal message that especially resonates among older, white working class voters who have lost jobs in industries like textiles. "Hillary Clinton supported NAFTA, she supported China's entrance into the World Trade Organization, and she supported the job-killing deal with South Korea that she helped to push through," he said at his High Point rally.
Sen. Bernie Sanders on Monday night warned that the heavily hyped debate between Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton is "not a night of entertainment." Clinton's former rival and current surrogate made the rounds on the cable news networks as the first showdown neared, laying out the stakes of the contest that has tightened in the last couple weeks. Story Continued Below “I think the hardest part is understanding that despite what the media may think, that this is not a night of entertainment. It's not a Super Bowl. It's not the World Series,” he said. “Tonight, the American people are going to be looking at somebody who will have enormous power in influencing the direction of our country, 320 million people, and the rest of the world. And I hope that we focus on the issues, the differences between the candidates.” Sanders criticized Trump on a number of issues, including tax breaks for the rich, climate change, and his possible choice of Supreme Court justices. “Donald Trump will appoint another conservative,” he said, adding, “Which means that Citizens United, the disastrous Supreme Court decisions that allow billionaires like Sheldon Adelson and the Koch brothers to buy elections and undermine American democracy.” When questioned over his recent comments saying Clinton needs to “get away from this personality stuff” and “start talking about the real issues,” he shot back, “It's not a criticism of her. It's a criticism of the media. Let's talk about which candidate is going to be better for working families.” Sanders said Clinton knows she is up against a skilled showman, saying, “Donald Trump is an excellent entertainer. He's had successful TV shows. That's his campaign. It's entertainment.” Offering advice for Clinton, he continued, “I would say in contrast what she has got to do is focus on the real issues. Stay focused on the issues impacting the American people.” The senator offered more criticism of Trump, taking aim at his divisive rhetoric by saying, “Donald Trump is making the cornerstone of his campaign, in fact, bigotry. Dividing us up. Latinos and blacks, and Muslims. Trying to divide our nation up.” He said that he hoped the candidates would be respectful of each other and that there is an “intelligent debate on the real issues facing the families, working families, of America.”
Washington (CNN)Donald Trump's campaign manager sought to downplay concerns raised by a report Tuesday that the Republican nominee's personal philanthropy used more than $250,000 to litigate lawsuits against opponents of his business interests. Kellyanne Conway said she's not worried about the Washington Post report that said on four occasions the Donald J. Trump Foundation cut checks to settle suits in a controversial and potentially illegal tactic, given that the foundation is funded primarily with other donors' money, not his own, according to the Post review of legal documents and interviews. "Trump is using his charities to benefit his businesses, which is against the law," Washington Post reporter David Fahrenthold told CNN's John Berman and Kate Bolduan of his report. The most substantial donation was $100,000 to Fisher House, a veterans' charity, as part of a settlement with the city of Palm Beach, Florida, home to Trump's Mar-a-Lago Club. Conway defended the donation as a settlement because of a flag Trump wanted to raise at the Mar-a-Lago. "I think this is a classic Donald Trump," she told CNN's Erin Burnett on "OutFront." "He wanted to raise the American flag as high as he possibly could over Mar-a-Lago. I think a lot of Americans at this point would applaud that. And of course the county said he couldn't do that, it had to be smaller, so they started assessing a $1,250 fine. So the way they wanted to settle it was for Trump to donate $100,000 to a veteran's group." And another check for $158,000 was distributed from the foundation as a way for a Trump golf course to settle another lawsuit, according to the Post. "I've been talking to the people who are responsible for the Trump Foundation to get some facts and some figures," she said. "It's very important for people to understand what happened in these cases. Donations went to veterans groups ... How did the Mar-a-Lago benefit from him giving $100,000 to veterans? The veterans benefited and I think that's great and I applaud him for doing that." Burnett said: "Well, the business benefited by the lawsuit going away and being settled, right? That would be how the business benefited." "Well, there are many lawsuits everyday against people ... I think you're making things up based on facts as they are not reported in this story, which also uses a lot of conditional phrasing, I'd like to point out," Conway said. Conway also added that Trump frequently is "signing checks privately to help people" from his own bank account separate from the foundation, "You can only imagine how many people have asked Mr. Trump for his time and his resources and his connections and his money privately, and he does that and he doesn't have cameras in there, it doesn't go through foundations," she said. Burnett pointed that the public could verify those donations if Trump released his tax returns, to which Conway didn't directly respond. Trump's Foundation has come under scrutiny from investigators and Democrats over possible pay-for-play schemes. New York Attorney General Eric Schneiderman is investigating the foundation to make sure it is abiding by state charity law, and House Democrats have called for the Department of Justice to look at Trump's relationship with Florida Attorney General Pam Bondi, who declined to formally investigate it. 
(CNN)As Hillary Clinton on Monday night reeled off a litany of insults he had leveled against women through the years, including some nasty nicknames for a former Miss Universe, Donald Trump leaned into his microphone and asked repeatedly, "Where did you find this? Where did you find this?" The Clinton campaign need not have looked far, or particularly hard, to turn up instances of the Republican presidential nominee speaking in cold or cruel ways about women. Trump has made a habit of it over the years, targeting public figures, even his own wives and girlfriends. On Tuesday, Trump even added to the list, calling into Fox News and explaining why he'd alternately described former Miss Universe Alicia Machado as "Miss Piggy" and "Miss Housekeeping." "She was the winner (of the pageant), and, you know, she gained a massive amount of weight, and it was a real problem," Trump said. "We had a real problem." The Trump campaign has pushed back against suggestions his past comments betrayed any lack of respect for women. "Mr. Trump has tremendous relationships with women," spokeswoman Hope Hicks told CNN in an email, noting the presence of high-ranking female officials within his campaign and company. "To say otherwise is wholly inaccurate and based on unsubstantiated claims from publicity hungry individuals." But many of Trump's nastiest affronts are matters of public record. And voters have noticed -- even as he gained in recent polls, Clinton's lead among women remained considerable, usually up around 20 points. Here is an incomplete list of his insults over the years: Critical women During the first Republican primary event in August 2015, Fox News' Megyn Kelly challenged him over his past comments about women. Trump didn't like it. "You could see there was blood coming out of her eyes," he told CNN's Don Lemon after the fact. "Blood coming out of her ... wherever." His feud with Kelly would stretch on. Before it was informally settled, he would retweet another Twitter user who posted images form Kelly's GQ Magazine photo shoot and called her a "bimbo." Trump and Rosie O'Donnell have sparred for years -- right through Monday night. During her time on ABC's "The View," O'Donnell had disparaged Trump as a "snake-oil salesman" and discussed his bankruptcy. Trump has been especially harsh in return. In this clip from a 2006 Entertainment Tonight segment, he called O'Donnell a "slob." "If I were running 'The View,' I'd fire Rosie. I'd look her right in that fat ugly face of hers, I'd say, 'Rosie, you're fired,' " he said, channeling his reality TV tagline. "We're all a little chubby, Rosie is just a little worse than most of us. But it's not just the chubbiness. Rosie is a very unattractive person, both inside and out." In August 2012, he mocked Arianna Huffington, whose ex-husband Michael revealed he was gay a year after their marriage ended in 1997, tweeting that she was "unattractive both inside and out. I fully understand why her former husband left her for a man- he made a good decision." Better Midler, too, has come under fire from Trump. In the space of six minutes on October 28, 2012, he tweeted at the singer and actress twice, first calling her "grotesque," then adding: "While @BetteMidler is an extremely unattractive woman, I refuse to say that because I always insist on being politically correct." A year earlier, New York Times columnist Gail Collins wrote about a note she had received from Trump. "During one down period, I referred to him in print as a 'financially embattled thousandaire,'" Collins recalled, "and he sent me a copy of the column with my picture circled and 'The Face of a Dog!' written over it." On their mental health More recently, he responded angrily to another Times columnist, Maureen Dowd, who suggested during an interview on CNN that Trump "thought the violence (at his rallies) added a frisson of excitement." First, Trump tweeted that Dowd was "wacky" and a "neurotic dope." In a second post, he called her "Crazy Maureen Dowd." Earlier in the summer, he had used similar terms to smear now-former Democratic National Committee Chairwoman Debbie Wasserman Schultz and MSNBC host Mika Brzezinski. Wasserman Schultz was "highly neurotic," while he described Brzezinski, who had been critical on her show, as "off the wall, a neurotic and not very bright mess!" And don't forget Supreme Court Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg. During a brief back-and-forth for which she eventually apologized, Trump tweeted: "Her mind is shot - resign! Crude gender stereotypes In a clip turned up by HBO's John Oliver, Trump discusses with a female reporter how contestants at his beauty pageant are judged. Then comments on her own appearance (at 4:56). There is a pattern. The future GOP nominee offered this assessment in his 1997 book, "Trump: The Art of the Comeback": "Women have one of the great acts of all time," he wrote. "The smart ones act very feminine and needy, but inside they are real killers. The person who came up with the expression 'the weaker sex' was either very naive or had to be kidding. I have seen women manipulate men with just a twitch of their eye -- or perhaps another body part." When discussing whether he might want more children with his third wife during a 2005 visit to radio host Howard Stern, Trump explained his paternal role as such: "I mean, I won't do anything to take care of them. I'll supply funds and she'll take care of the kids. It's not like I'm gonna be walking the kids down Central Park." More recently, as he again considered a run for office, Trump tweeted that the presence of women, simply by their presence in the ranks, were to blame for sexual assault in the military. "26,000 unreported sexual assaults in the military-only 238 convictions," he tweeted in May 2013. "What did these geniuses expect when they put men & women together?" Public, sex-specific insults Before he turned on Maureen Dowd, Trump last summer told the columnist that, "sadly," the supermodel Heidi Klum is "no longer a 10." A few months earlier, the not-yet-candidate retweeted a fan who posted a question: "If Hillary Clinton can't satisfy her husband what makes her think she can satisfy America?" Trump deleted his own post, blaming it on a rogue staffer. By the fall of 2015, Trump was a leading candidate for the Republican nomination. During an interview with Rolling Stone he commented on his primary rival, Carly Fiorina. This was the scene, as reporter Paul Solotaroff described it in his story: "When the anchor throws to Carly Fiorina for her reaction to Trump's momentum, Trump's expression sours in schoolboy disgust as the camera bores in on Fiorina. 'Look at that face!' he cries. 'Would anyone vote for that? Can you imagine that, the face of our next president?!' What he said to the face of "Celebrity Apprentice" contestant and former Playboy playmate, Brande Roderick, during a 2013 show left her blank-faced. "It must be a pretty picture," Trump said. "You dropping to your knees." Disgust at normal bodily functions At a campaign event in December 2015, he remarked on Clinton's slightly delayed return from a bathroom break during a recent Democratic primary debate. "I know where she went, it's disgusting, I don't want to talk about it," Trump said. "No, it's too disgusting. Don't say it, it's disgusting, let's not talk, we want to be very, very straight up." It wasn't the first time Trump had expressed some revulsion at something so mundane. In July 2015, attorney Elizabeth Beck told CNN's Alisyn Camerota that Trump a few years earlier had suffered an "absolute meltdown" after she requested a break to pump breast milk. "He got up," Beck said, "his face got red, he shook his finger at me and he screamed, 'You're disgusting, you're disgusting,' and he ran out of there." 
A 19-year-old U.S. Marine shot in the head while on weekend leave in Los Angeles has died and police are searching for suspects, authorities said Tuesday. Lance Cpl. Carlos Segovia Lopez died at a hospital Monday night, according to coroner's spokesman John Cades. The young Marine had been on life support since he was found Friday night slumped over in the driver's seat of his car in South Los Angeles. No suspects were identified and investigators did not have a motive. Officials named the victim as Carlos Segovia Lopez, but a family friend, Claudia Perez, referred to him as Carlos Segovia. "We ask everyone to please keep his family and Carlos in your thoughts and prayers during this difficult time," Perez posted to Facebook on Tuesday morning. Perez told the Los Angeles Times (http://lat.ms/2cCJbf0) that the Marine was visiting family and friends while on leave from Camp Pendleton near San Diego. The Marine had spent time with his girlfriend and was on his way to Perez's home, where he usually stays while in Los Angeles, when he was struck by gunfire, she said. A vehicle pulled up beside the Marine's car, and at least one person opened fire, striking him once in the head, LAPD Officer Norma Eisenman said Monday. He was not in uniform. Police contacted the U.S. Marine Corps, which in turn notified his family. He was born in El Salvador and came to the U.S. with his mother. Both are U.S. citizens, Perez said. He joined the Marines about six months ago. "The overwhelming support and prayers we witnessed in support of this young man are a testament to the mighty son, friend and warrior that he was," the Marine Corps said in a statement. It went on to say his "unselfish and honorable legacy will live on in our Corps. Once a Marine, always a Marine."
Orlando (CNN)Hillary Clinton kicked off a campaign event Wednesday by saying that the recent police killings of two African-American men that unleashed a national uproar this week are "unbearable" and "intolerable." Clinton used those words the day before to describe last week's shooting death of Terence Crutcher in Oklahoma, but revisited the issue Wednesday in light of the death of Keith Lamont Scott in North Carolina. Her comments -- which came at the beginning of a lengthy speech about improving economic opportunities for disabled Americans -- marked her first on-camera remarks on the shootings, which have again sparked a debate about lethal police force. "There is still much we don't know yet about what happened in both incidents. But we do know that we have two more names to add to a list of African Americans killed by police officers in these encounters," Clinton said. "It's unbearable. And it needs to become intolerable." The Democratic nominee added: "I know I don't have all the answers. I don't know anyone who does. This, though, is certain: too many people have lost their lives who shouldn't have." Even as she referred to the deaths as "two very upsetting incidents," Clinton also urged the public against channeling their anger by targeting police officers as she pointed to the protests that unfolded Tuesday night. "Every day, police officers across our country are serving with extraordinary courage and honor and skill," she said. "I've spoken to many police chiefs and other law enforcement leaders who are as deeply concerned as I am, and deeply committed, as I am, to reform. Why? Because they know it's essential for the safety of our communities and our officers." The racially charged issue of the deaths of black civilians in confrontations with the police has taken center stage multiple times in the 2016 election, and Wednesday was not the first time that the Clinton has commented on the issue. This week, Scott -- a father of seven -- was killed by police in a parking lot when police officers were searching for another man to serve a warrant. His family has said that Scott was unarmed and reading a book in his car, but the Charlotte-Mecklenburg police says that Scott came out of the car with a gun. In Tulsa, Oklahoma, last week, Crutcher was killed in a confrontation with police officers. Crutcher was unarmed, and videos of the incident shows Crutcher standing next to his car and falling to the ground after an officer shot him. The officer's attorney later said she was afraid Crutcher was trying to reach for a weapon. Clinton's Republican opponent, Donald Trump, also reacted to Crutcher's death on Wednesday, saying in Ohio that he was "very troubled" by the fatal shooting. "I must tell you, I watched the shooting in particular in Tulsa and that man was hands up, that man went to the car -- hands up -- put his hand on the car. To me, it looked like he did everything you're supposed to do," Trump said. "This young officer, I don't know what she was thinking. I don't know what she was thinking, but I'm very, very troubled by that and we have to be very careful." 
“Donald supported the invasion of Iraq” — Clinton “Wrong.” — Trump Trump was supportive of the Iraq invasion as far back as 2002, according to interviews the Donald did with Howard Stern, which were first uncovered by BuzzFeed. Stern asks Trump if he agreed with the Bush administration trying to sell the war. He said, “Yeah, I guess so.” The argument between Clinton and Trump then spilled over into a clash of words between Trump and moderator Lester Holt. Holt insisted Trump had supported the war, referencing the Stern interview. Trump then claimed he'd had arguments with Fox News televsion host Sean Hannity, in which he argued against the war. He also said the argument that he supported the war was a media "lie." He also cited a 2004 Esquire interview that mentioned his criticism of the Iraq invasion as proof of his opposition. That interview took place after the start of the war, and Esquire has since attached a note to the article arguing that Trump is misrepresenting its contents.
(CNN)Democratic vice presidential nominee Tim Kaine has a message for voters considering a third-party candidate: They're going to lose. "The argument against the ticket is, I think, everybody knows that they're not going to win," Kaine said of the Gary Johnson and Bill Weld Libertarian ticket in an interview with Yahoo News' Katie Couric this week. Hillary Clinton's running mate pointed to the 2000 election as evidence that a protest vote for a third-party candidate can affect the outcome of the race -- and history. RELATED: Gary Johnson: Running mate Bill Weld not dropping out "My argument against the (Johnson-Weld) ticket is the Al Gore-George W. Bush race in 2000. The third party candidacy of Ralph Nader cost Gore electoral votes in New Hampshire and Florida. And if Gore had been president, we probably wouldn't had a war in Iraq," he said. "Casting a vote, a protest vote, for a third-party candidate that's going to lose may well affect the outcome. It may well lead to a consequence that is deeply, deeply troubling. That's not a speculation, we've seen it in our country's history." RELATED: Johnson, Stein fail to qualify for first debate As the race tightens nationally and in key swing states, Kaine cautioned against a protest vote, but acknowledged he and Clinton need to make that case to voters who may be considering Johnson. "We're going to make the affirmative case for Hillary, we're going to draw the contrast with Donald Trump, but we're also going to tell people, the way you make a difference to your nation is not by doing a protest vote. It's picking the next leader of the country." RELATED: National poll: Clinton leads Trump by 6 ahead of debate 
Despite not making it to the first debate stage, both parts of the Libertarian ticket agree they are "going to alter the course of this election whether or not we're in the debates." Last week, it was determined that Libertarian candidate Gary Johnson and Green Party candidate Jill Stein did not make the cut for the first presidential debate, which will be held Sept. 26. Despite that, on Sunday in an interview that aired on "60 Minutes," Johnson and running mate William Weld agreed with interviewer Steve Kroft that their ticket still has the ability to make an impact. Story Continued Below Johnson said 70 percent of America do not know either him or Weld. At the end of the day, the former New Mexico governor said the Libertarian ticket is taking votes from both Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton and Republican nominee Donald Trump. "This is both sides, man, this is both barrels," Johnson said on the CBS news program. "I'm not going to lose one minute of sleep ruining this two party monopoly that is going on. I think they are dinosaurs and I think we're the comet in this whole equation. I'm glad for it." For his part, Weld said he thought their ticket would hurt Trump more. "I think at the end of the day, it would be most likely Trump than Clinton," the former Massachusetts's governor said. Johnson also acknowledged his recent gaffe, where he could not identify what the Syrian city of Aleppo was. He said there is no quicker way to fix mistakes than acknowledging them in the first place. "I am human, I have a filter, it starts with honesty, it starts with the truth. When I was asked the question, the first thing that came to my mind is this is an acronym," Johnson said. "You know so many people have said 90 percent of American doesn't know Aleppo, well 90 percent of America is not running for president of the United States. No excuse, no excuse."
Washington (CNN)With two months to go before Election Day, Democrats have the cash advantage in the race for the White House, but Republicans have the cash advantage in the race for the Senate. Presidential campaigns and their supportive super PACs filed new numbers Tuesday that continue to show Clinton's cash lead in the homestretch of the presidential race. Clinton's campaign raised $59.5 million and had about $68 million on hand at the end of August; Trump's raised $41.7 million and had $50.2 million on hand. Meanwhile, a cadre of Republican donors -- most prominently, Sheldon Adelson -- are keeping Republicans competitive in down-ballot races. Here are the five takeaways from the money race: Hillary Clinton is very dependent on a few billionaires Under-noticed in this campaign have been the very few Democratic billionaires who are responsible for Clinton's advertising machine: Priorities USA. The super PAC had a record-breaking month, collecting $23.4 million during summer's dog days. The bulk of the money is from a select few: Fred Eychaner and Daniel Abraham, who gave $3 million each, George Soros, who donated $2.5 million, Don Sussman, who kicked in another $2 million, and Laurene Powell Jobs, whose LLC contributed another $2 million. Those five people are responsible for a majority of the money that Priorities USA has raised, and their names have littered Democratic campaign finance reports for the entire 2016 race. Trump doesn't have donors of similar sizes, and that's why his super PACs have failed to keep pace. Only one new name appeared on Trump's PAC's reports: Cherna Moskowitz, who gave $1 million to a group run by close Trump allies (and billionaires) Bob and Rebekah Mercer. What's Clinton's money good for? Ads Clinton has enjoyed a fundraising advantage over Trump for the entire campaign, and it's allowed her to build an organization that Trump could not. The Democratic nominee spent almost $50 million last month -- way more than she spent during any other month -- and that's due to $33 million in "media buys." That's more than six times as much as they spent on payroll costs. And her campaign, joint fundraising committees and Priorities USA had $194 million on hand, meaning plenty of more ads are coming. She's still struggling with small donors: only $8.4 million of the money she raised last month if from donors who gave $200 or less. Trump is finally raising the big bucks Despite record spending in the month of August -- including a hefty amount on its digital firm -- Trump still entered the month with over $50 million on hand. Trump collected $12 million from small-dollar donors who gave directly to his campaign, and he himself added another $2 million to his own bid. $20.2 million came from his joint committees with the Republican National Committee. Trump finally began advertising in the month of August, and it's reflected in his campaign finance report. He spent almost $30 million last month, $11.5 million more than he spent in any other month. The return of Mike Bloomberg The former New York City mayor remains the most prominent political donor who hews to the center of the political aisle. His super PAC, Independence USA, has primarily focused on supporting candidates who support restrictions on firearms, and has emerged as a leading backer of Pennsylvania Sen. Pat Toomey. But he personally is backing the Democratic ticket for president. The billionaire last month made his largest donation yet to his group: another $8.5 million from his personal fortune. That's his largest check ever to the super PAC. Senate Republicans have the upper hand Thanks to $21.5 million from the Adelsons, groups backing Senate Republicans have more to spend in the homestretch than do those backing Senate Democrats. The Senate Leadership Fund, an allied group in New Hampshire, and the Koch brothers' super PAC, Freedom Partners Action Fund, raised $32.5 million in August. That also doesn't include various groups that aren't required to disclose their donors, such as the US Chamber of Commerce or other Koch nonprofit groups. And the Democrats? The main Senate groups -- Senate Majority PAC, Emily's List and the League of Conservation Voters -- took in only $20.5 million. Environmental activist Tom Steyer on Tuesday pledged another $15 million to his joint effort with labor unions to develop a coordinated ground game for the Democratic ticket. But here's what we do know now: The Democrats don't have an Adelson equivalent. Their main Senate donor last month is Facebook co-founder Dustin Moskovitz, who along with his wife gave $5 million of the $20 million he has pledged to spend in 2016. In the Senate cash race, Adelson is a game-changer. 
Donald Trump called for a change Tuesday in how the U.S. handles the terror threat of the Islamic State, a shift away from President Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton's policies. “Crooked Hillary has been fighting ISIS, or whatever she has been doing, for years,” Trump tweeted Tuesday morning. “Now she has new ideas. It is time for change.” Story Continued Below Following a series of planted bombs in New York and New Jersey over the weekend and a stabbing in Minnesota, Trump on Monday hammered Clinton on her record amid increasing concerns regarding the terrorist network and the threat of domestic attacks. The real estate mogul again blamed Clinton and Obama for refusing to utter the words “radical Islamic terrorism” and accused them of emboldening terrorists across the globe. “Today, Hillary Clinton showed again that she will say anything — and blame anyone — to shift attention away from the weakness she showed as Secretary of State,” he said in a statement Monday, adding that terrorists are “hoping and praying that Hillary Clinton becomes President so that they can continue their savagery and murder.” Trump vowed to “bring an end to these senseless acts of violence” and condemned the White House, whose spokesman referred to the battle against the Islamic State as a “narrative fight.” “They are wrong to say that we’re in a fight about ‘narratives,’” Trump said. “These terrorists pose an existential threat to our country, our values, and our way of life.”
Washington (CNN)The top Republican on the Senate's homeland security committee wants the Department of Homeland Security to hand over its records on the suspects in this weekend's bombings in New York and New Jersey and an unrelated stabbing in Minnesota. Sen. Ron Johnson of Wisconsin sent a letter Tuesday to DHS Secretary Jeh Johnson asking for information on Dahir Adan, alleged to have stabbed 10 people in a mall in St. Cloud, Minnesota, and Ahmad Khan Rahami, alleged to have planted improvised explosive devices in New York and New Jersey. Johnson also asked for information about Rahami's wife, Asia Bibi Rahami, a Pakistani national who has not been accused of any wrongdoing. Father says he warned FBI The Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee chairman asked the secretary for the alien files, records of foreign travel, visa applications and citizen applications for the two men and immigration, visa and travel records for Rahami's wife. "It is important for Congress to learn more about these individuals in order to understand and evaluate the department's efforts to counter homegrown radical extremism," Johnson wrote. The senator told CNN's Wolf Blitzer on Tuesday that the request for information is about putting pieces together. "I've sent a letter to secretary of DHS Jeh Johnson. I want to see the alien file, I want to know everything we can found out about Mr. Rahami as well as Mr. Adan," Johnson said. "And we've just got to try to piece things together. But Wolf, we are not fighting a winning battle here when we're dealing with these inspired lone wolfs." Rahami is a naturalized citizen who came to the states from Afghanistan. He traveled at length to Afghanistan and Pakistan. Adan was Somali and was killed by an off-duty police officer during the attack. 
Hillary Clinton on Monday called on Donald Trump to apologize to people who have worked on the real estate mogul's properties who have not been paid in full. Do "the thousands of people that you have stiffed over the course of your business not deserve some kind of apology from someone who has taken their labor, taken the goods that they've produced and then refused to pay them?" Clinton said at the first debate of the general election. "I can only say that I'm certainly relieved that my late father never did business with you." Story Continued Below Over the course of the campaign, reports have emerged about Trump refusing to pay what some vendors said he owed them. "I have met a lot of the people who were stiffed by you and your businesses, Donald," Clinton said, adding that there was an architect in the audience who wasn't fully paid by Trump for designing a clubhouse at a Trump golf course. "It's a beautiful facility. It immediately was put to use. And you wouldn't pay what the man needed to be paid what he was charging you." "Maybe he didn't do a good job and I was unsatisfied with his work," Trump responded. Trump went on to suggest that he had only taken that route four times, and that he was within his legal rights to do so. "My obligation right now is to do well for myself, my family, my employees, for my companies," he said. "And that's what I do. But what she doesn't say is the tens of thousands of people that are unbelievably happy and they love me."
New York (CNN)President Barack Obama confronted one of his most strained foreign partnerships Wednesday during a final meeting with Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, the pair making a last attempt at patching up their stormy bond before Obama leaves office. Speaking before their session, Obama said he was aiming to ascertain the prospects for peace in the region as he prepares to end his presidency. "Our hope will be that in these conversations we get the sense of how Israel sees the next few years, what the opportunities are and what the challenges are in order to ensure we keep alive the possibility of a stable, secure Israel at peace with its neighbors," Obama said. "These are challenging times. One thing that I would say about Prime Minister Netanyahu is that he is always very candid with us." That candor has become a hallmark of the relationship between Obama and his Israeli counterpart, whom the White House has accused of being less-than-diplomatic in expressing his opposition to US policies like the nuclear agreement with Iran. Obama's 30-minute meeting Wednesday with Netanyahu was likely to be their final opportunity for face-to-face consultations before a new president enters the Oval Office in January. Obama is intent on conferring solid ties with Israel upon his successor, despite the personal animus that developed between him and Netanyahu, as he looks to boost the relationship during the homestretch of a presidential campaign in which he hopes to see Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton prevail. Obama took a step toward solidifying the alliance this month by completing a long-term, $38 billion security aid package for Israel, the largest such agreement ever for a US ally. The aid, Obama said, "allows the kind of certainty in a moment where there's enormous uncertainty in the region. It is a very difficult and dangerous time in the Middle East and we want to make sure Israel has full capabilities to keep the Israeli people safe." In their talks, Obama said he and his Israeli counterpart would discuss challenges in Syria, and said he would get Netanyahu's assessment of conditions in Israel and the West Bank. "Clearly there is great danger of not just terrorism but also flare-ups of violence," he said. "We do have concerns about settlement activity as well." Obama hopes to take steps in his final days in office to promote renewed talks between the Israelis and the Palestinians on peace, though his previous efforts toward reconciliation in the region have fallen short. "My hope is we can continue to be an effective partner in Israel in finding a path to peace," Obama said. But the White House remains opposed to Israel's expanded settlement activity in the West Bank, and has expressed disappointment at Netanyahu's occasional skepticism about the viability of a two-state solution in the region. In the meeting Wednesday Obama raised "profound US concerns about the corrosive effect that that is having on the prospects of two states." "They've never papered over their differences," another senior administration official said of Obama and Netanyahu. In his final United Nations address Tuesday, Obama made scant reference to the Israel-Palestine conflict, saying only that "Israelis and Palestinians will be better off if Palestinians reject incitement and recognize the legitimacy of Israel, but Israel recognizes that it cannot permanently occupy and settle Palestinian land." The passing remark was in stark comparison to the large amounts of time Obama spent on the issue during addresses to the UN earlier in his tenure. The shift reflected the now-frozen peace negotiations, which moved in spurts during Obama's presidency but never materialized into a workable solution. The White House has conceded that talks aren't likely to resume while Obama remains in office but has remained open to the possibility the President could take steps in the next months to ramp up pressure on both sides to work toward a two-state solution. "With respect to Middle East peace, I wouldn't rule out the President taking any particular step on the issue," Ben Rhodes, Obama's deputy national security adviser, said Tuesday. "What I would say is his test has always been, can I make a positive difference by engaging on the Israeli-Palestinian issue? We've tried multiple tactics, none of them have succeeded, given the fact that the parties themselves have been unable to come together." Obama's talks with Netanyahu Wednesday capped a tumultuous personal history, though both displayed a businesslike camaraderie during their photo-op. The low point between the two men came in March 2015, when Netanyahu infuriated the White House by publicly lobbying against the Iran nuclear deal before Congress -- a move the administration lambasted as a breach of diplomatic protocol. Netanyahu returned to Washington last November in an attempt to repair the relationship, meeting with Obama in the Oval Office and addressing both the conservative American Enterprise Institute and the left-leaning Center for American Progress, the think tank with ties to Clinton. Netanyahu on Wednesday invited Obama for a round of golf in Israel once he departs office in January, saying warmly that Obama's "influential voice" on international politics would remain a force "for many decades." "Our alliance has grown decade after decade, through successive presidents, bipartisan Congresses and with the overwhelming support of the American people," he said. "It is an unbreakable bond." 
A politics-filled Emmys ceremony. A shocking Bush endorsement. And Ted Cruz’s surprise tweet to Trump. How well have you been following this week’s political news? Take POLITICO’s quiz to find out, then share your result and compare scores on Twitter by tagging @POLITICO with the hashtag #PoliticoQuiz.
As my 25th wedding anniversary approached, I tried to be creative in buying gifts for my wife. I had the idea of a silver coin that marked 25 years of something or other. I went to a local coin shop, and as I idled over some of the display cases, I noticed a set of coins from the mid-19th century. Oddly, the coins from the 1840s and 1850s were large—up until 1857, when the coins started becoming, at best, half the size of the others. “Oh, the Panic of 1857,” the owner said when I asked him about the change of size. “It was really bad. The president didn’t seem to have any solution except to use less gold or silver in the coins.” Story Continued Below Now that is inept presidential decision-making. During the current election campaign, there has been a lot of gnashing of teeth over the possibility that—whoever the winner is—he or she will be so terrible as a leader they will bring down the republic as the worst president since independence. And before the current candidates were known, the two most recent White House occupants, Barack Obama and George W. Bush, have been consistently reviled by their detractors as the worst men to lead the country. But Obama and Bush can both take heart. And Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton can gain solace, perhaps, from knowing that no matter how badly they do, they almost certainly won’t rank last. By my reckoning, that place belongs to James Buchanan, genial a man though he was. I’ve made quite a study of him. My innocent encounter at the coin shop only reinforced my lifelong determination to take an offbeat look at, let’s say, the lesser presidents. My father was definitely the only one in our suburban neighborhood with a biography of Franklin Pierce. Everywhere we went, he forced me to read historical plaques—stopping the car in a shrieking halt at times to view them. If I were to write a book about a president, it surely wouldn’t be about Washington or Lincoln, or even Silent Cal Coolidge. It would have to be about someone as ineffectual as possible. Buchanan, the only president from my native state, Pennsylvania, turned out to be my man. Start with his anemic, minimalist solution to one of America’s great financial downturns. For a long time before Buchanan, in effect, precipitated the Panic of 1857, things were going well for the country, at least in an economic sense. There had been a bad downturn 20 years before, with multiple causes, like war in Europe, the dissolution of the Bank of the United States, and overspeculation in, oddly enough, slaves and Western land. The great acquisition of land under President James Knox Polk, from Oregon to California to Texas, reinvigorated the economy, and a boom lasted for the next two decades. Railroads were the big player, since so many people wanted to move West into the new territories and states. Manufacturing boomed domestically, and then with foreign trade as well, since Europe had quelled many of its hostilities and American items were cheaper than those on the Continent. Then the day before Buchanan took office, Congress passed what he wanted, the Tariff Bill of 1857, which lowered tariffs on a panoply of items from abroad—Buchanan wanted to stimulate foreign trade—but made American manufactured goods of the same sort less competitive. Three days later came the real fatal blow, though, the Dred Scott Supreme Court decision, which fell on the shoulders of Buchanan. The case had wound through state and federal courts for at least a decade, but Roger Taney, the Supreme Court chief justice, and a fellow alumnus, with Buchanan, of small Dickinson College, wanted it settled. Scott was a slave to a military man who at times was stationed not in his native Missouri, a slave state, but in the Northwest Territories, which were nonslave. After his master died, Scott brought the case that he should be free because he had lived in nonslave territory. Buchanan wanted to be a hero, and thought if the case could be decided broadly, it could settle the question of slavery in the Union for good. Buchanan knew, too, though, that the court had five Southerners and four Northerners, and if the decision were split that way, it would be ineffective. He and Taney had apparently agreed to have a narrower decision, or remand the case back to the Appeals Court, if it were merely sectional, since they felt the need to have some sort of bipartisanship for the decision to be legitimate. Ignoring the idea of separation of powers, though, Buchanan browbeat Robert Cooper Grier, another Dickinson alumnus and a justice from Pennsylvania, to go along with the majority opinion, which Taney would write. Eventually, a New York native, Justice Samuel Nelson, wrote a concurring opinion, making the vote even less sectional. Legend has it that Taney, on the Capitol stairs just before he gave Buchanan the oath of office at the inauguration, told Buchanan that the decision would become public in the next few days. Buchanan apparently changed his speech to indicate that—and that he would be all for whatever the court decided. Two days later, the decision came down. Taney castigated Scott, whom he said was not a citizen, being a slave, and thus could not bring any suit. He also wrote that the Constitution gave no state or territory the power to institute or, conversely, prohibit slavery. Thus all the compromises about it, going back to the 1820s, were invalid, and, in fact, the Fugitive Slave Law, requiring anyone who knew about it to return slaves to their owners anywhere in the country, was in force. Historically, experts rate Dred Scott as the worst decision in the court’s history, but short of that, it was at the very least transformational for the country—with not just Taney, but surely Buchanan, responsible for it. As appalled as most of the country was about the morals of the decision at the time, there was a practical downside, too. Now no one knew whether he or she wanted to go West, to use the railroads, or to start a business that railroads might profit from. Railroad stocks started to decline in value, and then a contagion hit, and it was free fall. By midsummer, no one could take a ride on the Reading, as Uncle Pennybags does in the Monopoly game, since the Reading Railroad had shut down, as did lines now and then famous like the Illinois Central. Several lines, like the Delaware, Lackawanna and Western and the Fond du Lac Railroad in Wisconsin, declared bankruptcy. Thousands were thrown out of work, and banks started foreclosing on loans and property. Senator William Seward, the leader of the new Republican Party, come home from a vacation to find out he had lost most everything he owned—his stock in the Illinois Central, promoted to him by his rival Democrat Stephen Douglas, was virtually worthless. Every bank in New York City effectively closed—none would convert coins or gold into bank notes. The oldest grain company in New York, N.H. Wolfe and Co., failed in August, as did the most prominent insurance business in the country, the Ohio Life Insurance and Trust Co. Buchanan and his administration did nothing to stem the public hysteria. Calm words might have quelled it, but his inaction only made for further runs on banks and, thus, more turmoil in markets. The residue that mattered most, though, was the reaction caused by Dred Scott. Instead of promoting unity and opening up the West to more settlement, as Buchanan had thought, Dred Scott thwarted it, and brought an end to years of Northern prosperity. Yet the South did not succumb as badly. Its agrarian culture was self-sustaining, and its cotton still had a market in Europe. There was a surge in arms sales there as well, the economic downturn in the North exacerbating regional tensions. The relative good times in the South caused Northerners of all parties to further blame Buchanan for being a Southern lackey. Buchanan’s response was underwhelming, almost disdainful. He said the federal government could do nothing. In his Annual Message in December 1857, he said he sympathized with the travails caused by the Panic, but he would do nothing for individual suffering. The government would continue to pay its obligations and would keep going on whatever public works projects it had started, but would begin no new ones. He said too many people had speculated in land and slaves and the like and “deserved the gambler’s fate.” Eventually, he noted, the youth and energy of the rugged American individuals would triumph, though there would clearly be an interim of rough times. In a sense, he was right, because it took the rugged young Americans who went to war in 1861 to bring the economy back. Throughout his term, when a fork appeared in the road, Buchanan managed to take the wrong turn. When hostilities flared in Kansas, over whether that territory would enter as a slave or free state, Buchanan wavered over which of two proposed constitutions would be valid, exacerbating the killings, some done by the wild-eyed anti-slavery radical John Brown. When later Brown seized arms with a small cadre of followers in Harpers Ferry, West Virginia, just 40 miles from Washington along the Potomac, Buchanan again diddled before consulting Robert E. Lee, who had fortuitously been home in Arlington on leave from his post in Texas. Lee quickly went to Harpers Ferry to capture Brown and quell the raid. In other ventures, though, Buchanan dashed troops out on strange and unproductive missions. He caused chaos in Utah, quelling what he thought to be a Mormon revolt, causing villages to be burned to the ground and dozens of lives lost over what was merely a jurisdictional dispute. He supported mercenary William Walker’s forays to conquer Nicaragua and Guatemala, and sent troops to try to annex parts of Paraguay, primarily to acquiesce to his Southern base that wanted more slave states to come into the union. Then there was the little known Pig War, started when a settler along the Canadian border on the San Juan straits in the Northwest, shot a pig owned by the Hudson Bay Co. that wandered onto his property. A standoff ensued until Buchanan sent troops otherwise guarding Kansas, where there was a real problem, out to calm the nonfatal—except to one pig—battle. This was at a time when there were about only 12,000 soldiers in the U.S. Army, stretched as thin as could be. As the election of 1860 came close, Buchanan refused to support the one Democrat who could win, Stephen Douglas, because he just plain didn’t like him. That caused the party to split into three factions, each nominating a candidate, virtually ensuring Republican Abraham Lincoln the election. The Southern states, which had threatened secession, started doing so during the interim between Lincoln’s election and his inauguration in March, thus under Buchanan’s watch. Buchanan took the unusual position that the Constitution did not allow secession, but the president could not do anything to prevent it. As the first half-dozen states seceded, Buchanan lost several Cabinet members—he had a lot of Southern allies—and refused entreaties by many, including former President John Tyler, who would himself become a Confederate congressman, to find compromises to bring the wastrel states back into the fold. Meanwhile, Buchanan allowed the seizure of armaments and forts by the seceding states and suggested the abandonment of the one major fortified island in the South, Fort Sumter. Enter Lincoln, who has long been rated in serious surveys and schoolmarms’ speeches as the greatest of presidents. Lincoln no doubt was a man with plans and savvy, but I contend that the bar was set so low by his predecessor that maybe if there were no James Buchanan, the “Worst. President. Ever,” there would have been a few notches more on the presidential-rating scale for Abe Lincoln to climb. Today, George W. Bush is often rated one of the worst presidents in history, thanks to his authorship of the Iraq War and his presiding over the Crash of ’08 and the beginning of the Great Recession. Obama is sometimes seen in the same light, especially by the far right. But as happened with Honest Abe and his predecessor, perhaps that low bar will only make it easier for a President Hillary Clinton or a President Donald Trump to shine.
Washington (CNN) Few counties could prove more decisive in this election than Wake County, North Carolina. A historically competitive county whose fortunes are on the rise, Wake could help deliver Hillary Clinton a win in a key battleground state -- or dash her hopes for the presidency. Simply put, if Clinton performs well in the highly educated research triangle, then election night bodes well for her. If Wake County doesn't come out for Clinton, Donald Trump's path to the White House would grow much clearer. The county is rapidly expanding, and the influx of new people and industries could reshape the race. Meanwhile, the turmoil across the state in Charlotte after a police officer shot and killed a black man could add another focal point in the election — search data from Google Trends shows Wake County's spiking interest in "police brutality" this week. Keep your eye on Wake County, and take a look at the fundamentals below. Population New in town Representation Popularity Top searches Who's searching? Trending Searches by candidate 
Politico POLITICO's must-read briefing on what's driving the day in Washington THE TERROR CREEP -- Pipe bombs in New York City. An explosion in New Jersey. Stabbings in St. Cloud, Minnesota. And now, late last night when most of you were sleeping, a pipe bomb was found near a train station in Elizabeth, New Jersey -- just 20 miles outside of Manhattan. There are 50 days until Election Day. DEVELOPING -- “Pipe Bombs Found Near Train Station in Elizabeth, N.J., Official Says,” by NYT’s Nate Schweber and Jonah Engel Bromwich: “The bomb drama rattling the New York region arrived here on Sunday night when two men walked out of Hector’s Place Restaurant near the city’s train station and found a backpack containing five explosives resting atop a municipal garbage can, Mayor J. Christian Bollwage said. Story Continued Below “After finding that the backpack contained ‘wires and a pipe,’ the mayor said, the men dropped the item in the street and contacted the Elizabeth Police Department shortly about 8:45 p.m. The police, in turn, called the Union County bomb squad, and the investigation was quickly turned over to the F.B.I. and the New Jersey State Police, Mr. Bollwage said. The F.B.I. then sent in a pair of robots and determined that the backpack held five bombs, some of which were pipe bombs, the mayor said. Around 12:30 a.m., the robots attempted to clip a wire to disarm one bomb and accidentally detonated it, the mayor said. ‘As a robot was trying to disarm one of the devices it exploded,’ he said. No injuries were reported.” http://nyti.ms/2cVPtmp -- “FBI seeks confirmation that St. Cloud attacker was pledged to ISIL,” by the Star Tribune’s Stephen Montemayor: “The claim on social media Sunday had a familiar ring: The man who stabbed nine people in a St. Cloud mall on Saturday was ‘a soldier of the Islamic State.’ His attack, the message continued, was an ‘operation in response to calls to target the citizens of the crusader coalition.’ “The Amaq News Agency, media wing of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), has used nearly identical language in taking credit for at least a half-dozen other attacks in Western countries in recent months, analysts say. If confirmed, the episode also marks a new chapter in ISIL’s link to Minnesota. ISIL’s claim, a little more than 12 hours after Dahir A. Adan, 22, carried out his attack, mirrors the group’s response to killings in San Bernardino late last year and a more recent spate of terrorism in Europe, according to counterterrorism analyst Thomas Joscelyn … Minnesota is home to the nation’s largest ongoing terrorism recruitment investigation, with 11 Somali-Minnesotans charged since late 2014 in an alleged plot to travel to Syria and join ISIL.” http://strib.mn/2cK10oc **SUBSCRIBE to Playbook: http://politi.co/1M75UbX --@realDonaldTrump: “Under the leadership of Obama & Clinton, Americans have experienced more attacks at home than victories abroad. Time to change the playbook! ... Saturday’s attacks show that failed Obama/Hillary Clinton polices [sic] won’t keep us safe! I will Make America Safe Again! … Terrible attacks in NY, NJ and MN this weekend. Thinking of victims, their families and all Americans! We need to be strong!” --CLINTON STATEMENT: “I strongly condemn the apparent terrorist attacks in Minnesota, New Jersey, and New York. I pray for all of those who were wounded, and for their families. Once again, we saw the bravery of our first responders who run toward danger to help others. Their quick actions saved lives. Law enforcement officials are working to identify who was behind the attacks in New York and New Jersey and we should give them the support they need to finish the job and bring those responsible to justice - we will not rest until that happens. ISIS has claimed responsibility for the attack in Minnesota, and this should steel our resolve to protect our country and defeat ISIS and other terrorist groups. “I have laid out a comprehensive plan to do that. This includes launching an intelligence surge to help identify and thwart attacks before they can be carried out, and to spot lone wolf attackers. We also need to work with Silicon Valley to counter propaganda and recruitment efforts online. Americans have faced threats before, and our resilience in the face of them only makes us stronger. I am confident we will once again choose resolve over fear.” Good Monday morning. Have you always wondered why there wasn’t a Playbook Food Truck that gave away free breakfast? Us too. So, this week, beginning Wednesday, Anna, Daniel and Jake will be bouncing around D.C. in a Playbook-branded food truck handing out free breakfast sandwiches and coffee. Stay tuned for locations. #playbookeats THERE IS ONE WEEK until the big presidential debate at Hofstra University on Long Island. Here are some numbers you need to know about what America thinks about the debates and its moderators, courtesy of our friends at Morning Consult, who conducted a poll of 1,861 registered voters last week. -- A sky-high 73% of those polled said it was very likely or somewhat likely they would watch the first debate. 37% said they thought it was likely Hillary Clinton would win, 31% said they thought Donald Trump would win and 32% didn’t know or had no opinion. -- LESTER HOLT, the “NBC Nightly News” anchor who is moderating the first debate, is seen as favorable by 47% of those polled, and 20% view him as unfavorable. Just 39% of Republicans see him as favorable, while 60% of Democrats view him as favorable. -- ANDERSON COOPER of CNN, who will co-host the second presidential debate, is seen as favorable with 58% of those polled -- by far the most popular moderator. He is also seen as the moderator who will be the toughest and least biased. --CHRIS WALLACE of Fox News, who will moderate the last debate on Oct. 19 in Las Vegas, has 60% favorability ratings with Republicans. Morning Consult’s toplines on all topics in the poll http://bit.ly/2cXkIAe … Crosstabs http://bit.ly/2d1rssR **** A message from BP: Over the past 10 years, no energy company has invested more in the U.S. than BP – $90 billion in total. Take 90 seconds to see what else we’re doing to help keep America moving forward. ****** ARI FLEISCHER in WSJ, “The Wrong Lessons From Matt Lauer”: “There’s a smarter way for the debate moderators to do their job and establish facts. If Mr. Trump were to say during the debate that he never supported the Iraq invasion, the moderator should turn to Mrs. Clinton and say, ‘Mr. Trump says he always opposed the invasion. Is that what you recall?’ Then it’s up to her to respond.” http://on.wsj.com/2da3VX8 NEW POLL -- The much-awaited The New York Times Upshot/Siena College poll has Hillary Clinton narrowly beating Donald Trump in Florida, 41-40. They are tied in a head-to-head matchup. The poll used “voter registration files, the core of the ‘big data’ that has transformed campaigning over the last decade. The voter file data here -- from L2, a nonpartisan voter file vendor -- includes information on the race, vote history and partisanship of every voter in the state, a big advantage for polling.” http://nyti.ms/2coB6HJ --NEW LARRY SABATO RANKINGS: Hillary Clinton wins the presidency with a “bare majority” of 272 electoral votes. Senate: 49 Republican seats, 47 Democratic seats and four tossups. http://bit.ly/2dd53fJ SHOT -- “Among Democrats, deep concern about Clinton’s Hispanic strategy,” by WaPo’s Abby Phillips and Ed O’Keefe: “While Clinton holds a significant lead over Republican rival Donald Trump in every poll of Hispanic voters, less clear is whether these voters will turn out in numbers that Democrats are counting on to win. Clinton trails President Obama’s 2012 performance in several ­Latino-rich states, including Florida, Nevada, Colorado and Arizona. In those same states, on which Democrats’ prospects of retaking the Senate hinge, some down-ballot Democrats remain unknown to many Hispanic voters.” http://wapo.st/2dd19TY CHASER -- NEW CLINTON AD -- “FAMILIES TOGETHER” -- SCRIPT: Donald Trump on screen saying, “We are going to triple the number of ICE deportations officers.” Narrator: “Donald Trump’s plan? Tear families apart. Hillary Clinton -- she’s made protecting children and families her life’s work. She began her career defending children with disabilities. As First Lady, she helped extend healthcare to 8 million children. And now fighting for immigration reform that keeps families together.” The 30-second ad, which will be on TV and online http://bit.ly/2d5mQXk EVAN OSNOS in The New Yorker, “President Trump’s First Term: His campaign tells us a lot about what kind of Commander-in-Chief he would be”: “Trump aides are organizing what one Republican close to the campaign calls the First Day Project. ‘Trump spends several hours signing papers -- and erases the Obama Presidency,’ he said. Stephen Moore, an official campaign adviser who is a senior fellow at the Heritage Foundation, explained, ‘We want to identify maybe twenty-five executive orders that Trump could sign literally the first day in office.’ “Over the summer, I interviewed several dozen people about what the United States could expect from Donald Trump’s first term. Campaign advisers shared his plans, his associates relayed conversations, and I consulted veterans of five Republican Administrations, along with economists, war gamers, historians, legal scholars, and political figures in Europe, Asia, and Latin America. Most of the people I spoke with outside the campaign expected Trump to lose. But they also expected his impact to endure, and they identified examples of the ways in which he had already altered political chemistry far beyond the campaign. After seventy years of American efforts to stop the spread of nuclear weapons, Trump has suggested that South Korea and Japan might be wise to develop them. Returning from a recent visit to Seoul, Scott Sagan, a political-science professor at Stanford who is a nuclear-arms specialist, told me, ‘These kinds of statements are having an effect. A number of political leaders, mostly from the very conservative sides of the parties, are openly calling for nuclear weapons.’” http://bit.ly/2dcPOTP PRESIDENT TRUMP – “Why a President Trump Could Start a Trade War With Surprising Ease,” by Justin Wolfers in The Upshot: “[I]nternational trade policy is one area where a President Trump could unilaterally deliver on the changes that he has promised. Mr. Trump has said that as president he would ‘rip up’ international trade deals such as [NAFTA], withdraw from the [WTO] and sharply raise the tariffs charged on goods imported from China and Mexico. As president he could pretty much do it. And there’s very little Congress can do to stop him, even if the result is a costly trade war.” http://nyti.ms/2cJMgWJ --@JTSantucci (ABC’s John Santucci): “Campaign sources tell @ABC News Donald Trump will meet tomorrow morning with Egyptian President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi in New York” DONALD CASHES IN -- “Trump shatters GOP records with small donors,” by Shane Goldmacher: “Donald Trump has unleashed an unprecedented deluge of small-dollar donations for the GOP, and one that Republican Party elders have dreamed about finding for much of the last decade as they’ve watched a succession of Democrats -- Barack Obama, Bernie Sanders and, to a lesser extent, Hillary Clinton -- develop formidable fundraising operations, $5, $10 and $20 at a time. “Trump has only been actively soliciting cash for a few months, but when he reveals his campaign’s financials later this week they will show he has crushed the total haul from small-dollar donors of the last two Republican nominees, John McCain and Mitt Romney — during the entirety of their campaigns. “All told, Trump is approaching, and has possibly already passed, $100 million from donors who have given less than $200, according to an analysis of available Federal Election Commission filings, the campaign’s public statements and people familiar with his fundraising operation. It is a threshold no previous Republican has ever achieved in a single campaign. And Trump has done so less than three months after signing his first email solicitation for donors on June 21 — a staggering speed to collect such a vast sum.” http://politi.co/2daaZmD DATA DU JOUR – AdAge: “[O]f the $149,912,723 million in booked TV and radio spending through election day for these three presidential candidates, $145,299,727 is being spent by the Clinton campaign combined with pro-Clinton PACs.” http://bit.ly/2cxxIIh BRUSSELS BURST -- “McDonald’s could face EU order to pay almost $500m in back taxes: Chain under investigation by Brussels over ruling underpinning European structure,” by FT’s Rochelle Toplensky: “McDonald’s could face an order to pay nearly $500m in back taxes to Luxembourg, according to a Financial Times analysis of an investigation by Brussels into state-supported tax avoidance … According to an FT review of the commission’s McDonald’s probe, it paid an average tax rate of 1.49 per cent on the $1.8bn profit earned by its Luxembourg-based European headquarters since its 2009 reorganisation.” http://on.ft.com/2cxAqNT HAPPENING TODAY -- Donald Trump is in Fort Myers, Florida, for a 3 p.m. rally at the Germain Arena. Mike Pence is in Iowa, holding a town hall in Mason City and rally in Dubuque. Hillary Clinton is in Philadelphia, speaking at Temple University about “the stakes of November’s election for millennial voters in Pennsylvania and across the country.” Tim Kaine and Anne Holton are campaigning in Ames, Iowa. Barack Obama is attending a DSCC roundtable in New York and meeting separately with Chinese Premier Li Keqiang and Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi of Iraq at the Lotte New York Palace Hotel. He’ll then visit the U.S. Mission to the U.N. with Secretary of State John Kerry and Ambassador Samantha Power. He’ll sleep in New York. Paul Ryan is giving a speech at the Economic Club of New York this morning. YOU’RE INVITED! -- Join us for Playbook Cocktails Wednesday evening with civil rights icon, Rep. John Lewis (D-Ga.)! Our conversation comes during the opening week of the Smithsonian’s National Museum of African American History and Culture. We’ll talk about civil rights and explore Lewis’s extraordinary life. Doors open at 5:30 p.m. The W Hotel, 515 15th Street, NW. RSVP here http://bit.ly/2cvXEEd SWING-STATE WATCH -- “Clinton focuses on Pennsylvania, a must-win state for Trump,” by AP’s Tom Beaumont: “Hillary Clinton’s campaign is aggressively outworking Donald Trump in battleground Pennsylvania, a state the billionaire businessman can scarcely afford to lose and still hope to become president. Despite polling well in Pennsylvania throughout the summer, Clinton's team is nevertheless bearing down in a state her party has carried in six straight elections. They are ratcheting up advertising and dispatching their top supporters to Pennsylvania, from Bill Clinton to Joe Biden to last week’s visit from President Barack Obama … “At a minimum, an energized Pennsylvania campaign is a balm for Clinton as she weathers a dip in national polls and dips in the swing states of Florida and Ohio. But with roughly seven weeks until Election Day, Trump’s scattershot approach to Pennsylvania also puts his White House prospects in jeopardy.” http://apne.ws/2coyGco INSIDE THE ROOM -- OBAMA LAST NIGHT IN NYC -- At a Hillary Victory Fund fundraiser at Danny Meyer’s apartment near Gramercy Park, per the released transcript: “It is a cliché that every election is the most important election of our lifetime. This time it’s true. (Laughter.) They’re all important, and I’m a big believer that the project of America, the project of democracy, is never finished; that it is a constant process of us together, reimagining what might be, figuring out how we can work together to make this country a little more just, a little more fair, a little more prosperous, a little more secure. ... “And when I said that I think she is somebody who is as qualified as any individual who has ever run for this office, I meant it. Audrey mentioned ‘Hamilton’ and being in the room where it happens -- well, she’s been in the room where it happens, repeatedly. And her judgment has been unerring, and she has been disciplined, and she has been extraordinarily effective in every job that she’s had. ... “This guy is not qualified to be president. And he shows no interest in even gaining the rudimentary knowledge required to make really hard decisions on a day-to-day basis. There's no curiosity, there's no desire to get up to speed. It’s an infomercial. It’s a reality show. And more disturbingly, it's tapping into some of our worst impulses as a country -- ones that divide us rather than bring us together; ones that seek to put down people who have been historically vulnerable as opposed to lifting them up.” SNEAK PEEK -- NPR’s Steve Inskeep spoke with Bill Clinton from his house in Chappaqua. Here’s a snippet about how he sees role in a potential Hillary Clinton White House: “Well I will do whatever I'm asked to do but she said if she wins that she wanted me to go out to places like coal country, Indian country, small town and rural America, all in urban pockets of despair and try to get the economy going again so we can all rise together, which we haven’t really been able to do yet. Although in the last economic report we see the year on end and year increase in income of 5.2 percent -- the percentage was highest in lower income people.” Will air on Morning Edition. See NPR.org/stations for broadcast times JOE BIDEN INTERVIEW -- “I’m not going to stay on in the administration,” Biden said in a 25-minute interview with STAT’s Dylan Scott at Rice University. “What Hillary talked about is, as I understood it, me being able to have the same authority over elements of her administration from the outside that I have now from the inside, to be able to coordinate those efforts.” --What Trump would do with Biden’s cancer moonshot: “I would hope he would bring, attract, out of just pure patriotic necessity, some very good minds to let him know that there is a lot of money we’re spending in the federal government, billions of dollars on medical research,” Biden said, “and there is a consensus.” On Hillary’s pneumonia: “I’ve just found that, in my career, just transparency and disclosure works the best, even when there’s bad stuff … I think she’s handled it pretty well in the sense that she’s laid out everything from what happened when she fell, what happened with the blood clot.” http://bit.ly/2chsuQ8 ... Transcript http://bit.ly/2cVX7Ns GOP INFIGHTING -- “Kasich camp bashes Priebus, warns of national GOP ‘wipeout’,” by Kyle Cheney: “Gov. John Kasich’s war with the national Republican Party exploded into the open Sunday night, when his top adviser thrashed GOP leader Reince Priebus and hinted that the presidential election may be out of reach. The statement, issued on official campaign letterhead, followed remarks by Priebus earlier Sunday suggesting the party might block the Ohio governor from running for office again because he has refused to support Donald Trump. “‘Thankfully, there are still leaders in this country who put principles before politics,’ said John Weaver, Kasich’s adviser, adding, ‘The idea of a greater purpose beyond oneself may be alien to political party bosses like Reince Priebus, but it is at the center of everything Governor Kasich does.’ “It’s a stunning act of open hostility between the national Republican Party and the governor in perhaps the most crucial swing state — and at a sensitive moment in the election. Trump has risen in national polls and inched closer to Hillary Clinton in swing states. He’s even passed her in Ohio, perhaps his strongest chance to capture a state that Mitt Romney lost in 2012.” http://politi.co/2d4KKSO CHRIS CILLIZZA -- “Sure, Trump has the momentum. But his prospects for 270 electoral votes are still dim”: “Let’s start with the two most important numbers in this election: 18 and 13. Eighteen is the number of states every Democratic presidential nominee has carried in each of the past six presidential elections, dating to 1992. Add in the District of Columbia, which also fits the bill, and you get 242 electoral votes. Thirteen is the number of states every Republican presidential nominee has won in those same presidential elections. Add them up, and you get 102 electoral votes ... “Consider this: If Clinton wins the 18 states plus the District that every Democrat has won since 1992 and also wins Florida (and its 29 electoral votes), she is president. If Clinton wins those 18, the nation’s capital and Ohio (18 electoral votes) and Virginia (13 electoral votes), it’s over.” http://wapo.st/2cXpEFc **** A message from BP: We’ve donated $147 million to U.S. community programs over the past five years. Check out the programs we support in your community. ****** 2016 PLAYERS -- Jessica Ditto, the communications director for Kentucky Gov. Matt Bevin, is joining the Trump campaign as deputy communications director. Jessica will be based in New York with Jason Miller and Hope Hicks. --“Meet the man behind Right Side Broadcasting, the network that live-streams every Donald Trump speech,” by Business Insider’s Maxwell Tani: “Joe Seales was a stay-at-home dad between jobs. Then he started watching Donald Trump's speeches. Seales is the CEO of Right Side Broadcasting Network, a website known best for its YouTube channel, which has hosted feeds of almost every single Trump rally, town hall, or public appearance since July 2015. ... Right Side Broadcasting Network has emerged as a tool for many Trump fans, journalists, and campaign operatives.” http://read.bi/2cjwILF GLENN THRUSH’S “OFF MESSAGE” PODCAST -- “Jill Stein: Trump may have 'memory problem': The physician turned Green Party candidate sees signs of health, mental, cognitive issues in the man atop the GOP ticket'": “You know, I don't pretend to be able to do TV diagnosis, but I think the guy has a problem,’ said the 66-year-old candidate, who is averaging somewhere between two and five percent in most national and state polls, enough (Clinton people say) to the Democrat in too-close-to-call states. ‘The guy has a lot of problems--physical, mental, emotional, cognitive.’” http://politi.co/2cK5Z8B … Transcript http://politi.co/2cK7689 MEDIAWATCH -- “Michael Slackman to be named Times international editor,” by Joe Pompeo: “Joe Kahn’s promotion to managing editor of The New York Times has created an opening for a new international editor, and POLITICO can confirm that person will be Michael Slackman, who has most recently served as international managing editor under Kahn. ... Slackman [is] a veteran foreign correspondent whose postings have included Cairo, Berlin and Moscow.” http://politi.co/2cXmyBj CLICKER -- Lyft’s President John Zimmer in Medium delves into his vision for the future of transportation http://bit.ly/2cjx19h TIME CAPSULE -- From Playbook’s subject line, a year ago today, “CARLY REVELS IN HER MOMENT” http://politi.co/1iEIxeB DESSERT -- “Jeb Bush Makes Surprise Appearance in Jimmy Kimmel’s Opening Sketch” – Variety: “Bush was the limo driver for ‘Veep’ character Selena Meyer (Julia Louis-Dreyfus). ‘Are you nominated?’ Bush asks Kimmel, who was looking for a ride downtown to the [Emmy] awards ceremony. ‘Wow, what’s that like?’ ‘It’s nice,’ Kimmel replied. When asked if he could win, Kimmel replied, ‘probably not.’ Bush — the former Governor of Florida — offered this advice to the late-night host: ‘Here’s what I know, If you run a positive campaign, the voters will ultimately make the right choice.’” http://bit.ly/2cBDzhK ... Video http://bit.ly/2cJquUn ... Full list of winners http://bit.ly/2cXNhxq SPORTS BLINK -- DAVID AXELROD in the New Yorker: “THE MOST PLEASING CAMPAIGN OF 2016: The Chicago Cubs look poised to end the longest championship drought in American sports.” http://bit.ly/2cBOlVn CGI KICKS OFF TODAY -- The Clinton Global Initiative starts its 12th and final meeting today. The Clinton Foundation plans to drastically downshift its work if Hillary Clinton wins the White House. The foundation has been in the crossfire for its accepting of foreign donations and coziness with government. Neither Hillary Clinton or President Obama will attend. A Clinton Foundation spokesman: “The event will recognize the impact and legacy of CGI members, who have made more than 3,600 Commitments to Action – projects to address a global issue - which have improved the lives of more than 435 million people in 180 countries worldwide. The annual convening will bring together more than 1,000 leaders in philanthropy, business, and government to talk about issues like the refugee crisis, Zika, violence against women, climate change and more. In this morning’s opening plenary, President Bill Clinton and Chelsea Clinton will be joined by Argentinian President Mauricio Macri, Italian Prime Minister Matteo Renzi, and London Mayor Sadiq Khan, Bono, and Gen. John Allen. In Wednesday’s closing session, President Bill Clinton will provide deeply personal remarks that are a reflection on the work of CGI over the last 12 years, and the evolution of philanthropy overall. People can watch live at live.clintonglobalinitiative.org or #CGI2016.” SPOTTED: Speaker Paul Ryan, Capitol Police and staff scurrying about Notre Dame this weekend. They were holding private meetings, and seen in the executive suite during the football game wearing a blue hat, emblazoned with “Play Like a Champion today.” HAPPENING TUESDAY -- Hope for Henry ‘Strike’s Celebrity Bowl’ fundraiser at Pinstripes in Georgetown Tuesday. The event raises money for “Hope for Henry,” which has provided care for more than 16,000 sick children in the D.C. and Baltimore region. CNN’s Jake Tapper is hosting the event and Tommy McFly is emceeing the event which will feature media bowlers Mark Leibovich, Chuck Lane, Laura Evans, Sen. Amy Klobuchar, Rep. Mia Love and several celebrities for D.C. sports teams. The event starts with a 6 p.m. reception with bowling starting at 7:30 p.m. -- Hoops for Youth Charity Basketball Game, this Tuesday night at GW’s Smith Center (22nd and G St, NW). Tip-off at 7:30 p.m. for Members of Congress vs. Lobbyists Game. Staff vs Lobbyists at 6:30 p.m. Roster for the Members of Congress team: Reps. Duncan Hunter Jr. (R-Calif.), Darin LaHood (R-Ill.), Robert Dold (R-Ill.), David Rouzer (R-N.C.), Ryan Costello (R-Pa.), John Moolenaar (R-Mich.), Steve Scalise (R-La.), Tim Huelskamp (R-Kan.), Kevin McCarthy (R-Calif.), Cedric Richmond (D-La.), Jeff Denham (R-Calif.), Brad Wenstrup (R-Ohio), Mike Bishop (R-Mich.), David Valedao (R-Calif.), Carlos Curbelo (R-Fla.) and Sen. Jeff Flake (R-Ariz.). TRANSITIONS – JULIA MAZZONE starts today as deputy director of scheduling and operations for Sen. Marco Rubio. She previously worked at POLITICO, Rubio’s presidential campaign, the RSLC, IMGE, the RNC and Pawlenty for President. WEEKEND WEDDINGS -- “Bourree Lam, David Iseri” – N.Y. Times: “Ms. Lam, 32, is keeping her name. She is an associate editor in New York for The Atlantic magazine. She graduated from the University of Chicago. ... Mr. Iseri, 33, is a senior designer in New York for the Bjarke Ingels Group, the Danish architecture firm. He graduated from California Polytechnic State University in San Luis Obispo. ... The couple were introduced in 2012 by mutual friends at a rooftop barbecue in Brooklyn.” With pic http://nyti.ms/2d5loE6 BIDEN ALUMNI -- “Roanna Wang, Nathan Bruschi”: “They are now first-year M.B.A. students at Harvard, where the groom is also studying for a master’s degree in public policy. ... The groom served in the United States Navy from 2010 to 2015, attaining the rank of lieutenant. He was based in Tokyo, where he served as an intelligence officer in support of strategic deterrence operations aboard the aircraft carrier U.S.S. George Washington. In 2015, he worked on national security issues in the office of Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. The groom is also the founder and president of Dartmouth Uniformed Service Alumni, an organization for military members and their families.” With pic http://nyti.ms/2chp7II WELCOME TO THE WORLD -- Jacqui Newman, chief administrative officer at the DCCC, and Kevin McKeon, a SVP at Putnam Partners, email friends and family: “After a midnight ride in a Car2Go to Sibley Hospital, Iliana Larkin McKeon was born a healthy 20 inches and 7 lbs 5 oz on [Friday]. Both Jacqui and Iliana are doing great. Jacqui especially as she is now able to eat prosciutto again.” Pic http://bit.ly/2chq3gf HAPPY ONE-YEAR ANNIVERSARY to Ellie Schafer and Heather Rothenberg -- pic http://bit.ly/2cK49EL BIRTHDAYS: Michael Barone ... Ana Marie Cox ... Andrea Saul, policy comms at Facebook, the pride of Dalton, Ga., near Tennessee, and a Romney, McCain, Instacart and Lean In alum ... Jimmy Fallon is 42 ... Roger Angell is 96 ... Joan Lunden is 66 ... Soledad O’Brien is 5-0 ... former Defense Secretary Harold Brown is 89 ... Spencer Garrett ... Hillary for America’s Christina Iskandar, an OFA alum ... Sen. Tim Scott (R-S.C.) is 51 ... Rep. Henry Cuellar (D-Texas) is 61 ... Politico alum Anne Garland, account coordinator at Lewis Media Partners ... Colleen Connolly … Rebecca Blank, chancellor of the University of Wisconsin-Madison and a Commerce alum ... Jeannie Bunton, SVP of comms. and marketing at the Consumer Bankers Association … Sarah Davey, senior associate at Beacon Global Strategies … Toby Chaudhuri, VP of strategic comms and national partnerships at PBS ... Suzanne Salgado (h/t Jon Haber) ... Politico eHealth writer David Pittman (h/t Arthur Allen) ... David Silber (h/t Claude Marx) … communications twins Megan Byers (of DMR Architects) and John Byers (of Rep. Leonard Lance’s office) are 27 ... … Edward Scheinman, senior editor at Pacific Standard, is 31 ... Amanda DeBard ... Kate McMahon Etter ... Dan Kolko, MASN Nationals on-field reporter ... WSJ night editor Wade Lambert is 56 ... Andrea McCarren ... Neal Urwitz, director of external relations at the Center for a New American Security, is 33 ... Al Jazeera English’s Kimberly Halkett ... Sean Coit, comms director for Katie McGinty’s campaign, is 29 (h/t Jonathan Kott) ... Evangeline Weiner Hooie ... Paul Logan, comms director for Virginia Chamber of Commerce... Mike Laws, alum of The Hill ... Janno Lieber … Donn Stanley … Mary Pat Day … Larry Fox … Mark Edwards … Sarah Bailey (h/ts Teresa Vilmain) ... Ali Glisson ... Adam Temple, VP of public affairs at JDA Frontline and a true South Carolina gentleman ... Bill Varian of the Tampa Bay Times ... Masamichi Hanabusa is 83 ... Greg Audel ... VOA’s Bruce Alpert, a Times-Picayune alum ... Patrick Hughes is 74 ... James Lipton (“Inside the Actors Studio”) is 9-0 ... Adam West is 88 ... Jeremy Irons is 68 ... College Football Hall of Famer and former NFL player Reggie Williams is 62 ... Mario Batali is 56 ... Trisha Yearwood is 52 ... celebrity chef Michael Symon is 47 ... Carter Oosterhouse is 4-0 ... Eamon is 33 ... actress Danielle Panabaker is 29 (h/ts AP) SUBSCRIBE to the Playbook family: POLITICO Playbook http://politi.co/1M75UbX ... New York Playbook http://politi.co/1ON8bqW … Florida Playbook http://politi.co/1OypFe9 ... New Jersey Playbook http://politi.co/1HLKltF ... Massachusetts Playbook http://politi.co/1Nhtq5v ... Illinois Playbook http://politi.co/1N7u5sb ... California Playbook http://politi.co/2bLvcPl ... Brussels Playbook http://politi.co/1FZeLcw ... All our political and policy tipsheets http://politi.co/1M75UbX
It’s no coincidence Donald Trump rolled out his child care proposal this week in suburban Philadelphia, with his daughter Ivanka by his side. To win Pennsylvania, the GOP nominee must remain competitive in the populous suburbs that ring the state’s largest city. Recent polls suggest he’s not even close. Story Continued Below And unless Trump can boost his performance on the outskirts of cities like Philadelphia, Milwaukee, Detroit and Columbus, Ohio — particularly in the more affluent suburbs where middle-class women and college-educated white voters have eyed him askance — he risks being overwhelmed by the large Democratic margins delivered by the nearby big cities. “He’s played the white, working-class speech,” said Terry Madonna, a veteran Pennsylvania pollster, referring to the message Trump has aimed at working class white men in economically struggling communities. “He’s not really made an appeal to [suburban] individuals.” The suburbs, where 47 percent of all votes were cast in 2012, went narrowly for Romney after voting narrowly for Barack Obama in 2008. This time around, with Trump doing little to tailor his message beyond his base of disaffected white men, he’s lagging far behind Romney’s performance. A Franklin and Marshall College poll in late August showed Hillary Clinton with a 45-31 advantage in the Philadelphia suburbs. An analysis from the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel revealed drastic underperformance by Trump in suburban Milwaukee’s Waukesha County, a conservative bastion where GOP candidates typically run up huge margins. While Trump led Clinton by 45 percent to 32 percent over the summer, he was far behind Romney’s pace there — the 2012 GOP nominee carried Waukesha by 67 percent to 32 percent. The story is similar in Virginia, another swing state. According to an August Washington Post poll, Trump was running well behind Romney’s clip in the close-in D.C. suburbs and also in the Northern Virginia exurbs — places like Loudoun County, a critical battleground that Obama won by 5 points in 2012. “I think it's more a matter of tone than it is his platform,” said Val DiGiorgio, chairman of the Republican Party of Chester County, the only one of Philadelphia’s four main suburban counties that Romney won in 2012. “We're a county where fiscal conservatives tend to do very well. If he could convince these folks that he's a fiscal conservative and acts more presidential, he could win over some of these voters. They dislike Hillary so intensely.” GOP leaders and pollsters say Trump can’t win without making inroads in the suburbs — and voters there are turned off by his bluster and sometimes-erratic nature. But many also say Clinton’s unpopularity is keeping Trump in the hunt. “There are some voters out there, they would prefer not to vote for Clinton, but they have yet to see Trump as a viable alternative,” added John Brabender, a GOP strategist who helped steer Rick Santorum to a Senate victory in Pennsylvania. “Trump can still take advantage of it. Trump needs to show a comfort level from a personality and temper standpoint.” Trump’s temperament has been a persistent issue throughout the campaign — nowhere more than in the suburbs — but there are signs an image makeover is underway. Aside from his uneven attempts to moderate some positions, eschew some of his harsher rhetoric and hew more closely to a script with the use of a TelePrompter, the campaign has been dispatching his children and their spouses to the critical suburban counties that could decide his fate. On Sept. 11, Trump’s daughter-in-law Lara made an unannounced stop in Painesville, Ohio — in suburban Cleveland’s Lake County — for a 9/11 memorial event. She’s also been active in her native North Carolina, where she reportedly helped open a field office in the Charlotte suburbs. She’s also joining Trump’s other women surrogates to help soften his image in these key communities. Trump’s daughter, Ivanka, stood alongside her father to unveil Trump’s new child care plan in Delaware County, a Democratic-leaning suburb of Philadelphia,. She’s also arranging a trip to Colorado next week — after a Saturday visit to the Denver suburbs by her father — for a series of events. Last week, Donald Trump Jr. was also in Colorado too for events in downtown Denver — one with millennials, one with sportsmen — before heading north for a fundraiser in Windsor. The campaign is also in talks to send one of the Trump kids next month to Chester County, another crucial suburb outside Philadelphia, when the local GOP holds its fall reception. Trump supporters view the candidate's children as highly effective surrogates who can smooth some of the mogul’s rougher edges and articulate (or talk around) some of Trump’s harsher policies and rhetoric, the central challenge Trump has faced to making inroads in the suburbs. “The important thing is that you’re sending people that connect with people in the community,” said Robert Blaha, Trump’s Colorado campaign chairman. “Ivanka coming and talking to young millennial women -- like the role she played last night on the stage — the more you can connect with those groups, the more people can understand the candidate.” The suburbs, of course, aren’t a monolithic voting bloc. While Trump’s struggles appear most acute in the affluent suburbs and among minorities in more mature suburbs, he’s actually well-positioned to make gains in some of the more industrial suburbs, which are prevalent in Ohio. “A lot of suburbs have mini Rust Belts within them, and the same sort of angry, white working class voters have found Trump appealing,” said Larry Levy, executive dean of the National Center for Suburban Studies at Hofstra University. “When you add it all up, the give and the take, Trump is almost certainly going to do worse than prior Republicans. A big tiebreaker is the number of new immigrants and other minorities, are the fastest growing population bloc in many suburbs.” In Ohio, Levy noted, the Cleveland suburbs are riper targets for Trump because of their industrial tilt, while the Columbus suburbs are full of those more affluent white voters that haven’t warmed to Trump. Suburban Republican leaders say that even in places where Trump may be lagging behind Romney’s performance, they see some recent evidence his fortunes may be improving. “Our polling indicates he's down among the more affluent, suburban part of the county,” DiGiorgio, the Chester County chairman, said. “I'd say he's rebounded since then. He's probably still losing Chester County.” Dale Fellows, chairman of the Cleveland-area Lake County GOP, said he’s seen an uptick in support for Trump among women. He noted the recent visit by Lara Trump, who was accompanied by Trump surrogates Lynnette Hardaway and Rochelle Richardson, the YouTube personalities who go by the names Diamond and Silk. “Republican women are starting to become more engaged,” he said. “That’s, I think, going to make a big difference in the outcome of the election.” In Virginia’s Loudoun County, outside of Washington D.C., Trump is still working to put his base together. “I’ll be honest, that’s something that’s still happening,” said Will Estrada, chairman of the county GOP. But he points to what he views as some optimistic signs — from a mad rush to claim Trump lawn signs to a decision by longtime Trump hater and prominent conservative radio host Mark Levin, a resident of the county in Leesburg, to relent and announce his support for Trump. “Every day that gets closer to Election Day, we’re seeing the base come on board with Donald Trump,” he said.
Should Ben Carson want a spot in Donald Trump's White House, the retired neurosurgeon and former GOP primary rival would likely get it, the Republican nominee said on Wednesday. Praising Carson's performance in the polls and his pleasant demeanor during a speech to pastors in Cleveland, Trump pronounced him "amazing." Story Continued Below "Not only is he a brilliant guy, but he’s got a brilliant heart. He loves people. And if all of this happens, there will be a great place for Ben," Trump said. Carson, who endorsed Trump in March, has repeatedly said that he is not seeking a position in a potential Trump White House. "I don’t know if he wants that, but I know that he wants to help people," Trump said. "But there will be a great place."
NEWARK — A Donald Trump aide who worked for Gov. Chris Christie testified in federal court Friday that the Republican governor’s office meticulously tracked which local mayors had received special treatment and how likely they were to endorse his re-election campaign. Matt Mowers, who was an aide in Christie’s Office of Intergovernmental Affairs, or IGA, told prosecutors that the office used a Google Document to note when a local mayor or council person had been invited to sporting events, invited to breakfast at the governor’s mansion or received steel from the wreckage of the World Trade Center. Story Continued Below Mowers, testifying in the George Washington Bridge lane closure trial, said officials were given a score on a scale of 1-10 about how likely they were to endorse Christie’s 2013 campaign. Mowers said in U.S. District Court that the Democratic mayor of Fort Lee, where the bridge is located, was among those officials. Mowers had been assigned to the mayor, Mark Sokolich, and other officials in the northern part of the state, as part of his job at a regional director with the office. Sokolich, he wrote in the document, had a good chance of being persuaded. “Only thing that could prevent endorsement is possible ambition for higher office (county executive),” Mowers said he wrote about the Democrat from Bergen County. Mowers said he spoke to Sokolich frequently, meeting with the mayor about once a month and also calling every few weeks. They attended sporting events. They helped get Port Authority funding for local shuttle buses, with the governor writing the bistate agency a letter requesting the buses. Mowers said Sokolich even request a letter of recommendation from the governor to help his son get into Rutgers University. The two had a good, friendly relationship, Mowers said. By 2013, they began discussing the possibility that Sokolich would endorse Christie — at the mayor’s request, said Mowers, who is currently a national field coordinator working on the Trump campaign. Sokolich testified earlier in the week that Mowers had been pushing him to endorse and that he’d felt uncomfortable at times. But Mowers said the mayor was so interested that he discussed having the entire town council endorse Christie, and suggested doing so after the Democratic primary so as not to upset the county party bosses. “Given that he brought it up and the rest of the council was interested in endorsing as well,” Mowers said, he thought it “was something he would consider.” But Sokolich ultimately told him he couldn’t do it, Mowers said. Mowers said that at a meeting in March 2013 in Fort Lee, the mayor said he was concerned about his private business as a zoning attorney, and that he could lose contracts with local municipalities for endorsing Christie. Mowers sent a text message to a higher ranking employee in the IGA saying what happened: “Unfortunately, I think Sokolich is going to be a no. It’s a shame, too, I really like the guy.” He added in another message: “He flat out said ‘I wish I had the balls to do it’.” Mowers left the governor’s office to join the Trump campaign the next month. He said he heard twice after that from Bridget Anne Kelly, who was his boss at governor’s office, asking if he’d heard from Sokolich again. First she called him on his cell phone on the evening of August 12. “At first, she called and we exchange pleasantries,” he said. “Then she asked if Mayor Sokolich is definitely not endorsing.” “Ok, great, that’s all I needed to know,” she replied, Mowers said. On Sept. 9, two local access lanes to the George Washington Bridge were closed, causing major traffic jams in Fort Lee. It was that day that Kelly sent Mowers a message asking again about Sokolich and whether they had spoken. He said they had not. Kelly, who was a deputy chief of staff to the governor, and Bill Baroni, who was the deputy executive director of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, are accused of closing access lanes to the bridge to punish Sokolich for refusing to endorse Christie. The Port controls the bridge. They allegedly worked with David Wildstein, who was the director of interstate capital projects for the bi-state agency. He had already pleaded guilty and plans to testify against both defendants this afternoon. Christie, who is currently a top adviser to Trump, has denied any knowledge or involvement in the lane-closing incident. But prosecutors said on Monday the governor was told of the traffic gridlock on the third day of the lane closings. Baroni and Kelly, both 44, were indicted last May on charges of conspiracy, fraud and civil rights violations.
Hillary Clinton will be at the next debate in St. Louis and the one after that in Las Vegas, regardless of whether Donald Trump decides to show up, she maintained Tuesday. Former New York Mayor Rudy Giuliani, a top Trump surrogate, suggested that the Republican presidential nominee forgo the remaining presidential debates unless he’s assured by the moderators that they will “act like a journalist and not an incorrect, ignorant fact-checker.” Story Continued Below “Well, I’m gonna show up,” Clinton told reporters Tuesday during a gaggle aboard her campaign plane in White Plains, New York. “He gets to decide what he’s gonna do, but I will be there at Wash U in St. Louis and then after that in Las Vegas. If I’m the only person on stage, well, you know, I’m the only person on stage.” The next presidential debate is Oct. 9 at Washington University in St. Louis, followed by an Oct. 19 debate at the University of Nevada, Las Vegas. Trump skipped two debates during the Republican primary — once to hold a competing fundraiser for veterans organizations and again because he was due to speak at a conference of the pro-Israel lobbying group AIPAC (the latter debate was ultimately canceled after Trump and John Kasich pulled out). “Nobody told me about debates. As you saw, I thought the last debate on CNN was the last debate,” Trump told “Fox and Friends” at the time, though following that CNN debate he had told Chris Cuomo that he’s “had enough” of the debates after noting “they want to do two more.”
11/19/16, 3:14 PM CET BY Chris Spillane So is anti-establishment message of Nigel Farage, the Labour leader said. 11/19/16, 1:55 PM CET BY Sarah Wheaton Alumni of the Obama White House spent days mourning Trump’s win. Now they’re ready to fight. 11/19/16, 11:37 AM CET BY Chris Spillane Dick Schoof: ‘Chance of attack in the Netherlands is real.’ 11/19/16, 10:38 AM CET BY Chris Spillane Government could focus on starting the process of leaving the bloc sooner. 11/19/16, 10:13 AM CET BY Benjamin Oreskes Diplomats say the president-elect already has a playbook to undermine the global body. 11/19/16, 10:01 AM CET BY Michael Crowley and Nahal Toosi Flynn, Bannon represent ‘Islamophobic’ thinking of the type rejected by Bush and Obama, critics say. 11/19/16, 5:25 AM CET BY Michael Kruse The blue-collar workers who put Donald Trump in the White House are ready for him to deliver. How much time will they give him? 11/19/16, 5:20 AM CET BY Ryan Heath, Tara Palmeri, Harry Cooper and Quentin Ariès  11/18/16, 9:09 PM CET BY Harry Cooper A Polish political party’s links to a pan-European group raise questions about funding. 11/18/16, 6:31 PM CET BY Tom McTague Signs that Britain’s political class is coming to terms with June’s EU referendum. 11/18/16, 6:26 PM CET BY Hortense Goulard Conservative MEP denounced Juncker’s efforts to drum up support for Schulz as ‘outrageous.’ 11/18/16, 5:31 PM CET BY Ivo Oliveira Drawing the top stories around the globe. 11/18/16, 4:55 PM CET BY Cynthia Kroet Italians are likely to reject prime minister’s reform package in next month’s vote. 11/18/16, 4:48 PM CET BY Elana Schor, Kyle Cheney and Louis Nelson The president-elect starts building out his administration with loyalists. 11/18/16, 4:01 PM CET BY Nicholas Vinocur Left-wingers hope that by backing Alain Juppé, they will see off two political enemies. 11/18/16, 3:15 PM CET BY Cynthia Kroet Jens Stoltenberg did not mention the total number or reasons for the requests. 11/18/16, 3:02 PM CET BY Florian Eder and Janosch Delcker Wird Martin Schulz die SPD in den Bundestagswahlkampf führen? Oder schafft er es, doch noch einmal EU-Parlamentspräsident zu werden? Er muss sich bald entscheiden. 11/18/16, 2:34 PM CET BY Anthony Skinner Syrian refugees are pawns in Turkish president’s pursuit of power. 11/18/16, 2:33 PM CET BY Charlie Cooper Shadow Brexit secretary ‘seriously pissed off’ at colleague’s comments. 11/18/16, 2:33 PM CET BY Cynthia Kroet German chancellor is ‘championing the interests of Europe,’ Witold Waszczykowski said. 11/18/16, 12:58 PM CET BY Cynthia Kroet Nikola Gruevski stepped down in January over a wire tapping scandal. 11/18/16, 12:48 PM CET BY Barbara Surk Jens Stoltenberg said he had a ‘good talk’ with the president-elect. 11/18/16, 12:35 PM CET BY Esther King Majority of those who failed to gain international asylum come from the Balkan states. 11/18/16, 11:48 AM CET BY Esther King Immigration is what keeps the country running, says pro-EU Lord. 11/18/16, 10:57 AM CET BY Esther King Conditions at offshore detention center for refugees are ‘cruel, inhuman and degrading,’ said François Crépeau. 11/18/16, 9:36 AM CET BY Esther King Foreign Minister Linas Linkevičius warned that Vladimir Putin could use transition period in Baltics, Syria. 11/18/16, 8:55 AM CET BY MADELINE CONWAY Former ambassador to the UN says there are ways of supporting the opposition that does not involve the use of American military force. 11/18/16, 8:39 AM CET BY Cristiano Lima Her presence is likely to raise fresh concerns about potential conflicts of interest. 11/18/16, 8:35 AM CET BY Bryan Bender The retired lieutenant general’s hardline views on Islam — as well as laudatory statements about Russia — have made him a lightning rod, as did his strident attacks on Hillary Clinton during the campaign. 11/18/16, 5:33 AM CET BY Nicholas Vinocur The center-right’s first ever presidential primary looked all over. Now it’s wide open. 11/18/16, 5:25 AM CET BY Tim King The Günther Oettinger controversies are tainting this European Commission by intimate association. 11/18/16, 12:17 AM CET BY Nahal Toosi Much of Europe is alarmed over what Trump’s presidency could augur. 11/17/16, 11:52 PM CET BY Shane Goldmacher and Andrew Restuccia ‘We feel way ahead of schedule and never in a rush to do the wrong thing,’ said campaign manager Kellyanne Conway. 11/17/16, 9:42 PM CET BY Jacopo Barigazzi Maltese interior minister not impressed with Bratislava’s migration plan. 11/17/16, 9:33 PM CET BY Edward-Isaac Dovere In Berlin, the president warned his successor that his divisive campaign style won’t wear well in the Oval Office. 11/17/16, 8:24 PM CET BY Janosch Delcker US President hopes Trump won’t ‘simply take a Realpolitik approach.’ 11/17/16, 8:21 PM CET BY Hortense Goulard European Parliament president will only accept foreign minister role if he is also the SPD candidate for the top job. 11/17/16, 8:18 PM CET BY Konstantin Richter Germans, of all people, are now called on to be bulwarks of democracy. 11/17/16, 8:06 PM CET BY Paul Dallison and Esther King Euroskeptic party stands accused of breaking rules on spending EU funds. 11/17/16, 7:16 PM CET BY Brent Griffiths  11/17/16, 6:31 PM CET BY Maïa de La Baume Brussels faults Ankara for ‘neglecting and undermining’ democracy and the rule of law. 11/17/16, 6:27 PM CET BY Louis Nelson  11/17/16, 5:47 PM CET BY Cynthia Kroet Jean-Marie Le Pen should receive €15,000 because he was prevented from carrying out his duties. 11/17/16, 4:57 PM CET BY Carter Stoddard Net debt has ballooned to £338 million, and currency fluctuations are partly to blame. 11/17/16, 4:34 PM CET BY Laurens Cerulus In finally passing her surveillance bill, Britain’s PM just made Brexit even more complicated. 11/17/16, 4:13 PM CET BY Hortense Goulard French prime minister called for more European integration amid rising nationalism. 11/17/16, 3:23 PM CET BY Cynthia Kroet Former European Council president joins forces with Flemish singer. 11/17/16, 2:53 PM CET BY Paul Dallison Corey Lewandowski said president-elect will work closely with Theresa May, with no need for UKIP leader as a go-between. 11/17/16, 2:37 PM CET BY Cynthia Kroet Freedom Party leader’s comments on Moroccans living in the Netherlands were ‘unnecessarily offensive.’ 11/17/16, 2:11 PM CET BY Esther King Nigel Farage’s party stands accused of breaking rules on spending EU funds. NATO Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg looks on during a press conference | Adem Altan/AFP via Getty By Jacopo Barigazzi 9/27/16, 3:22 PM CET Updated 9/30/16, 11:46 AM CET BRATISLAVA — NATO Secretary-General Jens Stoltenberg struck back Tuesday at Donald Trump over the U.S. presidential candidate’s claim that the Atlantic alliance is now fighting terrorism only because of his criticism. “NATO has been focused on the fight against terrorism for many, many years and it’s not a result of the U.S. elections campaign,” said Stoltenberg in a press conference during a gathering of European defense ministers in Bratislava. Trump, who has been critical of NATO and even gone so far as to question the U.S. membership of it, said Monday night in a debate with his presidential opponent Hillary Clinton that he now supported the alliance. “I’m all for NATO,” Trump said. “But I said they have to focus on terror, also. And they’re going to do that. And that was — believe me, I’m sure I’m not going to get credit for it — but that was largely because of what I was saying and my criticism of NATO.” Also On Politico Zoya Sheftalovich Stoltenberg, a former Norwegian prime minister, defended NATO’s track record of fighting terrorism. “We went into Afghanistan to prevent Afghanistan from becoming a safe heaven for international terrorists,” he said, stressing that it was “our biggest military operation ever.” NATO “has and is playing a key role in the fight against terrorism” and the organization has “stepped up our efforts to support the U.S.-led coalition to fight ISIL.” Stoltenberg also said that NATO’s newly created position of assistant to the secretary-general for intelligence “will also be a tool in our efforts to fight terrorism, to share intelligence.” But he insisted the role is “something which has been planned and discussed for a long time and is not a result of the U.S. election campaign.”  © 2016 POLITICO SPRL Log in to access content and manage your profile. If you do not have a login you can register here.
The Senate on Wednesday backed a $1.15 billion arms sale to Saudi Arabia, even as Congress is preparing to override an expected presidential veto of a different bill allowing 9/11 victims’ families to sue the Saudi government. The Senate voted 71-27 to table, or kill, the resolution from Sens. Rand Paul (R-Ky.) and Chris Murphy (D-Conn.) that would have blocked the $1.15 billion sale of Abrams tanks to Saudi Arabia, which the State Department approved last month. Story Continued Below While the vote was unsuccessful, Murphy said his goal wasn’t necessarily to pass the resolution, but rather to press Saudi Arabia on its role in the civil war in Yemen. Riyadh has been accused of killing civilians with airstrikes in Yemen and other human rights violations. “I don’t think the Saudis are interested in continually having a debate about the future of U.S.-Saudi relationship on the floor of the Senate or the House,” Murphy told POLITICO ahead of the vote. “I knew from the beginning that this was not becoming law. My point here is to raise a discussion about the war in Yemen and Saudi behavior in the region that isn’t happening.” Opponents of the resolution — including Republican Senate foreign policy stalwarts like Armed Services Chairman John McCain (R-Ariz.) and Foreign Relations Chairman Bob Corker (R-Tenn.) — argued that the Saudis were important allies in the Middle East, despite their abuses in the war in Yemen. “Were this resolution disapproval ever to be adopted, it would further convince the world that the United States is retreating not only from its commitments, but also as the guarantor of the international order,” Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell said on the floor Wednesday. The arms sale vote comes at a tense time in U.S.-Saudi relations, as Congress is preparing to override a presumed veto on legislation that also targets Saudi Arabia. The White House plans to issue a formal veto of the Justice Against Sponsors of Terrorism Act, which would allow families of the victims of the Sept. 11, 2001 terror attacks to sue foreign governments found responsible for them. The legislation, which breezed unanimously through both chambers of the Capitol earlier this year, has long been viewed as focusing on Saudi Arabia’s alleged role in the terrorist attacks. The so-called “28 pages,” part of a 2002 probe that was declassified in July, included some indications that appear to suggest links between a handful of Saudis in the United States and two of the 9/11 hijackers. Some influential lawmakers have shown hesitation about the 9/11 bill and its implications as an override vote became imminent. President Barack Obama has not vetoed the legislation yet; he has until Friday to do so, and McConnell said the vote will be held before senators leave Washington until the November elections. Murphy said it was “unfortunate” the timing of the two bills intersected, arguing they were two separate issues that both happened to deal with Saudi Arabia. “I think there are a lot of people who want to vote — who will vote to override the JASTA veto and then vote against our resolution as a means of balancing their votes out,” he said. “Had our resolution happened at a different time, the vote might be different.” Opponents of the disapproval resolution also made a distinction between supporting the 9/11 bill and supporting the arms sale to the Saudis. Republicans who came to the floor to back the sale tied it to Iran, charging that Iran was on the other side of the civil war in Yemen and that Saudi Arabia was essential as a counterbalance in the region. “You're talking about a body and an idea that is ass-backwards, this is one for the ages,” said Sen. Lindsey Graham (R-S.C.). “To those who want to vote today to suspend this aid to Saudi Arabia, people in Iran will cheer you on.” The U.S. has played a support role for Saudi Arabia in the Yemen civil war, providing aerial refueling and intelligence sharing. The proposed arms sale to the Saudis includes 153 Abrams tanks, and 20 “battle damage replacements,” likely from their use in the Yemen war. Wednesday vote wasn’t the first time that Paul and Murphy have teamed up to force a vote on a sale to a Middle Eastern ally with a checkered history. In March, the pair forced a vote on the sale of F-16 fighter jets to Pakistan, which was also blocked by the Senate, 71 to 24. Paul’s Senate campaign sent out a note to his supporters ahead of the vote Wednesday, urging them to “#standwithrand” and to sign a petition backing his resolution.
Politico POLITICO's must-read briefing on what's driving the day in Washington HAPPY DEBATE DAY! Bloomberg is out with a poll this morning that tracks with practically every public survey that’s been released: the race for the White House is basically tied. http://bloom.bg/2dlw162 Donald Trump leads Hillary Clinton in a four-way race, 43-41, and the two are tied with 46 percent in a head-to-head race. A NEW CNN poll has Hillary Clinton up one point -- 45-44 -- in Pennsylvania, and Donald Trump leads Clinton in Colorado 42-41. http://cnn.it/2dawOn3 Story Continued Below It’s with that backdrop that the nation turns to HOFSTRA UNIVERSITY on LONG ISLAND for the first matchup between Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump. The debate begins at 9 p.m. and will run for 90 minutes without commercial interruption. NBC’s Lester Holt is the moderator -- he’s done practically no press in the leadup to what could be the biggest moment of his career. The topics for the debate are: “America’s Direction,” “Achieving Prosperity” and “Securing America.” Clinton and Trump are scheduled to face off for a second time on Oct. 9 at Washington University in St. Louis. The final debate is Oct. 19 in Las Vegas. 43 DAYS until Election Day. **SUBSCRIBE to Playbook: http://politi.co/1M75UbX WHAT YOU NEED TO KNOW -- NYT, Pat Healy and Alex Burns on A1: “First Clinton-Trump Debate Is Framed by Rifts Over Race and Gender”: “In a campaign that has veered from traditional policy arguments toward a battle over national identity and values, Mrs. Clinton and Mr. Trump are more sharply opposed over racial and gender issues than any two presidential opponents in decades. Rather than play it safe with milquetoast positions, Mrs. Clinton wants to increase turnout among African-Americans and women by tackling issues of bias and respect. Mr. Trump is positioning himself at the vanguard of white men.” http://nyti.ms/2dceeJi --POLITICO, Shane Goldmacher, “Clinton vs. Trump: The only 30 minutes that matter: Most of the big debate moments in history came in the encounter’s opening rounds, something Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton would do well to remember”: “Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump will debate for 90 minutes on Monday. But the winner likely will be determined in the first half-hour. That’s when Al Gore first sighed, Mitt Romney knocked President Obama on his heels, and Marco Rubio, earlier this year, glitched in repeating the same talking point — over and over and over. It’s when Gore tried, unsuccessfully, to invade George W. Bush’s space, Richard Nixon was first caught wiping away sweat with a handkerchief (during the moderators’ introductions!) and Gerald Ford in 1976 made the ill-advised declaration that, ‘There is no Soviet domination of Eastern Europe.’” http://politi.co/2cZAbAT --WSJ, Janet Hook and Andrew Ackerman, “Presidential Debates Will Be a Major Influence for a Third of Voters, Poll Says”: “Some 34% say matchups between Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump will be very important in picking a candidate to support”: “About 11% of voters are considered ‘debate persuadables’ -- that is, they think the debates are important and are either third-party voters or only loosely committed to either major-party candidate. Slightly more Republicans than Democrats said the debates would be important to them, 37% to 31%. But voter groups that seem poised to pay the most attention include several that Mrs. Clinton is counting on to win. Some 49% of Hispanics, 42% of African-Americans and 39% of voters under age 35 say that the debates will be extremely or quite important to them.” http://on.wsj.com/2dsTRsH --AP, Julie Pace, “Debate Night: Clinton, Trump set for high-stakes showdown”: “Clinton has debated more than 30 times at the presidential level, including several one-on-one contests against Obama in 2008 and Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders in 2016. But Monday’s contest will be her first presidential debate against a candidate from the opposing party.” http://apne.ws/2cvIDRZ --WaPo, John Wagner, Jose DelReal and Abby Phillip: “A huge moment for Clinton and Trump at first of three debates”: “A roiling disagreement over the role of the debate moderator flared up Sunday, with Democrats arguing that a more activist ‘fact-checker’ role is needed to rein in Trump’s well-established pattern of factual misstatements. But Janet H. Brown, the executive director of the Commission on Presidential Debates, seemed to side with the Republican nominee, saying in a television interview that ‘it’s not a good idea to get the moderator into essentially serving as the Encyclopaedia Britannica.’ She added, however, that ultimately it will be up to Monday’s moderator, Lester Holt of NBC News, to do the job as he sees fit.” http://wapo.st/2cZsVVJ THE CLINTON CAMPAIGN says it’s hosting more than 1,200 debate watch parties in 50 states. They also have a minute-and-a-half new web video called “Lies.” The spot, released this morning, juxtaposes contradictory Trump statements on a bevy of issues. http://bit.ly/2cvS0B4 THE TRUMP CAMPAIGN did not reply when asked about anything they’re doing tied to the debate. **** A message from BP: Over the past 10 years, no energy company has invested more in the U.S. than BP – $90 billion in total. Take 90 seconds to see what else we’re doing to help keep America moving forward. ****** GLENN THRUSH asks: “Is Donald Trump qualified to be president?”: “[T]he spotlight belongs on Trump, who is in need of a rigorous job interview. Clinton deserves the same, but she is already the single most scrutinized, parsed, vetted, investigated, attacked and plaudited non-incumbent to ever seek the presidency. She’s been around forever, making enemies since the internet was dial-up, cell phones were the size of skateboards and Trump was engaged to Marla Maples. “Everyone makes the orange jokes, but Trump is something of a black box -- running on a few big and broad ideas (curbing illegal immigration, ditching bad trade deals, restoring American prosperity to the working class and obliterating political correctness). He’s bad with facts and the truth, and perhaps worse, takes perverse pride in being a D student who doesn't read books, has the sketchiest sense of history, doesn't read briefing materials, and, according to aides and ghostwriters, can't even sit still long enough to be given a thorough verbal briefing. “1. Does he actually know - or care to know - the basic information needed to competently run the country? … 2. Does Trump understand and respect the basic principles and traditions of American Constitutional government? … 3. Why won’t Trump forthrightly answer the most basic questions about his businesses and debts? … 4. What's the deal with his charitable foundation? … 5. Why lie?” http://politi.co/2dciZlR HISTORY LESSON -- “A partnership between Microsoft and PBS NewsHour, sanctioned by Commission on Presidential Debates, [houses] all the general election debates since 1960. You can watch -- and rate -- all debate moments, highlights by year and issue, since 1960, such as: Kennedy vs Nixon ... Bush vs Clinton ... Obama vs Romney. And on Monday, Clinton vs Trump (live and on-demand afterward).” http://to.pbs.org/2dchTqm … www.WatchTheDebates.org PAGING SIMPSON AND BOWLES -- “Fiscal Constraints Await the Next President,” by WSJ’s Nick Timiraos: “Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton are likely to recite their varied promises for fresh government spending at Monday’s first presidential debate. One reality they’re unlikely to note: Whoever wins in November will enjoy far less latitude to spend money or cut taxes than any president since World War II. Not since Harry Truman will a new leader enter office with a higher debt-to-GDP ratio. And for the first time in decades, the new president will face the specter of widening deficits despite a growing economy.” http://on.wsj.com/2cW4IvV -- “Giffords, Kelly take Clinton gun message to swing states,” by USA Today’s Heidi Przybyla: “For the first time in a generation, Democrats are betting they’re on the winning side of the gun issue. On Tuesday, Gabrielle Giffords, the former Arizona congresswoman who was shot in the head at a 2011 Tucson rally, and her husband, Mark Kelly, a retired astronaut, begin barnstorming election battlegrounds, including those with a strong gun culture, like Iowa, Virginia and North Carolina, in a 14-state tour that goes through Election Day.” http://usat.ly/2dsX9Mw STATE OF THE ART -- FROM IJR: “The campaign for Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump purchased the national Snapchat geofilter ahead of Monday’s debate at Hofstra University in Hempstead, New York, Independent Journal Review has exclusively learned.” The top of the frame says “DEBATE DAY ... Donald J. Trump vs. Crooked Hillary.” http://bit.ly/2dlrJHb --“Cruz profited off Trump well before endorsing him: The vanquished 2016 contender was renting his valuable email list to the GOP nominee for months,” by Shane Goldmacher: “It took Ted Cruz four months and three weeks of ‘careful consideration, of prayer and searching my own conscience’ to declare publicly that he would vote for Donald Trump. ... Just six weeks after he dropped out – and more than a month before Cruz would dramatically snub the nominee at the Republican National Convention – the senator quietly began renting his vast donor email file to his former rival, pocketing at least tens of thousands of dollars, and more likely hundreds of thousands, that can be used to bankroll the Texan’s own political future. ... [A]n email rate sheet obtained by POLITICO shows that Cruz asks campaigns to pay more than $22,000 for the right to send a single email his list of 280,000 digital donors. He charges more than $51,000 to ping his full email file of 1.28 million supporters.” http://politi.co/2dvr5KK REMEMBERING ARNOLD PALMER -- “Arnold Palmer, the Magnetic Face of Golf in the ’60s, Dies at 87,” by NYT’s Dave Anderson: “Arnold Palmer, the champion golfer whose full-bore style of play, thrilling tournament victories and magnetic personality inspired an American golf boom, attracted a following known as Arnie’s Army and made him one of the most popular athletes in the world, died on Sunday, according to a spokesman for his business enterprises. Palmer was 87. The spokesman, Doc Giffin, said the cause of death was complications from heart problems. … Palmer died Sunday evening at UPMC Shadyside Hospital in Pittsburgh.” http://nyti.ms/2cP26Ol FOR YOUR RADAR -- The government is slated to shut down on Friday night, unless Congress passes a stopgap spending bill. The plan is to extend government funding until the lame-duck session of Congress in December, but the two sides are still haggling over various issues in the Senate, chiefly money to help Flint, Michigan. THRUSH’S OFF MESSAGE PODCAST -- JEN PALMIERI: “When I ask her which Trump Clinton is really prepping for, Palmieri predicted Trump will do No. 2 in front of the biggest televised audience for any debate, ever. ‘I imagine that the person who will show up is the same person who showed up the Commander-in-Chief Forum that NBC did a few weeks ago -- that person was relatively disciplined,’ said Palmieri, a veteran Democratic aide and messaging manager who most recently served in Barack Obama’s White House and is in charge, more or less, of rendering Clinton just likeable enough to get elected president of the United States.’” http://politi.co/2cvUgbL On Wednesday Jake and Anna will be sitting down for a chat with theSkimm co-founders and co-CEOs Carly Zakin and Danielle Weisberg at Twitter’s DC office for breakfast, conversation and networking. Join in on the conversation on Twitter at #POLITICOSkimm and send us a message at politicoevents@politico.com to learn more. PRESIDENT TRUMP -- “Trump hitches a ride on Bibi’s coattails,” by Michael Crowley: “Donald Trump once promised to be the ‘neutral guy’ in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and said he didn’t want to assign fault in the never-ending impasse. Trump struck a very different tone on Sunday, telling Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu that he would recognize an undivided Jerusalem as Israel’s eternal capital and squarely blaming Palestinian ‘hatred and violence’ for the ongoing failure of Middle East peace efforts. “Not to be outdone, in her own meeting with Netanyahu a few hours later, Clinton told the Israeli leader that she opposes, in the words of a senior campaign aide, ‘any attempt by outside parties to impose a solution, including by the U.N. Security Council.’ … The two get-togethers spotlighted the U.S.-Israel relationship on the eve of the first presidential debate and likely drew the close attention of Jewish American voters. They also prompted complaints from Trump critics that Netanyahu was legitimizing Trump on the world stage.” http://politi.co/2dvqQz7 NYT EDITORIAL BOARD, part II -- “Why Donald Trump Should Not Be President: Donald Trump is a man who dwells in bigotry, bluster and false promises”: “When Donald Trump began his improbable run for president 15 months ago, he offered his wealth and television celebrity as credentials, then slyly added a twist of fearmongering about Mexican ‘rapists’ flooding across the Southern border. From that moment of combustion, it became clear that Mr. Trump’s views were matters of dangerous impulse and cynical pandering rather than thoughtful politics. Yet he has attracted throngs of Americans who ascribe higher purpose to him than he has demonstrated in a freewheeling campaign marked by bursts of false and outrageous allegations, personal insults, xenophobic nationalism, unapologetic sexism and positions that shift according to his audience and his whims.” http://nyti.ms/2cP5lpd AIR WARS -- “Coal industry mounts unusual court-focused ad campaign,” by Josh Gerstein: “For the past few weeks, the American Coalition for Clean Coal Electricity has been running radio ads focused squarely on Tuesday’s oral arguments before a 10-judge, en banc sitting of the D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals.” http://politi.co/2davhxn MEDIAWATCH -- GABE SHERMAN PROFILE -- “Grit vs. Goliath: A Reporter’s Dogged Pursuit of Roger Ailes,” by NYT's David Segal: “Anyone visiting the Rockefeller Center studios of MSNBC on Sept. 2 would have witnessed a peculiar spectacle: the reporter Gabriel Sherman arriving for an on-air interview accompanied by a bodyguard. ... In mid-July Politico reported that Mr. Ailes had once talked about dispatching thugs to beat up Mr. Sherman. It is unclear how serious he was. But now that Mr. Ailes had lost his job, it seemed possible that he would also lose his famously volatile temper. So Mr. Sherman and the editors at New York hired some muscle. ... “[I]n the summer of 2012, [Sherman's wife] spotted a black sport utility vehicle at the bottom of the driveway at a house in Vermont that she and Mr. Sherman had rented. The place was on a dead-end dirt road, in a tiny town where pickup trucks are the norm. When Ms. Stahl started walking toward the vehicle, it pulled into the driveway of a neighbor, who wasn't home. Who was in this car was never known, though Mr. Sherman assumed it was an Ailes operative. The low point, Mr. Sherman said, was a death threat delivered by telephone that winter.” http://nyti.ms/2duR3Ok IN YOUR FACEBOOK FEED -- Facebook is out with the top five most talked about political topics over the last 30 days: 1. Racial issues … 2. Homeland security and terrorism … 3. Government ethics … 4. The economy ... 5. Religion. PIC DU JOUR -- @kenvogel: “Donald Trump’s immigrant grandfather lived in an apt in this tenement at 76 Forsyth St on the #LowerEastSide upon arriving in the US in 1885” http://bit.ly/2d3196w GOTHAM WATCH -- “De Blasio, Focusing on Small Donors, Hires Team That Bolstered Sanders,” by NYT’s William Neuman: “Mr. de Blasio has hired the senator’s digital fund-raising team, seeking to bring some of its small-donor smarts to his 2017 re-election campaign in New York. The consultant, Revolution Messaging, sent out an initial fund-raising email on Saturday, adding to the flood of solicitations for political donations that many New Yorkers are getting from the presidential candidates Hillary Clinton and Donald J. Trump.” http://nyti.ms/2dlvEDX **** A message from BP: We’ve donated $147 million to U.S. community programs over the past five years. Check out the programs we support in your community. ****** WASHINGTON INC. -- JOHN BUCKLEY joins Subject Matter as its first CEO. Buckley comes on board from strategic communications firm the Harbour Group, where he has served as managing director since 2008. The veteran GOP operative worked as deputy press secretary to Reagan-Bush ‘84, as press secretary to Jack Kemp in Congress and for his 1988 presidential campaign. He also worked in senior level communications positions at AOL and Fannie Mae. TECATE, the Mexican brewer, is running an ad poking fun about a wall on the U.S.-Mexico border. They want to build the “Tecate beer wall.” http://bit.ly/2d2TkQ3 PLAYBOOK METRO SECTION -- “Metro chairman Evans: Board is so unwieldy that we ought to scrap it altogether,” by WaPo’s Robert McCartney: “Metro board Chairman Jack Evans is so frustrated trying to lead the transit system’s cumbersome, 16-member governing body that he would prefer to scrap it and start fresh … He conceded that would be ‘extreme’ and it won’t happen. But he said members of such a board would not be ‘beholden to the local jurisdictions’ and thus could do what’s best for Metro as a whole … Divided allegiances at the top have hobbled Metro since its creation. The problem has arisen again as the board wrestles over cutting subway hours and studying how to raise billions of dollars in coming years to rebuild the system and cover pension costs.” http://wapo.st/2dkm5cv THE PLAYBOOK INTERVIEW: Stephanie Schriock EMILY’S List President Stephanie Schriock is leading the effort to turn out women voters in the 2016 election. Schriock, who serves as a top Clinton surrogate, is crisscrossing the country to stump for Clinton and other Democratic candidates in the lead up to the election. And, she’s also been responsible for the group raising more money to achieve that goal — $26.8 million as of July — than ever before. “This really is EMILY’s List’s moment,” Schriock said. “We are having our most successful fundraising cycle and we are going to have by far the largest women voter program, which is our independent expenditure arm, that we’ve ever had.” The bar at the debate is higher for Hillary Clinton: “This is a really important moment and the first time that Americans have seen a woman standing on that stage for a presidential debate and I think she’s going to be ready. I know there is no one who prepares harder than Hillary Clinton, but the stakes are high and the bar is really high for her. I don’t think there is anything they can do about that. Like so many of our women candidates they just have to deal with it.” Stunned at Trump’s comments on women: “I think it is really really important for all of the women in this country… to know that Donald Trump has these views and has no problem just letting these really offensive words come off his tongue.” Trump’s policy targeting women is a sham: “It was atrocious policy. It was the kind of thing that a campaign throws together with less than 60 days left when they know they are losing particularly women voters. Women voters and Americans in general are obviously not going to fall for something like that.” Female candidates will determine Senate majority: “Catherine Cortez Masto of Nevada, Maggie Hassan in New Hampshire, Katie McGinty in Pennsylvania, and now Deborah Ross, who we are so proud of in North Carolina, those four races are the keys to the majority and they have incredibly strong candidates we’ve been working on since day one, or even before as we tried to recruit them and got them in these races.” 2016, ya'll. pic.twitter.com/M0AZceVagQ — Victor Ng (@victomato) September 25, 2016 SPOTTED: Charles Dance, of Game of Thrones fame, upon accepting the 2016 William Shakespeare Award for Classical Theatre, finished his acceptance speech with a commentary on American politics. “I would like to wish you all a Trump-free future.” … North Carolina Rep. Richard Hudson yesterday at the Harris Teeter in Navy Yard, with an old-fashioned, handwritten grocery list. OBAMA ALUMNI -- After 23 years of government service, Tanya Bradsher -- former DHS Assistant Secretary for Public Affairs, White House Office of Public Engagement Associate Director, and NSC Spokesperson -- starts today as the chief communications officer at the American Psychiatric Association. WEEKEND WEDDINGS – pool report: “Sydney Kaufman of the State Dept. and David Lienemann of VP Biden’s office were married Sunday in front of nearly 100 friends and family in a gorgeous setting: Los Poblanos Historic Inn and Organic Farm in Albuquerque, New Mexico. Guests came from all over - NY, SC, DC, TX, NE, CA and Alaska, to name a few places. The rabbi told the story of how Biden helped them first meet.” Pic http://bit.ly/2dawK6U --“Christina Rexrode and Nick Zaccardi: A Wayward Trip Pays Off,” by NYT’s Vincent M. Mallozzi: “The bride, 33, is a reporter who covers the banking industry for The Wall Street Journal in New York. She graduated from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. ... The groom, 30, is an Olympics writer for NBC Sports in Stamford, Conn. He graduated from the University of Florida. ... According to Ms. Rexrode, she and Mr. Zaccardi met in 2013, when they sat next to each other at a membership class at Redeemer Presbyterian Church in New York.” With pic http://nyti.ms/2cxJKWi --“Emma Kynoch, Marc Lowenstein”: “The bride, 31, is a recruiter for the financial product analytics and sales division of Bloomberg, the media and financial technology firm in New York. She graduated from the University of Michigan. ... The groom, also 31, works in New York as a marketing manager for bands on behalf of Milestone Music Management, a company in Asheville, N.C. He graduated from the University of Wisconsin.” With pic http://nyti.ms/2d39QxP --E&E reporter Tiffany Stecker and David Gustavson, who works at a Marriott franchise, were married on Sept. 10 in San Diego, near where Tiffany grew up. The couple honeymooned in Costa Rica. Pic http://bit.ly/2djV7BZ WELCOME TO THE WORLD – Adam Kushner, WashPost Outlook editor, and Maria Simon, partner at the Geller Law Group, post on Facebook: “Meet our son! Maria delivered this hirsute little 7-pounder [Friday], and he’s very curious. He has his mom’s general zen and his dad’s desire to eat everything RIGHT NOW, so we love him. We’ll name him at his bris next week.” Pic http://bit.ly/2ddatH5 ... Big brother Jack and his new sibling http://bit.ly/2dcuI3V OUT AND ABOUT -- Washington Post Mexico City Bureau Chief Josh Partlow spoke to a packed Politics and Prose Sunday about his new book, “A Kingdom Of Their Own: The Family Karzai and the Afghan Disaster.” Friends from his Afghanistan days and fellow Washington Post colleagues turned out, including: Marty Baron, Mary Beth Sheridan, Karin Brulliard, Matt Rosenberg, John Dempsey, Matt Sherman, Caitlin Hayden and Siobhan Oat-Judge. $18.14 on Amazon http://amzn.to/2dlBCcI --The 8th Annual Secretary Tom Ridge Golf tournament was held on Friday at Old Hickory Golf Course in Woodbridge, Virginia. Sixty current and former Homeland Security officials took part in festivities. Funds raised from the event went to benefit the Border Patrol Foundation. Pics http://bit.ly/2cvJF0n ... http://bit.ly/2cP5TLK SPOTTED: Gov. Tom Ridge, Ed Cash (organizer of the event), former Border Patrol Chief Mike Fisher, Don Kent, James Norton, Stewart Verdery, Andrew Howell, Rowdy Adams, Kay Olive, Michael Dougherty, Drew Drake, Janet Hale, Steve Klopp, Andy Purdy, Drew Owens, Craig Haverback, Carrie Supko, Kristen Lillard, Kandi Molyneaux, Mark Holman, Mark Campbell, Tim Grattan, Jeff Goldberg, Greg Garcia, Michael Gambale, Jay Foley, Mark Emery, Jamie Brown, Ray Whitehead, Keith Trippie, Mark Robertson, Bill Parrish, Adam Paulson, Tony Dimoulas, Terry DiVittorio, Geoff Hill, Rich Irwin, Ryan Kociolek, Barry Neulen, Jamie Brown, Brad Alden. LGBT44 LAUNCHES -- One hundred and fifthy LGBT appointees in the Obama administration held their first-ever “LGBT44 Family Reunion.” “The weekend began with a Friday night reception at Republic Restoratives distillery, co-owned by former DHS official Pia Carusone, where Army Secretary Eric Fanning and Arcus Foundation CEO and former Education Department leader Kevin Jennings gave remarks emphasizing the importance of public service and reflecting upon the change they've seen in their careers. Saturday’s day-long event at the Human Rights Campaign building included remarks by Gay and Lesbian Victory Institute Vice President Ruben Gonzales and federal CTO Megan Smith - the highest ranking out woman in the Administration -- as well as a surprise drop-by from HUD Secretary Julián Castro.” BIRTHDAYS: Doug Sosnik … WashPost’s Dave Weigel, the pride of Wilmington, Delaware, is 35 ... Winnie Madikizela-Mandela is 8-0 ... former Arizona Gov. Jan Brewer is 72 ... Elizabeth Arzt, a Udall alum ... Julia Slingsby, deputy comms director for Speaker Paul Ryan, is 28 ... Rep. Beto O’Rourke (D-Tex.) is 44 (h/t John Meza) ... Politico’s Jessica Bakeman, Thomas Clark and Alexis Barranca ... Rep. Frank Guinta (R-NH) is 46 ... Bill Scher is 44 ... Jordan Cohen, NYT’s senior manager of comms ... WashPost’s Kathleen Parker ... photographer Stephen Voss is 38 ... Washingtonian’s Ben Freed … Sam Myers, Sr., a veteran of the last 10 presidential election cycles, Godfather of presidential advance, Trip Director to VP Biden, is 66 (h/t son Sam Jr.) ... Missy Edwards, president of Missy Edwards Strategies ... Jon Rosborough of Statler Nagle is 32. Instead of watching the debate, he’ll be listening to his favorite podcast, Hardcore History ... Evan Hollander, comms director for Rep. Betty McCollum, is 24, who spent the weekend celebrating Georgetown Homecoming on Saturday, and capped it off by throwing a birthday brunch Sunday (h/ts Lauren Weber and Eli Yokley) ... Goli Ameri, president and CEO of the Center for Global Engagement ... No Labels leader and former Gov. Christie Todd Whitman (h/t Dennis Craig) ... Gary Carpentier ... Tom Gannon, VP of public policy at Mastercard ... Jen Chung, co-founder of Gothamist.com … Parag Mehta, COS to the U.S. Surgeon General (h/ts Jon Haber) ... Stacy England is 36 -- she celebrated with her husband J.D. Grom and friends at A&D in Shaw Saturday night (h/t J.D.) ... … Mark Isakowitz, Sen. Portman’s COS ...Greg Lorjuste, associate director of scheduling at the White House ... Erin Cunningham, senior fashion editor at Refinery29 and a Daily Beast alum ... Roy Hodson, political junkie, and incredible father of Nate Hodson of House Republican Conference and Redeemer Arlington … Republican strategist Mark Isakowitz … Henry Seltzer, Bloomberg’s senior editor of global digital video programming … Mackenzie Smith, a Gavin Newsom alum … Alexander Howe, account director at fama PR in Boston and a Global Strategy Group and Fenton alum ... Sarah Crawford Stewart, president of b-fresh consulting and a McCain, Pawlenty and Huntsman alum ... Sam Drzymala, COS and senior advisor Not Who We Are PAC and principal at Clever Edge ... Matt McKillip, policy director for NC Gov. Pat McCrory and an AEI alum … John Fitzpatrick, managing partner at Stratacomm … Bob Nash … Eric Stepney ... John Law ... John Norris ... Ken Trautmann ... Bob Nash (h/ts Teresa Vilmain) ... Dayne Cutrell, LD for Sen. Richard Shelby, is 29 ... Ian Rose ... Risa Heller ... Andrew Goldston ... Steve Janack ... Olivia Newton-John is 68 ... Serena Williams is 35 (h/ts AP) SUBSCRIBE to the Playbook family: POLITICO Playbook http://politi.co/1M75UbX ... New York Playbook http://politi.co/1ON8bqW … Florida Playbook http://politi.co/1OypFe9 ... New Jersey Playbook http://politi.co/1HLKltF ... Massachusetts Playbook http://politi.co/1Nhtq5v ... Illinois Playbook http://politi.co/1N7u5sb ... California Playbookhttp://politi.co/2bLvcPl ... Brussels Playbook http://politi.co/1FZeLcw ... All our political and policy tipsheets http://politi.co/1M75UbX
(CNN)Even if their preferred candidate wins, a new poll released Wednesday found that supporters of Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton will feel more relief than excitement. The findings from the Pew Research Center revealed widespread disenchantment toward this year's presidential contest among American voters. Majorities of voters say they are frustrated (57%) and disgusted (55%) with the campaign, dwarfing those who say they are interested (31%), optimistic (15%) and excited (10%). Those lukewarm attitudes even extend to backers of the two major party nominees. Only 25% of Clinton supporters say they would feel excited if she were to win. There was little more enthusiasm among Trump supporters; just 28% would be excited if the GOP nominee triumphs in November. But many more Clinton supporters, 68%, say they would feel relieved if she were to win. Ditto for Trump supporters, 61% of whom say they would also feel relief if he wins. According to Pew, a mere 11% of voters overall say they would feel excited if Trump were to win, virtually the same number (12%) who would be excited if the former secretary of state is victorious. The race between Clinton and Trump represents a battle between two of the least liked major party candidates in history, and Pew's findings are hardly the first to show that voters are largely disappointed with both. A Washington Post/ABC News poll last month found Clinton and Trump to be the two most unpopular presidential candidates in decades. The Pew Research Center report is based on a random sample of 3,941 registered voters who are members of the Center's American Trends Panel. Respondents took the survey between August 16 and September 12 online or by mail, and were originally recruited via nationally representative telephone surveys. Results among registered voters have a margin of sampling error of 2.6 percentage points. 
New York (CNN)After 30 years in the spotlight, Hillary Clinton finally found the balance on gender that has bedeviled her throughout her career during the debate at Hofstra Monday night. Demonstrate power, command of the issues and the ability to shred your opponent -- all while seeming (just) likeable enough. Monday night's faceoff with Donald Trump could have been heralded as another historic first for women. But Clinton made no mention of a glass ceiling. There was no self-congratulatory nod to the fact that she was the first female nominee of a major party to take that stage before as many as 100 million people. She wore red, a power color, but with a feminine cut that looked anything but severe. She was smooth and measured; flicking subtly to her gender with a quick mention of granddaughter Charlotte right off the top, but then didn't dwell on it. She didn't lecture. She smiled (a lot) — even as he slid into his role of interrupter-in-chief. Before Monday night's debate, all the attention was on which Donald Trump would appear -- the restrained candidate or the flame-thrower of primary days. But it was the former secretary of state who pulled off the more fascinating performance -- taking command of the stage, dominating Trump on a wide array of issues, luring him into ill-advised digressions about the source of his wealth and whether he pays federal taxes. Trump complains about debate mic In an interesting strategic move, she waited until the very end of the debate to throw her sharpest dart by raising his past descriptions of women "as pigs, slobs and dogs" and his criticism of weight gain by 1996 Miss Universe Alicia Machado. Trump shook his head, demanding where she had gotten her information (it's on tape); but then didn't seem to have an effective response. Instead he wandered off into a digression about Rosie O'Donnell, the meanness of Clinton's ads, and the notion that he had planned to mention Bill Clinton's infidelities -- but was holding back the instinct to say "something extremely rough to Hillary, to her family." "I said to myself, 'I can't do it. I just can't do it,' Trump said. And then the debate was over. One critical task for Clinton in the coming weeks is activating and energizing female voters, particularly moderate Republican and undecided women turned off by Trump. Her team clearly felt her light touch gender strategy -- provoking Trump but not complaining about her treatment -- worked Monday night. Her campaign chairman John Podesta told reporters before leaving New York that Trump's "constant interruption of her probably was reminiscent of the way a lot of women feel about bullies in their lives. He added, "I thought it was kind of unbecoming and he couldn't stop himself." The campaign followed up with a gut-punching web video showing Trump's comments on Machado's weight and the nickname she said he adopted for the Latina contest winner: "Miss Housekeeping." Who is Alicia Machado? In a gaggle with reporters en route to North Carolina, Clinton brushed off Trump's interruptions, taking a page from Carly Fiorina's playbook when Trump made comments during the GOP primary about her face. "I think his demeanor, his temperament, his behavior on the stage could be seen by everybody," Clinton told reporters who had asked about his frequent interruptions. The strategy? Let women judge for themselves. Was she fearful of future mentions of Bill Clinton's infidelity? "He can run his campaign however he chooses, and, you know, I will continue to talk about what I want to do for the American people," she replied. As the race has tightened in recent weeks, Trump's aides believe it is in part because they are making gains among suburban women, particularly in states like Colorado and Pennsylvania, who like Trump's childcare plan and his recent policy speeches. How Trump's performance affects that calculus remains to be seen. But he seemed to have walked into Clinton's trap on Fox & Friends Tuesday morning when he defended his comments about Machado's weight. "I know that person, that person was a Miss Universe person, and she was the worst we ever had. The worst, the absolute worst," Trump said, later adding, "She was the winner and you know, she gained a massive amount of weight and it was a real problem." Clearly Trump isn't afraid to double down on his past comments about women, even when his advisers have tried to steer him toward more substantive policy issues. And Clinton is going to let that play out. CNN's Dan Merica contributed to this report.
Former "West Wing" cast members will stump for Hillary Clinton in Ohio this weekend. Richard Schiff (Toby Ziegler), Allison Janney (C.J. Cregg), Bradley Whitford (Josh Lyman), Dulé Hill (Charlie Young), Joshua Malina (Will Bailey) and Mary McCormack (Kate Harper) will participate. The cast reunion and campaign events will include appearances in Cleveland, Sandusky, Toledo, Columbus and elsewhere. Story Continued Below "The West Wing," an accounting of the White House under fictional President Josiah Bartlet (Martin Sheen), has been off the air for a decade. The show was created by Aaron Sorkin and netted 26 prime-time Emmy Awards during its run. Since the show ended, some cast members have touted their role in inspiring viewers to pursue a career in politics. In an interview on NBC’s "Today" show, Schiff recalled meeting fans of the show who, at the time, were staffers for Sen. Barack Obama.
Eastern Aleppo saw what witnesses describe as an unprecedented and relentless offensive as United Nations diplomats demanded a halt to the violence Sunday. This morning airstrikes continued to hit the rebel-held part of Aleppo, say locals. “Six have died at the hospital so far since airstrikes started to hit this morning,” Abu Rajab, a radiologist and managing director of an Aleppo hospital, told ABC News. Sunday's airstrikes were heavier than anything he had seen or heard since the Syrian war started over five years ago, he said. “It felt as if the ground was shaking under you, like an earthquake,” he said of the strikes. “The explosions sounded loud and strange, like nothing we’ve heard before in five years of war. It was a bloody day. No words can describe what happened yesterday.”   He said the hospital received about 180 injured people from Sunday's attacks and had to refer some of them to other clinics because it didn’t have the capacity to treat all of them. About 40 percent of the wounded were children, and 20 percent were women, he said. The intensive care unit was so filled up with patients that one surgeon had to conduct an operation on a floor. Since midnight Saturday, at least 27 people were killed by strikes from warplanes and government helicopters, the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said Sunday. At least 70 people have been killed in airstrikes on eastern Aleppo from Friday to Sunday night, activists in Syria told ABC News. The United Nations said the recent attacks on Aleppo could amount to war crimes.    “Repeated airstrikes and the use of bunker-busting and incendiary bombs in densely populated areas could well prove to be war crimes,” David Swanson, a spokesman for the U.N. Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, told ABC News. The U.N. has 40 trucks with aid ready to enter eastern Aleppo. The aid has been sitting by the Turkey-Syria border for about two weeks and is still waiting at a Syrian customs area. Once the U.N. gets the green light, the first convoy carrying a month's worth of wheat flour for more than 150,000 people will be sent to Aleppo, according to the U.N.’s Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. The shipment will be followed up by a delivery of enough food rations to feed 35,000 people for a month. The distance from the border to eastern Aleppo is only some 40 miles, but the journey could take about four to five hours. While up to 275,000 people in eastern Aleppo are still waiting for the aid they need, humanitarian assistance entered the four besieged Syrian towns of Madaya, Foah, Zabadani and Kefraya on Sunday.    On Wednesday evening, one of two water pumping stations in eastern Aleppo was destroyed by airstrikes. In retaliation, rebels turned off the second water pumping station, which mainly serves the government-held western part of the city. That means that close to 2 million people in Aleppo are living without running water. At an emergency meeting Sunday, Western U.N. diplomats condemned the recent escalating violence in Aleppo and blamed Russia and the Syrian government. Samantha Powers, the U.S. ambassador to the U.N., accused Russia of committing barbarism under the guise of counterterrorism. “Instead of pursuing peace, Russia and [Syrian President Bashar al-]Assad make war. Instead of helping get lifesaving aid to civilians, Russia and Assad are bombing humanitarian convoys, hospitals and first responders who are trying desperately to keep people alive,” Powers told members of the Security Council Sunday. “It seems the only items that make it into eastern Aleppo these days are barrel bombs and incendiaries that witnesses report seen dropped by Assad's forces and Russian forces. Russia, of course, has long had the power to stop this suffering. Even now, we will continue to look for any way possible to restore the cessation of hostilities.” Powers walked out of the emergency session along with the French and U.K. ambassadors to the U.N. in protest when Syria’s ambassador was called to speak. The U.S., the U.K. and France requested the emergency meeting after the Syrian military on Thursday announced a new offensive on eastern Aleppo.
Politico POLITICO's must-read briefing on what's driving the day in Washington ANOTHER SHOOTING IN CHARLOTTE -- With 47 days until Election Day, the national conversation is turning once again to a politically fraught set of interlocking issues: race, policing and urban crime. Late last night, Gov. Pat McCrory declared a state of emergency in North Carolina after more protests in Charlotte. One man was shot, and is on life support. National Guard and state highway patrolmen are assisting local police officers. -- CHARLOTTE OBSERVER: “[T]he unrest continued Wednesday night, with police using tear gas to disperse hundreds of protesters who blocked the intersection of Trade and Tryon streets in the heart of uptown, then occupied the EpiCentre entertainment complex. Pockets of the city were on edge late Wednesday afternoon, with some uptown businesses apparently sending workers home early over uncertainty about further protests. The Charlotte Chamber urged businesses in uptown and University City to ‘remove or chain down all tables, chairs, signs or planters.’ At about 4:30 Wednesday, a group of two dozen protesters stood in front of the Bank of America Tower at Trade and Tryon streets. They silently stood and held signs reading ‘Black Lives Matter’ and ‘Stop Killing Us.’” http://bit.ly/2d1Q73e Charlotte Observer A1 http://politi.co/2dbpl62 HEADLINE: “Violent protests return as city seeks answers” Story Continued Below --NYT’s Richard Fausset and Alan Blinder: “A second night of protests set off by the police killing of a black man spiraled into chaos and violence after nightfall here Wednesday when a demonstration was interrupted by gunfire that gravely wounded a man in the crowd. Law enforcement authorities fired tear gas in a desperate bid to restore order. The city said on its Twitter account that the unidentified man was on life support after what officials said was a ‘civilian on civilian’ confrontation. The authorities provided no further details. Charlotte officials had said earlier that the man had been killed in the unrest. The Police Department reported that four officers had injuries that were not life-threatening … “The gunshot victim lay motionless on the ground, his eyes open, as people surrounded him and blood pooled among their feet. He was taken into the nearby Omni Hotel, and a series of confrontations played out afterward as the police kept people from entering. There was sporadic looting. Twitter messages showed that the team store of the Charlotte Hornets of the N.B.A. had been broken into and gutted of merchandise. ‘We are working very hard to bring peace and calm back to our city,’ Mayor Jennifer Roberts said on CNN.” http://nyti.ms/2dj8X3X … A1 (lead story has large photo of gunshot victim) http://nyti.ms/2dcRYnX **SUBSCRIBE to Playbook: http://politi.co/1M75UbX TRUMP AT THE SEAN HANNITY/FOX NEWS TOWN HALL (taped yesterday) -- Q: “[T]here’s been a lot of violence in the black community. I wanted to know what you would do to help stop that violence, black-on-black crime.” TRUMP: “Right. Well one of the things I’d do … is I would do stop and frisk. I think you have to. We did it in New York, it worked incredibly well. And you have to be proactive. And you know you really help people sort of change their mind automatically … I see what’s going on here, I see what’s going on in Chicago...in New York City it was so incredibly, the way it worked. Now, we had a very good mayor. But New York City was incredible the way it worked. So I think that would be one step you could do.” (Airing of the town hall was pushed back due to the chaos in Charlotte.) CLINTON, IN ORLANDO -- Here’s what she said on the shooting in Charlotte and Tulsa, before last night’s violence in Charlotte: “We have two more names to add to a list of African Americans killed by police officers in these encounters … It’s unbearable. And it needs to become intolerable. … We are safer when communities respect the police and police respect the communities.” http://lat.ms/2dbytHw Good Thursday morning. THANK YOU to the people who showed up yesterday outside the Capitol South Metro to have breakfast with us at the PLAYBOOK FOOD TRUCK. We’re at 2nd and D streets N.E. from now until 10 a.m. REMINDER: Breakfast is free! Coffee, egg sandwiches and veggie breakfast burritos. Tomorrow we’ll be at 1700 K Street, NW. We also want to extend a BIG thank you to Rep. John Lewis (D-Ga.) for joining us for Playbook Cocktails last night. He filled a massive room in the W Hotel with hundreds of people on just a few days notice. The civil rights icon talked about his role in launching the National Museum of African American History and Culture, why he’s not interested in joining a Clinton administration and told us that he’s unafraid of Republicans punishing Democrats for the guns sit in on the House floor. Click here for more: http://politi.co/2cS3ov5 WHAT THE HILL WANTS TO KNOW -- When will Congress go home for its final campaign push? There’s still a lot of haggling over the stopgap spending bill, which will keep the government from closing at the end of the month. Jake’s guess is that they leave for the weekend, and come back next week and wrap things up. McConnell has basically signaled as much. Plus, who wants a weekend session when it’s going to be beautiful in Washington -- and members want to head back home to campaign? **** A message from BP: Over the past 10 years, no energy company has invested more in the U.S. than BP – $90 billion in total. Take 90 seconds to see what else we’re doing to help keep America moving forward. ****** STATE OF THE ART -- “Clinton makes an unusual push: To win over disabled people and their families,” by WaPo’s John Wagner and Abby Phillip in Orlando: “Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton is pushing intensively to win over a group of voters who don’t typically get much attention during elections but who have become an increasingly potent political force: disabled people and their families. With the race tighter than it was a month ago and Clinton struggling to generate enthusiasm within the Democratic base, her appeal to disabled people and their families comes amid a broader effort to win over voters. After weeks of mostly attacking Republican Donald Trump, she is highlighting specific policy prescriptions while trying to show a more compassionate side and present an affirmative vision for the country. “Clinton is also targeting Hispanics, women, caretakers of the elderly and sick, and families of gun-violence victims, among other constituencies focused on specific issues. In the case of the disability community, which cuts across all partisan and demographic divides, Clinton may be trying to attract not only ­Democratic-leaning voters who are not excited by her candidacy, but also voters who may be leaning toward Trump -- notably disabled veterans.” http://wapo.st/2cEXM4o -- “Trump’s bizarre ad strategy: It’s less than 50 days until the election and the GOP nominee’s television advertisements have all but vanished,” by Steven Shepard: “Trump’s ads last ran nearly a week ago in four battleground states: Florida, North Carolina, Ohio and Pennsylvania. Since then, the GOP presidential nominee has ceded the airwaves to Hillary Clinton -- and is only poised to launch a limited, less-targeted ad campaign in the days before next week’s debate. “While his campaign announced a new ad on Tuesday, it’s only going to run on national cable news stations and during two Sunday morning public-affairs shows, according to data from The Tracking Firm, a company that monitors media buys. And even with that seemingly modest buy — the full extent of which wasn’t clear on Wednesday night — Clinton is still outspending him this week many times over. ‘It’s unprecedented for a major-party nominee in this century to have such an on-again, off-again TV buy,’ said Elizabeth Wilner, a former TV-network political director who, until last month, monitored political advertising for Kantar Media/CMAG.” http://politi.co/2cvLeP4 -- “Trump: I reversed birther stance ‘to get on with’ campaign,” by AP’s Jill Colvin in New York: “In a brief interview with an Ohio television station Wednesday, [Donald] Trump was asked why, after years as the chief proponent of the falsehood that the president was born outside the country, he decided to announce Friday that was no longer the case. What had changed his mind? ‘Well, I just wanted to get on with, you know, we want to get on with the campaign,’ the GOP nominee responded. ‘And a lot of people were asking me questions.’” http://apne.ws/2dbqTN7 POLLS -- CHOOSE YOUR NEWS -- WSJ/NBC: Hillary Clinton 43, Donald Trump 37, Gary Johnson 9, Jill Stein 3. http://on.wsj.com/2cLxUZU … FOX NEWS -- N.C.: Donald Trump 45, Hillary Clinton 40 … OHIO: Donald Trump 42, Hillary Clinton 37… NEVADA: Donald Trump 43, Hillary Clinton 40. http://fxn.ws/2cEWB4O … MONMOUTH -- N.H.: Hillary Clinton 47, Donald Trump 38. http://bit.ly/2dcS6Uh POLL TWEETS -- @mattmfm: “Clinton firewall (CO, VA, PA, NH) is holding, new @MonmouthPoll in New Hampshire confirms.” … @alexburnsNYT (referring to the WSJ poll): “Like 1992, but with 3rd party vote fractured.” --“Pence set to attend first presidential debate,” by CNN’s Elizabeth Landers: “Since presidential debates resumed in 1976, running mates have generally watched their top-of-the-ticket partners from a distance, such as at campaign headquarters or via television surrounded by friends, family and supporters. The adviser said the decision wasn’t so much a strategy move, as Pence ‘likes to be there for Mr. Trump in big moments.’” http://cnn.it/2cIASuJ -- @JamesPindell: “C-SPAN will have split-screen showing both candidates throughout the presidential debates.” HAPPENING TODAY -- Donald Trump is in Chester Township, Pennsylvania, for an evening rally. Mike Pence is in Colorado Springs, Colorado. Hillary Clinton has no public events scheduled. Tim Kaine is in Reno, Nevada, at the University of Nevada - Reno, Lincoln & Meta Fitzgerald Student Services Building. JUST POSTED -- Daily Beast’s Olivia Nuzzi talks to Marla Maples! http://thebea.st/2d1YGLH VIDEOS DU JOUR -- “SAVE THE DAY” -- A bunch of celebrities -- including Robert Downey Jr., Leslie Odom Jr. and Neil Patrick Harris -- urge people to register to vote to stop Donald Trump. They don’t mention his name. Funny moment: They say Mark Ruffalo, a Bernie Sanders supporter who was in the video, will get naked in his next movie if Clinton wins. http://bit.ly/2cLftEw … @MarkHalperin: “These days everyone has their own @realDonaldTrump impression. Turns out he has just one for everyone else via @AlexanderTrow” http://bit.ly/2cnlYXO NEW AD – “Consensus” from March for Life Action http://bit.ly/2cMdvnz CLINTON INC. -- “Bill Clinton on CGI legacy: ‘You have to keep this alive’: The former president defends the Clinton Global Initiative’s work and urges supporters to carry on its mission,” by Louis Nelson and Annie Karni: “Bill Clinton doesn’t want his life's work to fade quietly into the night. In a personal speech defending his legacy at the Clinton Global Initiative — from its humble roots in his Harlem office to the international, star-studded conference it has become — the former president pleaded with the crowd Wednesday evening that the work couldn’t end. ‘You have to keep this alive,’ he said. “But in its current version, Clinton’s organization is dying. The former president's speech marked the official end of CGI, a glitzy, 12-year-old conference that convened Fortune 500 CEOs, movie stars, world leaders and nonprofit do-gooders in New York City during the United Nations meeting. There, they forged partnerships and made commitments to collaborate on projects such as saving elephants, improving AIDS relief in Africa and fighting for women’s rights across the globe.” http://politi.co/2d3oYeF ARTICLE OF THE DAY – “Barack Obama and Doris Kearns Goodwin: The Ultimate Exit Interview” – November’s Vanity Fair -- GOODWIN: “[W]hat F.D.R. used to say: ‘I think of the things that have come before me during the day and the decisions that I have made, I say to myself—well, I have done the best I could and turn over and go to sleep.” OBAMA: “Exactly. Another good example of that is the situation in Syria, which haunts me constantly. I would say of all the things that have happened during the course of my presidency the knowledge that you have hundreds of thousands of people who have been killed, millions who have been displaced, [makes me] ask myself what might I have done differently along the course of the last five, six years. The conventional arguments about what could have been done are wrong. The notion that if we had provided some more modest arms to Syrian rebels—that somehow that would have led to [Syrian president Bashar al-] Assad’s overthrow more decisively. The notion that if I had taken a pinprick strike when the chemical-weapons issue came out, as opposed to negotiating and getting all those chemical weapons out—that that would have been decisive. “All those things I tend to be skeptical about. But I do ask myself, Was there something that we hadn’t thought of? Was there some move that is beyond what was being presented to me that maybe a Churchill could have seen, or an Eisenhower might have figured out? So that’s the kind of thing that tends to occupy me when I have the time to think about it—mainly because I think that in this job one of the things you realize is there are problems that just end up being really hard and by definition the only problems that come to my desk are the ones that nobody else can solve. Usually, I’m pretty good about sorting through the options and then making decisions that I’m confident are the best decisions in that moment, given the information we have. But there are times where I think I wish I could have imagined a different level of insight.” http://bit.ly/2d2Tju2 CASH DASH – “The GOP’s Jewish Donors Are Abandoning Trump,” by Five Thirty Eight’s Eitan Hersh and Brian Schaffner: “In 2012, 71 percent of the $160 million that Jewish donors gave to the two major-party nominees went to President Obama’s re-election campaign; 29 percent went to Mitt Romney’s campaign, according to our analysis of campaign contributors, which used a predictive model to estimate which donors are Jewish based on their names and other characteristics. ... So far in 2016, of all the money given to major-party candidates by donors who appear to be Jewish, 95 percent has gone to Hillary Clinton and just 5 percent has gone to Donald Trump.” http://53eig.ht/2daFuIS FED WATCH -- “Yellen Says Fed Isn’t Playing Politics With Interest Rates,” by WSJ’s Kate Davidson: “[Federal Reserve Chairwoman Janet] Yellen, referring to prepared notes and not mentioning Mr. Trump by name, said the Fed doesn’t discuss politics at its policy meetings, nor does it take politics into account. Its decision to hold rates steady on Wednesday was based on economic factors, not political ones, she said. ‘I can say, emphatically that partisan politics plays no role in our decisions about the appropriate stance of monetary policy,’ she said. ‘We are trying to decide what the best policy is to foster price stability and maximum employment and to manage the variety of risks that we see as affecting the outlook.’” http://on.wsj.com/2cIb41M COVER DU JOUR – new TIME cover, “The Perilous Fight: National anthem protests led by Colin Kaepernick are fueling a debate about privilege, pride and patriotism.” See the cover: http://bit.ly/2dkgFNJ ... www.time.com/athletes **** A message from BP: We’ve donated $147 million to U.S. community programs over the past five years. Check out the programs we support in your community. ****** WASHINGTON INC. -- The American Legislative Exchange Council is publicly commenting after Enterprise Rental Car resigned immediately from the controversial conservative legislative group focused on state politics. Enterprise is just the latest company to head for the exits after sustained public shaming campaigns by multiple groups. “It’s true and unfortunate. They were forced to leave after sustained pressure. There was a month-long campaign: first article on 8/21; followed by petitions at moveon, change, color of change, and standuptoALEC; a ‘twitter storm;’ threats by CBC, Rashad Robinson and Sheldon Whitehouse; and, finally threats by unions to stop renting cars,” wrote ALEC’s Bill Meierling. “It’s a clear campaign to marginalize, harass and intimidate an effective organization of conservatives and get business out of policy. Washington, DC should be afraid of this new and clearly-documented strategy.” VALLEY WATCH -- “Tech Workers Wade Into Political Hot Zone,” by The Information’s Cory Weinberg: “For years, housing activists have blamed the fast-growing tech industry for causing housing shortages in the Bay Area. But now that tech employees are themselves struggling to pay high rents, they’re starting to get more politically active in dealing with housing issues. Take Adrian Fine, a city strategist with the social network Nextdoor, who is running for city council in his hometown of Palo Alto in November’s elections. As part of his agenda, Mr. Fine wants to make it easier for apartment buildings to get built in some parts of the town, expanding housing for tech employees and young transplants trying to start families. Separately, employees at Lyft and Postmates this year have started groups like ‘Tech for Housing’ advocating for housing development. And employees from Facebook and Palantir have won appointments to city planning commissions in Menlo Park, Redwood City and Palo Alto… “But increased tech involvement with local politics sets up a potential clash with increasingly intense anti-tech forces. Palo Alto’s mayor, Patrick Burt, for instance, has lately proposed banning tech firms from the city’s downtown. Mr. Burt has described the growth of tech companies in the city as ‘not healthy.’” http://bit.ly/2djIy8K --“Apple in talks with luxury carmaker McLaren,” by FT’s Matt Garrahan in NYC and Tim Bradshaw in SF: “Apple has approached McLaren Technology Group, the British supercar engineer and Formula One team owner, about a potential acquisition, in the clearest sign yet that the iPhone maker is seeking to transform the automotive industry. ... A tie-up with McLaren, whose expertise ranges from automotive engineering and on-board computer systems to novel chassis materials such as carbon fibre and aluminium, could accelerate Apple’s secretive automotive project. ... [The potential deal] would make it Apple’s biggest acquisition since the $3bn purchase of Beats Electronics, the audio group founded by Dr Dre and Jimmy Iovine, in 2014.” http://on.ft.com/2cIxUGH ON WALL ST. -- “SEC Accuses Leon Cooperman of Insider Trading: Regulators allege Omega Advisors chief made a total of more than $4 million in illegal profits,” by WSJ’s Juliet Chung, Aruna Viswanatha and Christopher Matthews: “The [SEC] accused hedge-fund manager Leon G. Cooperman and his firm, Omega Advisors Inc., of insider trading, marking the culmination of a five-year investigation into suspected securities fraud at one of the country’s best-known funds. The SEC alleged Wednesday that the 73-year-old Mr. Cooperman agreed to refrain from using information he received from a corporate executive but then went ahead and traded on it. Mr. Cooperman, who has kept his investors updated about the government’s investigation, has denied wrongdoing, saying, among other things, that the investment lost money. “‘It took me 50 years of hard work and playing by the rules to get where I got,’ Mr. Cooperman said Wednesday on a conference call with investors, where he mounted a defense. ‘I’m not going to let these people destroy my legacy.’ ... The SEC alleged … Mr. Cooperman, as well as others for which he directed trading, made a total of more than $4 million in illegal profits by trading in Atlas Pipeline Partners LP. Mr. Cooperman … used his status as one of Atlas Pipeline’s largest shareholders to gain access to a corporate executive and obtain confidential details about an asset sale. When the company publicly announced the sale of the facilities in Elk City, Okla., in July 2010, Atlas Pipeline’s stock price jumped more than 31%, according to the SEC.” http://on.wsj.com/2cNd7Fj MAYOR OF THE WORLD -- “As Bill Clinton marked the official end of CGI, Bloomberg Philanthropies and the U.S. Department of Commerce co-hosted the second U.S.-Africa Business Forum on Wednesday at New York’s Plaza Hotel to focus on trade and investment opportunities on the continent for U.S. and African business leaders and heads of state from the U.S. and Africa. President Obama and nearly 40 heads of state attended, plus hundreds of CEOs (including IBM, Cargill, Visa & Caterpillar among others), three U.S. Cabinet Secretaries (Jack Lew, John Kerry, Penny Pritzker) and of course Mike Bloomberg. Big deals were announced: More than $9B in U.S./Africa trade and investment deals were unveiled, including a $300M investment by Blackstone in an African Oil Pipeline.” Video recap: https://youtu.be/TwpuhCHppHk ... Pics http://bit.ly/2cWmGMy MEDIAWATCH -- “POLITICO Announces New POLITICO Pro Health Care Expansion and Partnerships”: “Pro Health Care is hiring three new reporters in California, Boston, and the southeast region who will be responsible for bringing state-level health care news to a national audience, joining our nine Washington-based reporters. Additionally, Pro Health Care is excited to announce a year-long polling partnership with the Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health.” http://politi.co/2cMevI3 -- “Corey Lewandowski to be paid severance by Trump campaign through 2016,” by Kelsey Sutton and Hadas Gold: “Donald Trump’s former campaign manager, Corey Lewandowski, will continue to be paid severance by the campaign through the end of 2016, prolonging concerns of a conflict of interest for CNN, which controversially hired Lewandowski in June to serve as a political commentator.” http://politi.co/2d3uQF3 GENIUS GRANT WINNERS -- The 2016 class of MacArthur “genius grant” winners has been announced. Sarah Stillman, a D.C. native and New Yorker staff writer, is one of the winners. http://bit.ly/2cIYBLj CHUCK TODD “sat down with Iran President Rouhani [yesterday] in an exclusive interview, the only U.S. television interview the president is doing. Of note, Chuck asked him ‘Can Iran live with a Syria that is not headed by Assad?’ And Rouhani replied that ‘Syria doesn’t have a military solution. And the Syrians’ problems must certainly be resolved politically.’” http://nbcnews.to/2cSfqTA … Video http://on.msnbc.com/2cWlGrG SPOTTED: Sens. Ted Cruz and Marco Rubio walking into a Rubio fundraiser last night at the NRSC. “It was not awkward at all,” according to one Playbooker … Justice Elena Kagan yesterday “looking like she was carefully listening to the conversation over lunch with younger-looking group of 5 people at Zaytinya.” ... Jim Messina last night at Joe’s Seafood, Prime Steak & Stone Crab near the White House with a glass of wine while waiting at the bar. WELCOME TO THE WORLD – @Senjohnthune posts on Instagram: “It’s official: We’re grandparents. Say hello to Henley Joy Hargens. She’s a little early but Larissa and baby girl doing fine.” Pic http://bit.ly/2cpYu9i REMEMBERING REP. STEVE LATOURETTE -- Tuesday afternoon a memorial service was held in honor of former Rep. Steve LaTourette (R-Ohio) at Temple Ref Shalom in Falls Church. Eulogists include Rep. Bill Shuster (R-Pa.) and Rep. Pat Tiberi (R-Ohio), and Emerson and Henry LaTourette, children of Steve and his wife, Jennifer. Steve was first elected to the Congress in 1994 and retired from the House in 2013, and served as president of the Main Street Partnership. SPOTTED: Sen. Roy Blunt (R-Mo.), House Minority Whip Steny Hoyer (D-Md.), Kim Dorgan; Linda Daschle, MB Savary Taylor and Emily Porter of the Nickles Group, Fred Graefe, Lori Rowley of the Lugar Center. -- On Tuesday night at the Landmark E Street Cinema, the Red Cross presented Tom Donahue’s documentary “Thank You For Your Service” about the veteran suicide crisis. Sens. Angus King and Joe Donnelly were in attendance and CBS News’ National Security Correspondent David Martin moderated the Q&A following the screening. Trailer http://bit.ly/2cnrgCN --NARAL held its fourth-annual #MenForChoice party last night at Baby Wale. The cocktail of the evening was the Ruth Bader Ginsburg, “fruity blend of sloe gin, cava, and fresh lemon.” SPOTTED: Montana Sen. Jon Tester, David Brock, Ilyse Hogue, WaPo’s Danielle Paquette, Niels Lesniewski, the DCCC’s Jenn Ridder, Molly Murphy, Tyler Law, John Neffinger, Will Robinson, Alexandra Khoo, Steve Kerrigan, Kimball Stroud, John Liipfert, Ralph Burns, Suzi Emmerling, Leah Chandler, Ron Bracco, Tony Massaro, Emily Pomeranz, Alexa Combelic, Scott Fay, and Bradley Beychock. HAPPENING TODAY -- Taxpayers for Common Sense is holding an event this afternoon marking the 30th Anniversary of the Tax Reform Act of 1986. “Showdown at Gucci Gulch Revisited: Lessons Learned from 1986 Tax Reform” today from 4 to 6 p.m. at B338 Rayburn Building. RSVP http://bit.ly/2ditCoM ENGAGED: LA Times’ California delegation reporter Sarah Wire proposed to her boyfriend of seven years John Bethel, who is in kitchen and bathroom remodeling, over the weekend. The two met at the University of Missouri and Wire writes “have stuck together moving from Missouri to Arkansas to Washington three years ago. Proposal happened on the balcony of our Bloomingdale apartment with the aid of our hound Penny.” TRANSITIONS -- Meredith McGehee, policy director at the Campaign Legal Center and a top political ethics advocate, is joining Issue One beginning Oct. 3 as chief of policy, programs and strategy. (She will continue as an advisor at Campaign Legal Center.) --CLINTON ALUMNI – “Two of the nation’s leading event production firms are merging to form Peak XV, a global event and communications team. Chris Wayne and Mark Poncher, the creative and production minds behind some of this decade’s most memorable largescale political and sports events, will lead the new entity. ... Wayne served in the Clinton Administration as a special assistant to the president, where he managed President Clinton’s official events for seven years.” http://politi.co/2cMetQH BIRTHDAYS: “Campaign” Carl Cameron, a dean of the presidential election press corps and one of the hardest-working reporters on the trail, is forever young at 55 (h/t Nick Kalman) … Amy Chozick, the pride of the Lower East Side (h/t Bushwick) … Politico’s Sarah Cabrera ... TJ Ducklo, comms director for Bloomberg Politics, is 28 (h/t Sam Newton, filing from Jamestown in New York’s 23rd congressional district) ... MFA’s EVP and COO Marc Charon ... Rita Medina, pride of the Inland Empire now the immigration campaign manager at CAP Action (h/t Michael Prather) ... Rep. Robert Goodlatte (R-Va.) is 62 ... Caroline Schaberg, “social velocity” at Bloomberg ... Natalie Daly, daughter of Brendan … Tommy “The Bull” Burr … Katie McBreen, National Retail Federation V.P. of comms and public affairs and a Chamber alum … Jon Romano, DOT’s senior advisor for strategic comms, branding fanatic and a MWW alum (h/ts Jennifer (Paolino) Romano and son Leo) … Outside magazine’s Molly Mirhashem, a National Journal alum (h/t Colby Bermel) ... … TJ Helmstetter, DNC’s deputy director of regional and specialty media ... Justin Germany, a McCain and Bush alum now at Outlaw Media, is 37 ... Lavin Gartland ... Shannon Graves ... Lynn Reed … Rahlyn Gossen … Jack Pagano … Hayley Zachary … Stacy Kerr, assistant V.P. for comms. at Georgetown, and a Bill Bradley and DCCC alum … Lois Cassano ... Jennifer Bishop (h/ts Teresa Vilmain) … Chelsie Paulson, a CRAFT alum and #DcInsider gone #Sydneysider, per her Twitter … Diana McLellan ... Tandy Dickerson ... CNN State dept. producer Jamie Crawford … Mike Rossetti … Jennifer Donahue … Nick Everhart … Brett Broesder … Lenox Robb Finlinson … Marco Nunez … Laurel-Manette Hanna ... Ghafoor Bazai ... Michael Masley is 64 ... Brian Wright O’Connor is 6-0 ... Heather Dawn Thompson ... Scott Baio is 56. SUBSCRIBE to the Playbook family: POLITICO Playbook http://politi.co/1M75UbX ... New York Playbook http://politi.co/1ON8bqW … Florida Playbook http://politi.co/1OypFe9 ... New Jersey Playbook http://politi.co/1HLKltF ... Massachusetts Playbook http://politi.co/1Nhtq5v ... Illinois Playbook http://politi.co/1N7u5sb ... California Playbookhttp://politi.co/2bLvcPl ... Brussels Playbook http://politi.co/1FZeLcw ... All our political and policy tipsheets http://politi.co/1M75UbX
The candidates are in the final stretch of the debates as the presidential campaign is on a true countdown. Some new information about the final debate was announced today, and considering the first two presidential debates of this cycle were the most viewed ever in the history of presidential debates, the third and final one could make history as well. "I think there's going to be a lot of focus [on the debates] and they've always been a really important part of the process," said Peter Eyre, a senior adviser with the Commission on Presidential Debates, the independent organization that sponsors the events. Watch the third presidential debate on ABC News and ABCNews.com at 9 p.m. ET on Wednesday, Oct. 19. Here's a rundown of the debates so far and what we know about the second and third head-to-head match-ups between Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton.  First presidential debate: Sept. 26 at Hofstra University in Hempstead, New York. Moderator: NBC's "Nightly News" anchor Lester Holt The debate had six segments covering different subjects, as mandated by the commission. The commission had announced that Holt selected three topics -- America's direction, achieving prosperity and securing America -- to cover during the debate, but noted that they were subject to change based on news events. Vice presidential debate: Oct. 4 at Longwood University in Farmville, Virginia. Moderator: CBS News correspondent Elaine Quijano The debate was set to feature nine segments, each about 10 minutes long. The topics of the debate were not announced in advance. Tim Kaine answered the first question, as a result of a coin toss. Second presidential debate: Oct. 9 at Washington University in St. Louis, Missouri. Moderators: ABC News' chief global affairs correspondent Martha Raddatz and CNN anchor Anderson Cooper The debate was held in a town hall format, with about half the questions asked by members of the audience and the other by the moderators. Gallup was responsible for finding the audience members, who are supposed to be uncommitted voters, the commission announced. The topics of the debate were not announced in advance. Third presidential debate: Oct. 19 at the University of Nevada at Las Vegas. Moderator: "Fox News Sunday" anchor Chris Wallace The final debate will be in the same format as the first one. The specific topics of the debate were announced today and include debt and entitlements, immigration, the economy, the Supreme Court, foreign hot spots and fitness to be president. They are subject to change based on news events.    Much like the first presidential debate, Clinton and Trump are the only two candidates who will be on stage this Sunday. Based on the CPD's average of polls from five different national polls, Clinton has 44.8 percent of the national vote, Trump has 40.8 percent, and neither Libertarian candidate Gary Johnson nor Green Party candidate Jill Stein passed the required 15 percent threshold to be included in the debate. The averages put Johnson at 7.8 percent and Green at 2.6 percent, respectively. The commission previously announced it will use five surveys -- ABC News/Washington Post, CBS/New York Times, CNN/Opinion Research Corp., Fox News and NBC/Wall Street Journal -- to make the decision. Kaine and Pence were the only two candidates who participated in the vice presidential debate.  The names of any high-profile campaign guests have not yet been announced for the town hall debate. For that town hall debate, the participating audience will be anywhere in size from a couple dozen people up to as many as 100 people, with a viewing audience of about 1,000. Polling company Gallup has been tasked with finding the audience members for the participating audience, who are expected to be uncommitted voters. In the run-up to the first presidential debate, attention was paid to some of the big names who would be in the audience off-stage. Chelsea Clinton attended the debate, a first for her this election cycle after not attending any of the Democratic primary debates. And then another familiar face was present in the front row supporting Team Clinton: Mark Cuban. The billionaire Dallas Mavericks owner is a vocal Clinton supporter and reportedly went so far as to volunteer to play Trump in Clinton's mock debates. He has said the Clinton team never returned his email offer, but they did keep him in mind for another move.  Just got a front row seat to watch @HillaryClinton overwhelm @realDonaldTrump at the "Humbling at Hofstra" on Monday. It Is On !  About 1,000 people are expected in the viewing audience at each debate, and while Eyre didn’t expect there to be frequent cuts to the audience by TV cameras, there is a chance that special guests sitting near the front may be seen on TV at some point. The audience will be a mix of guests of the universities, guests of the campaigns and "others who have made the debates possible, including sponsors, members of the media, security, etc.," he said.  Commission officials are tasked with picking the moderators for the debates, and while they normally announce their decisions in August, the final list was released in September this year. "These journalists bring extensive experience to the job of moderating, and understand the importance of using expanded time periods effectively,” Frank J. Fahrenkopf Jr. and Michael D. McCurry, co-chairs of the nonpartisan commission, said in the statement announcing the moderators. Raddatz, who is a co-anchor of the ABC News Sunday show "This Week," is the only one of the four who has been selected by the commission before. She moderated the vice presidential debate between Joe Biden and Rep. Paul Ryan in 2012. CNN's Candy Crowley was selected to moderate the town hall-style debate between President Obama and Mitt Romney in 2012. This year, that format will have two moderators: Raddatz and Cooper. Crowley was the second female debate moderator ever. The first was ABC News' Carole Simpson in 1992. "The formats chosen for this year's debates are designed to build on the formats introduced in 2012, which focused big blocks of time on major domestic and foreign topics,” Fahrenkopf and McCurry said in the statement. “We are grateful for their willingness to moderate, and confident that the public will learn more about the candidates and the issues as a result.”  Trump spoke repeatedly about his relaxed approach to preparations ahead of the first presidential debate. That might have changed with the second debate, but not according to Trump: he denies that a town hall-style event in New Hampshire on Thursday -- complete with a timer set to the same response times required for Sunday's debate -- was practice for the main event this weekend. Kaine and Pence have both been running mock debates, with D.C. power lawyer Bob Barnett acting as Pence and Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker standing in as Kaine. As for the top of their tickets, the candidates took dramatically different approaches to debate prep in keeping with their starkly different campaigns. Clinton cleared her schedule and took herself off the campaign trail for the four days before the first debate. She did intensive debate prep, which included mock debates complete with a Trump stand-in: her longtime aide Philippe Reines, whom Clinton has called "loyal, passionate and shrewd." She also reviewed Trump's performance in Republican primary debates, according to campaign sources. By contrast, Trump had two campaign events scheduled days before the first debate on Sept. 26. His debate prep was slim and he did not delve into policy or participated in mock debates, sources have told ABC News. The one study tactic that they both shared was a review of their opponent's past performances. But while aides say Clinton actively reviewed Trump's work, senior level Trump sources said he was given an iPad loaded with footage of old Clinton debates, though it's unclear how much time he spent watching them. Trump was reportedly being advised by his senior campaign staff, including campaign manager Kellyanne Conway and campaign CEO Stephen Bannon, as well as former Fox News chief Roger Ailes, who has worked on the campaigns of Presidents George W. Bush and Ronald Reagan in the past. Well-known Washington lawyer Bob Barnett was said to be advising Clinton during her debate prep. He helped her prepare for the primary debates by playing Sen. Bernie Sanders. The campaign reportedly found someone to play Trump in their mock debates but they were tight-lipped about the person's identity. Trump didn’t speak extensively about his debate prep, but talked about the tone he expected to take. "I'm going to be very respectful of her," Trump said during a phone interview on Fox News before the first debate, referring to Clinton. "I think she deserves that and I'm going to be nice. And if she's respectful of me, that’ll be nice. We'll have something that I think people will respect as a debate but we'll see where it all goes. You really never know exactly how it's going to turn out and that's why we’re going to have a lot of people watching," Trump said. ABC News' Liz Kreutz, John Santucci, Candace Smith and Ryan Struyk contributed to this report. Watch FULL LIVE COVERAGE of the third presidential debate at 9 p.m. ET on Wednesday, Oct. 19. Coverage and analysis of the debate will begin on ABCNews.com/Live at 7 p.m. ET.
The “designated survivor” has long been one of Washington’s favorite parlor games—imagining what America would be like if a catastrophe befell the capital during a State of the Union and the most powerful office in the land were delivered unwittingly to the cabinet official who had been hidden away as the president-of-last-resort. What would America have looked like under President Jeh Johnson (2016)? President Ernest Moniz (2014)? Or even President Alberto Gonzales (2007)? And then there are the weirder examples: In 2001, had a catastrophe occurred during the inauguration, Americans expecting Republican President George W. Bush might have instead found themselves with a Democratic president named Larry Summers. The idea is startling enough to fuel a new Kiefer Sutherland TV drama, Designated Survivor, in which the 24 actor plays a hapless Housing and Urban Development Secretary who finds himself ushered into the White House after a catastrophic attack on the Capitol. Story Continued Below You might assume that for something as important as presidential succession, the world's most powerful nation has it down to a science. That’s the scenario that Hollywood lays out in the show premiere tonight: Sutherland, who just minutes before had been headed to political obscurity in a low-profile ambassadorship, is instead ushered into the White House by an efficient set of government minders. But in reality, the system is far less clearly delineated, and dogged by questions that are likely to begin the moment it’s pressed into action. I’ve spent the last three years researching a forthcoming book on the government’s doomsday plans, and one fact that emerged starkly is just how uncertain the whole process is. The system of presidential succession is relatively new, and in many cases it's surprisingly unclear who becomes president. As legal scholar Akhil Amar, who had long studied the legalities of succession, told Congress during one hearing after 9/11, “The current Presidential succession Act, 3 U.S.C. section 19, is in my view a disastrous statute, an accident waiting to happen. It should be repealed and replaced.” Indeed, the presidential succession plan is the rare Washington story that’s even stranger—and contains even more unexpected twists—than the Hollywood version. For one thing, the system, known as “continuity of government,” is vastly larger and more complicated than most people realize. While attention usually focuses on the main presidential successor, during high-profile events a much broader shadow government often waits in secure undisclosed locations. During President Obama’s inauguration in 2009, when Defense Secretary Robert Gates was the designated presidential successor, James Clapper—then the undersecretary of defense for intelligence—waited out the swearing-in at the Pentagon’s secret Cold War bunker in Pennsylvania known as Raven Rock, ready to step into Gates’ role as defense secretary if the need arose. But the even weirder thing is what might happen after a disaster. In fact, had Gates emerged from a cave to claim the presidency on January 20, 2009, it might’ve only marked the opening gambit in a legal drama that could have played out for days, weeks, or even months as a variety of officials from all three branches of government argued over who could rightfully claim the presidency. *** For about three hours the designated survivor teeters on the edge of becoming the most important person in the world. That moment in the spotlight—or, more accurately, far from the spotlight—can be brief. The night in 1997 Agriculture Secretary Dan Glickman served as the “designated survivor” during one of President Clinton’s addresses to Congress, Glickman went to New York for the night, with a security detail and the nation’s nuclear codes in tow, only to find that as soon as the speech was finished—and the need for a successor over—the security apparatus abandoned him, leaving him in the rain to catch his own taxi home. The idea of a “designated survivor” was formalized by the Carter and Reagan administrations, as White House officials worried about nuclear missiles aboard Soviet submarines that lay off the Atlantic Coast and could have devastated the capital with barely 10 minutes’ notice. President Carter’s White House Military Office in April 1980 had instituted new procedures with FEMA to monitor the attendance of all presidential successors “at major, publicly announced functions outside the White House complex.” While such gatherings of the U.S. leadership had been commonplace in the past—at inaugurations, states of the union, state funerals and the like—the rising tensions of the Cold War made government planners questions their wisdom. “The situation provides an inviting target to enemy attack or terrorist activity, and represents an unnecessary risk to national leadership,” the White House Military Office wrote, outlining the new procedures. The 25th Amendment—itself a modern relic of the Cold War and fears of nuclear attack—lays out a seemingly clear line for presidential succession. It flows from the vice president to the House speaker to the Senate president pro tem, then through the cabinet in the order in which the departments were created—a quirk that itself makes the Department of Homeland Security secretary, one of the people best qualified to actually assume the presidency in a disaster, actually last in line. When all those in the line of succession were gathered in a high-profile setting, FEMA was to notify the White House and an aide would recommend to the president which qualified cabinet successors should skip the event. (Constitutionally, foreign-born cabinet secretaries, like current Interior Secretary Sally Jewell—a Brit!—don’t serve in the line of succession.) It falls to a little-known branch of FEMA, the Central Locator Service, to track the whereabouts of the successors daily, and once a month, after the fact, audit a single day to determine whether it had correctly known where each cabinet member was. The new White House and FEMA procedures got their first test at Reagan’s inaugural. The incoming and outgoing administrations had agreed that Carter’s outgoing defense secretary, Harold Brown, would remain in office past the standard noon departure and ensure that there was a national leader in case something catastrophic happened at the ceremony. “Both sides agreed that something should be done,” a FEMA official explained later. Brown only resigned later on inauguration day once the Reagan team was firmly in control of government’s levers. The “designated survivor” program would grow more formal in the years to come—the chosen Cabinet member would receive a Secret Service detail for the length of the event and a White House military aide would arrive for the evening with one of the emergency briefcases known as the “Football,” which contain instructions on how to access the nation’s nuclear weapons codes—in case the unthinkable happened and the designated survivor needed to be ready to launch an attack. The “designated survivor” program, though, raised a new problem: How would the “designated survivor” prove he or she was actually now the president? The government lacked simple procedures for figuring out how to double-check that person’s identity after a decapitation event. Is the person at the other end of the phone really Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack (State of the Union 2012)? “One of the things we discovered is that there was no authentication system,” Reagan’s first FEMA head Louis Giuffrida said in 1981. “If a successor got on the horn and said, ‘I’m the successor,’ and somebody said ‘Prove it,’ [no one could]. So we’re working on that, and FEMA will be the authenticating mechanism to say, ‘Yeah, this guy’s for real. The president’s gone and we don’t know where the vice president is…and this is the man.’” In the years ahead, FEMA and the White House worked out an elaborate (and classified) system through which a successor would be able to confirm his or her identity, and in subsequent years the “designated survivors” became a common part of Washington lore, and often yielded amusing stories from those who served. Health and Human Services Secretary Donna Shalala recounted the story of how she watched the 1996 State of the Union from the White House and ordered pizza. “I took my staff with me and I ordered pizza for them in the Roosevelt Room,” she said years later. “I went to the Oval Office and for one minute sat in the president's chair and then I got up respectfully and went to watch the speech with my staff.” Yet, in the wake of the 9/11 attacks, a bipartisan commission examining the nation’s succession planning found that odd—and troubling—quirks persisted that could lead to serious constitutional quandaries in just the sort of situation that Kiefer Sutherland’s character, Secretary of Housing and Urban Development Tom Kirkman, experiences in the TV show. As clear as the line of succession may appear on paper, legally it would likely prove a much messier proposition the further down the list you go and cabinet officials become involved. And it could get particularly tangled if the president or vice president is only “incapacitated,” rather than killed outright. It’s not entirely clear, even, that the House speaker or the Senate president pro tem could legally serve as president. Republican Senator John Coryn raised the question during the debate in the early 2000s of what would happen if a speaker of the House or Senate president pro tem ascended to the presidency—and then was challenged by the secretary of state who argued that the legislators didn’t count as constitutional officers, making them ineligible to serve in the presidency. “Believe it or not, the secretary actually has a rather strong case, in my view,” Cornyn said. No less an authority than James Madison himself had argued that the congressional leaders were legislators, not constitutional officers, and thus ineligible to succeed to the presidency. As Cornyn said, “Who is the president? Whose orders should be followed by our armed forces, by our intelligence agencies and by domestic law enforcement bureaus? If law suits are filed, will courts accept jurisdiction? How long will they take to rule? How will they rule? And how will their rulings be respected?” In the years after 9/11, the so-called “Continuity of Government Commission,” pushed by American Enterprise Institute scholar Norm Ornstein, who has assumed the role of Washington’s succession Cassandra and has spent much of the last 20 years raising troubling questions about the 25th Amendment’s ambiguities, confronted one of the strangest and most nettlesome phrases in “COG” operations. It’s a seemingly unnecessary aside in the language guiding presidential succession known as the “supplantation clause,” which held that a “prior-entitled” presidential successor, that is someone who ranks higher in the official line of succession, could supplant a lower-level Cabinet official who was serving as “acting president.” For instance, in a situation where the president and the congressional leadership was killed, but the vice president only incapacitated, the secretary of state would presumably serve as “acting president” until the vice president was able to resume his or her responsibility and become the president. But the “supplantation clause” inserted unhelpful ambiguity: Could, after Congress reconstitutes itself, a newly elected speaker of the House or Senate president pro tem insist on replacing the secretary of state even after that person had assumed the office of “acting president”? Could a newly elected speaker supplant a president pro tem? Might the presidency swing wildly in a few days, at the height of a crisis, between different officials and different political parties? The Continuity of Government Commission tried also to tackle an ongoing problem with presidential succession that had dogged the debate for decades: Even with the idea of designated survivors for major high-profile gatherings and all the evacuation systems in place, on a day-to-day basis everyone in the presidential line of succession lives and works in a tiny radius extending a few miles around the White House and the Capitol. “In the nightmare scenario of terrorists detonating a nuclear device, it is possible that everyone in the line of succession might be killed,” the commission’s executive director, John Fortier, told Congress during one hearing. “Imagine the aftermath: a parade of generals, governors, and under secretaries claiming to be in charge.” It would be the chaos of Al Haig’s “I’m in control here” statement during the Reagan administration writ larger and more fraught. One proposal, floated during the post-9/11 discussions, would have created a “First Secretary,” a Cabinet official who would have been first-in-line to the presidency after the vice president and whose sole responsibility would be to remain outside of Washington and be the designated survivor to head the shadow government if a catastrophic event destroyed the capital. It would be a job, in essence, to remain in an “undisclosed location” until the worst moment of American history. * * * Such questions make the nation, under existing rules, particularly vulnerable during presidential inaugurations. The terms of the president and vice president constitutionally expire at noon on January 20th, but their cabinets remained in office until either a resignation is tendered or a successor is confirmed by the Senate—which usually doesn’t happen for hours or even days after an inauguration. In 2001, as Fortier, the commission leader explained, a terror attack that targeted George W. Bush’s inauguration, might have left the nation with a president carried over from the previous administration who would then serve until Congress had a speaker or president pro tem who would “bump” out the president and serve the rest of the four-year term of office. Fortier said, “A country expecting Republican George W. Bush to take office would have found themselves with a Democratic President Larry Summers. As secretary of the treasury, Summers was the highest-ranking Clinton Cabinet member eligible to serve as President.” In 1989, at George H.W. Bush’s inauguration, the situation would have been even more confusing, with the same strange outcome: Michael Armacost, the number three official at Reagan’s State Department, would have been elevated to president of the United States, for the outgoing secretary of state, George Shultz, and deputy secretary of state, John C. Whitehead, had both resigned before the inauguration. Then, with the House in Democratic hands, a newly chosen speaker could have bumped Armacost and given the nation four years of Democratic rule immediately after it elected a Republican president. In fact, given that the Senate took five days to confirm James Baker as secretary of state after Bush’s inauguration, Armacost remained fourth in line to the presidency for the better part of a week. Armacost went on to serve as president of the Brookings Institution and Summers went on to serve as president of Harvard University, so both men ended up with the title of “President,” but—had an unprecedented crisis summoned them to lead in 1989 or 2001—it’s hard to imagine that the ascension of either man to the American presidency would have proved reassuring to the nation in its moment of need. Unless Kiefer Sutherland’s drama reopens the debate, there are no plans to fix any of these—or a host of other—problems with presidential succession. Congress tabled and ignored the fixes on the table a decade ago, and except for a few lonely congressional voices in the years since, like Rep. Brian Baird, there’s been little attention since. So, as you tune in to watch Kiefer Sutherland heroically step in and lead the nation on TV, know that you’re perhaps watching the ultimate Hollywood fiction: The idea that the government’s Doomsday plans would actually work.
NEW YORK — John Kerry has been called an "indefatigable optimist," the kind of guy determined to try, try again in spite of tough odds. It's a drive that helped him push through the Iran nuclear deal and keeps him searching for ways to solve the Israeli-Palestinian crisis. But the latest chaos in Syria has critics saying he may be trying too hard this time — looking weak in the process and undermining his own goal of a peace deal. Story Continued Below A Syrian cease-fire that Kerry announced less than two weeks ago is near collapse. The first big blow came Saturday after an apparently errant U.S. airstrike believed to have killed dozens of Syrian government soldiers instead of Islamic State terrorists not party to the truce. Then, on Monday, suspected Syrian government airstrikes hit an aid convoy, killing at least 12 people and infuriating moderate rebels already wary of making a deal with Syrian President Bashar Assad. And late on Tuesday, a report emerged that U.S. intelligence indicates that Russian forces actually carried out the strike. By any measure, the developments are a blow to the 72-year-old secretary of state. Still, on Tuesday on the sidelines of the U.N. General Assembly in New York, Kerry met yet again with Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov, Syria's de facto international representative, to see what could be done to salvage the cease-fire. "He seems unaware that it's simply impossible to win at the negotiating table what you do not win on the ground, and he seems to be unaware that he keeps getting outsmarted and outmaneuvered by Lavrov," Elliott Abrams, a former deputy national security adviser in Republican George W. Bush's administration, wrote in an e-mail to POLITICO. "His defenders say well, better to try than to give up, but that is wrong. He looks weak, and that makes the United States look weak." The argument to keep trying is compelling. An estimated half-million people have died in the Syrian civil war since March 2011, and millions more have been displaced from their homes. Syria's misery is likely to be the biggest stain on Kerry's legacy as secretary of state, not to mention Barack Obama's legacy as president. Kerry's defenders grouse that he is being unfairly criticized by detractors who fail to offer reasonable alternatives — scenarios that won't slip the U.S. into another war in the Middle East. And the secretary of state himself, wherever he goes, insists that the problem in Syria must ultimately be solved through a political, not military solution. "What he's trying to do on Syria isn't about his legacy — he doesn't view it in those terms," a State Department official told POLITICO. "Critics can claim all they want that he is being unrealistic, but they aren’t sitting in the room like the rest of us watching him work tirelessly to try to find a way through, leveraging every ounce of personal relationships he has to reach [an] accord. Never once have I heard him talk blindly about trust. It’s always been a sober assessment of the interests at stake and an honest effort to negotiate. The man knows people, and he knows how far he can take things." Added a former administration official of Kerry: "I just don't think he gives two thoughts to whether some wise guy in Washington believes he shouldn't have tried. He would want to hear their alternative." But the Russians, and for that matter the Syrians, have little incentive to acquiesce to an administration that's on its way out; and Moscow appears either unwilling or unable to rein in Assad. The Syrian dictator, bent on staying in power, appears impervious to criticism from enemies and pleas from allies. Robert Ford, a former Obama administration ambassador to Syria, said Kerry's tactics, not his intent, pose a risk. "I’m full of admiration for him for being willing to try. He’s not afraid to grapple with big issues, and I think he deserves some credit for that," said Ford, now at the Middle East Institute. "What’s not clear is whether his constantly going back to the Russians over and over again is helping or hurting his efforts to convince them. It's making him look weak. I don’t know that the Russians do things out of kindness or if instead they take advantage of weak players and weak countries." Part of the problem for Kerry, observers say, is that Obama appears to have zero interest in committing more military muscle to give his secretary of state leverage in the talks with Russia. "Time will prove that Kerry played a weak hand as good as he could," said Randa Slim, an analyst also with the Middle East Institute. "The blame for U.S. inaction in Syria and its consequences should rest on Obama's shoulders, not Kerry's." It also doesn't help that there are divisions within the Obama administration over what to do about Syria. More than 50 U.S. officials signed a memo leaked earlier this year that urges U.S. airstrikes on the Assad regime. Kerry himself is reported to have asked Obama to allow airstrikes on specific Syrian government targets to put Assad on notice, but Obama, wary of deepening the U.S. military role in the conflict, has declined. The recent bargain Kerry struck with Russia on Syria also has upset the Pentagon because it included coordination between Moscow and Washington on airstrikes against terrorist groups such as the Islamic State. Defense officials are extremely wary of sharing intelligence with Russia. Kerry's defenders insist he is not naive, despite his professed faith in the power of negotiations. For instance, at least twice during the marathon talks that led to the nuclear deal with Iran last year, Kerry reportedly became fed up with Iranian intransigence and threatened to quit the negotiations. In fact, Kerry's determination to get a deal with Tehran fueled similar questions last year about whether he was too eager for a legacy-making accomplishment. Kerry has spent most of his life in public service, but he's been dogged by criticism that he passed too few notable bills during his years as a lawmaker. He also failed to defeat Bush in the 2004 race for the White House. Another challenge Kerry has tried to solve repeatedly is the conflict between the Israelis and the Palestinians. After taking over as secretary of state in 2013, Kerry pushed the two sides to try once again to come to terms. But ultimately that effort sputtered. The Syria crisis is in many ways more complex than the decades old Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Not only is the carnage ongoing and on an extraordinary scale, the sheer number of Syrian groups involved and international actors taking sides makes three-dimensional chess look easy. The cease-fire currently on the brink in Syria isn't even the first one Kerry has helped devise. A truce reached in February kept hold for several weeks before eventually collapsing. Then, too, Kerry worked long hours to negotiate with the Russians to agree to the cease-fire. That was alongside on and off initiatives to bring Syrian rebel leaders and Assad's representatives to the bargaining table for a long-term deal. On Monday, following the airstrike on the U.N. aid convoy, senior administration officials briefing reporters had tough words for Russia, saying it was responsible for the Syrian government's actions. "The Russians have the responsibility certainly to restrain — refrain from taking such action themselves, but they also have the responsibility to keep the regime from doing it," one official said. "The burden is on the Russians to demonstrate ... quickly and in a significant way, that they are committed to this process, which — without which obviously we’re not going to be able to move forward with them." The administration's tone was more restrained following Tuesday's meeting between Lavrov, Kerry, and others involved in the Syrian peace effort. A readout from the State Department said participants decided they needed to meet again, but agreed that despite the violence, "there was still an imperative to pursue a nationwide cessation of hostilities." The shorter version? John Kerry is going to keep trying.
(CNN)The circus of politics can often be a distraction from actual policy -- and last night's debate proved no exception when it came to the subject of foreign affairs. The back and forth between Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump was perhaps more instructive in terms of what was not mentioned -- Syria's civil war, for instance -- than what was discussed. To be fair, the debate was not intended to focus on international issues, which were basically a footnote in the "securing America" segment. But amid the exchanges about ISIS, Iran, NATO and nuclear proliferation, there were some brief glimpses of what the world might look like under a President Trump or a President Clinton. QUIZ: Are you more like Clinton or Trump? Fighting ISIS For the most part, Trump focused on attacking Clinton's record -- "she's got experience, but it's bad experience" -- rather than on articulating his own foreign policy proposals. That was certainly true of the discussion on ISIS, which was mentioned 24 times during the foreign policy part of the debate. Clinton spoke of the need to "intensify our air strikes against ISIS," "support our Arab and Kurdish partners," and "take out their leadership" -- positions that don't differ much from President Barack Obama's current policies. MORE: CNN's Reality Check Team vets the claims Trump repeatedly slammed Clinton and Obama for contributing to the rise of the terror group by pulling out of Iraq, but he offered no details of his own "secret" plan "to knock the hell out of ISIS." When Clinton taunted him about not having a plan, he retorted: "You're telling the enemy everything you want to do ... No wonder you've been fighting ISIS your entire adult life." (Fact check: ISIS only came into being in 2006 after splintering from al Qaeda in Iraq. Clinton was born in 1947.) Iran's nuclear deal Similarly, on Iran, Trump repeatedly attacked Clinton for striking "one of the worst deals ever made by any country in history," arguing that Iran had been "about to fall" and was now poised to become a "major power." But he didn't offer many suggestions for how it should have been done differently, beyond suggesting that "they should have included the fact that they do something with respect to North Korea. And they should have done something with respect to Yemen and all these other places." MORE: 6 key takeaways from the first debate Support for NATO If the debate didn't offer much new insight into Trump's foreign policy plans, his comments about America's allies and NATO certainly did. "I want to help all of our allies, but we are losing billions and billions of dollars. We cannot be the policemen of the world. We cannot protect countries all over the world ... where they're not paying us what we need," Trump said. MORE: Trump, Clinton debate nukes, ISIS, hackers It was a moment that will have sent shudders down the spines of America's international allies -- an isolationist vision that has many global leaders wary about a President Trump. Already under Obama, there is a perception that the US has retreated from taking an international leadership role, particularly in the Middle East. Clinton sought to provide some reassurance that she would be different, saying: "we've got to work more closely with our allies". But it remains to be seen how she would take on some of the toughest foreign policy questions -- namely, the civil war in Syria -- in a way that would be meaningfully different or more impactful than her predecessor. Perhaps the next debate will offer some more clues. 
NEW YORK — Reporters traveling with Hillary Clinton got a taste of the Egyptian security state on Monday — and they didn't much care for it. The Democratic presidential candidate was meeting Monday evening in New York City with Egypt's increasingly authoritarian president, Abdel Fattah al-Sisi. Story Continued Below According to the press pool report, upon reaching the hotel, the journalists were ordered to leave their bags, phones and computers with campaign staff "outside of the zone that had been deemed secure." "Reporters had to argue with Egyptian security to even carry recorders on their person," the pool report states. "There were also repeated arguments between Clinton campaign staff and the Egyptian security officials about how many reporters could enter the meeting despite having already reached an agreement with the country’s protocol officer prior to our arrival." Campaign staffers, as well as a Secret Service agent, were with the reporters the entire time. At one point, the journalists got stuck on an elevator with former Undersecretary of State Wendy Sherman, who now advises the Clinton campaign — "We all got cozy," the pool report states. Regardless of who they were with, the reporters went through multiple security sweeps and, at one point, ordered to wait behind a divider. "Because of our positioning, we were unable to see HRC when she arrived, as previously noted, and without our phones we couldn’t keep track of time," the pool report notes. Sisi, a former general, took power in Egypt in 2013 after massive popular protests forced out the elected government of Muslim Brotherhood leader Mohamed Morsi. During his session with Clinton, which lasted more than an hour, Sisi at one point said he wished to talk “about the path that we are taking in order to build up a new civil society, a new modern country that upholds the rule of law, that respects human rights and liberties." But Sisi is increasingly viewed as a serial human rights violator. Clinton's decision to meet with him signifies the importance the U.S. places on its alliance with Egypt, a relatively stable country in a chaotic Middle East. But she's already drawn criticism from both liberals and conservatives for sitting down with Sisi.
As police today captured the man wanted for questioning in connection to a series of explosive devices in New York City and New Jersey, new information about him has begun to emerge. The man, Ahmad Khan Rahami, 28, was born in 1988 in Afghanistan and is a naturalized U.S. citizen, according to the FBI. He was discovered and captured in Linden, New Jersey, not far from his last known address in Elizabeth.       A U.S. official initially told ABC News Rahami came to the U.S. in 2000, but his father later said the family came over in 1995. Court records indicate Ahmad Rahami was from a large family and may have as many as seven siblings. Former classmates said he attended Edison High School in New Jersey. One of them, Chris Konya, said Rahami was quiet but funny and a "pretty normal guy." Konya and another former classmate said Rahami had a child with his high school girlfriend. Rahami was enrolled at Middlesex County College from fall of 2010 to fall of 2012, where he worked toward an associate's degree in criminal justice but did not graduate, according to school officials.   The Rahami family owned a fried chicken restaurant in Elizabeth. An employee and a recent customer said Rahami worked there. "I come in here every week or two, just to get something to eat," local resident Ryan McCann told The Associated Press. "He's always in there. He's a very friendly guy. That's what's so scary. It's hard when it's home." Members of the Rahami family apparently did not get along well with the local police and sued several officers in 2011 for allegedly harassing them over purported violations related the restaurant's operation. The case was dismissed in 2012, pending the resolution of a related legal matter, according to documents. Investigators are poring over Rahami's past travel, including what may have been a recent nearly year-long trip in which he flew to Quetta, Pakistan in April 2013 and returned to the U.S. through the United Arab Emirates in March 2014, according to the U.S. official. Rahami reported to authorities that he was visiting his wife and family, who he said were Afghan refugees living in Quetta, and that he had traveled by car between Pakistan and Afghanistan.   In August 2014 Rahami was arrested after allegedly stabbing someone in the leg, according to court documents. A complaint filed by a police officer said the officer "has reason to believe that the person is a danger to himself, others or property," but Rahami was not indicted. Today Rahami was shot at least once by police during an exchange of gunfire before he was captured and then taken to a local hospital, authorities said. He is not cooperating with investigators, even so far as refusing to give his name, according to a source briefed on the case. Officials said they have not determined a motive for the attacks. Late Monday officials announced charges against Rahami related to the shootout with police: five counts of attempted murder, second-degree unlawful possession of a weapon and second-degree possession of a weapon for an unlawful purpose. Bail has been set at $5.2 million. It is unclear if Rahami has an attorney. A senior Afghan official told ABC News the Afghan government is ready to assist the U.S. in any way it can and is searching for any information it may have on Rahami.   ABC News' Cindy Galli, Megan Christie, Randy Kreider, Alex Hosenball and Cho Park contributed to this report. [Editor's Note Sept. 28, 2016: The original version of this report said that Ahmad Rahami came to the U.S. in 2000. Rahami's father later told ABC News, however, that his son and the family came in 1995 and that Rahami received his Green Card in 2000.]
Hillary Clinton drew applause Monday night for taking a shot at Donald Trump over having prepared for the first presidential debate – and similarly preparing “to be president.” Trump talked about his visits to “the inner cities” during a debate segment about race and policing but couldn’t resist also taking a shot at Clinton, who spent multiple days preparing for the debate in recent weeks. Story Continued Below “I just left Detroit, I just left Philadelphia. You've seen me, I've been all over the place. You decided to stay home and that's okay. I will tell you, I've been all over,” Trump said. “I think Donald just criticized me for preparing for this debate. And yes, I did. And you know what else I prepared for? I prepared to be president. And I think that's a good thing,” Clinton said in reply.
In March, in a bold “Oh yeah?” moment during an interview with the Washington Post’s editorial board, Donald Trump took the paper’s dare and revealed, then and there, his very short list of foreign policy advisers. There were just five, though he said, “I have quite a few more.” The list was a head-scratcher, a random assortment of obscure and questionable pundits. One of the names, offered without elaboration, was, “Carter Page, PhD.” Who? Story Continued Below Reporters quickly Googling found that Page is the founder and managing partner of an investment fund called Global Energy Capital, and that he claims to have years of experience investing in Russia and the energy sector. As for his connection to Trump, when Page was reached for comment by the New York Times the day after Trump’s big reveal, he said he had been sending policy memos to the campaign and the paper said he “will be advising Mr. Trump on energy policy and Russia.” This piqued my interest: I have been a Russia wonk for most of my adult life, I spent years living and reporting from Moscow, still go there regularly for reporting trips, and am in touch with lots of friends there. And yet, despite the tightly knit nature of the expat business community in Russia, no one I spoke to had ever heard of Carter Page. “What’s this guy’s name?” says one former Western energy CEO who spent years in Russia, and would have overlapped there with Page. “I had not heard of Carter Page before it came out in the media,” says another prominent Western businessman who has worked in the former Soviet Union for over two decades. “But I am getting a lot of emails from friends asking, ‘Have you heard of this guy?’” “Strangely, I've never heard of Carter Page until this Trump connection,” Bill Browder responded to me in an email. He was one of the biggest Western players in the Russian market until President Vladimir Putin turned on him and Browder became his fierce critic. “It's odd, because I've heard of every other financier who was a player on Moscow at the time.” Someone, apparently, has heard of him: On Friday, Yahoo News reported that Page was being probed by U.S. intelligence for purported back-channel ties to Russian leaders. The story resurfaced the name of a character who’d all but vanished from the campaign, and reawakened questions about who, exactly, Trump was surrounding himself with. This has been a concern swirling around the outsider candidate since he began, a real-estate developer with almost no serious Washington connections to tap for advice. “I’m going to surround myself only with the best and most serious people," Trump famously told a Post reporter last summer about how he would staff his campaign. "We want top-of-the-line professionals.” As the primaries unfolded, it became increasingly obvious that Trump would need all the top-of-the-line help he could get when it came to foreign policy. In an interview with conservative radio host Hugh Hewitt, Trump confused the Kurds with the Iranian Al-Quds Force, couldn’t tell the difference between Hezbollah and Hamas, and couldn’t recognize the name of the leader of ISIS. (In his defense, Trump said that “Hugh was giving me name after name, Arab name, Arab name, and there are few people anywhere, anywhere, that would have known those names.”) The Republican foreign policy specialists who would normally be a brain trust began slamming him in the press or publicly signing on to anti-Trump manifestos. And since they increasingly were fleeing the candidate, who were the people who would line up to advise him instead? What would they be like? Enter Carter Page, a 44-year-old Ph.D., and business school graduate who claims an expertise in Russia and energy, yet who, I quickly discovered, was known by neither Russia experts nor energy experts nor Russian energy experts. (“I can poll any number of people involved in energy in Russia about Carter Page and they’ll say, ‘Carter who? You mean Jimmy Carter?’” says one veteran Western investor in Russian energy.) Page also, as I would be surprised to discover, appears largely unknown to Trump’s own campaign. What I did find, however, is that while Page might not be helping Trump, Trump has been a significant help to Page. Since being named by Trump as an adviser, Page, who has spent his career trying to put together energy deals in Russia and the former Soviet Union, has finally begun to be noticed in the region. He is being treated in Russia as a person with potentially important ties in America. “He’s an extremely well-informed, authoritative expert on Russia,” says Mikhail Leontiev, a pro-Kremlin talking head and spokesman for Rosneft, Russia’s state oil giant. “People really respect him in this industry. He’s a very serious guy, and he has a good reputation.” According to the Yahoo report, U.S. intelligence believes Page had an audience with top Russian officials—including Rosneft head Igor Sechin—during a summer trip to Moscow. From what I could find about him, it’s hard to imagine he could have secured those meetings without that mention by Trump. Page has also been the subject of some breathless coverage in the American press. A March Bloomberg profile touted his “deep ties” with “executives at Gazprom,” the state-owned Russian gas giant, whom he says he advised on some of its biggest deals of the past decade. Last month, the Post ran a piece that was breathless in a different way, casting him as a shadowy broker with potentially important ties in Russia, some of them unsavory. The Yahoo story also portrays Page as a well-connected, high-rolling businessman with “extensive business interests in Russia” and an office “around the corner from Trump Tower.” Page has fueled all this by making some remarkable statements, including saying Putin is a better leader than President Barack Obama to a June closed-door meeting of foreign policy Brahmins in Washington. In July, in Moscow, he spoke at the New Economic School’s commencement ceremony, a university that had hosted Obama just seven years ago. Page used the speech to slam the “hypocrisy” of American foreign policy in front of a Russian audience, saying, “Washington and other Western powers have impeded potential progress through their often hypocritical focus on ideas such as democratization, inequality, corruption and regime change.” He is now frequently quoted on Russian television, which hails him as a “famous American economist” and “adviser to Donald Trump on questions of foreign policy.” All of which reveals something deeply strange about Trump: when he shoots from the hip, his remarks do more than just whip up Twitter controversies. They also occasionally and unintentionally mint a new species of “insiders,” people who seem to be in Trump’s orbit but who may not have—and may never have had—any access to the gilded inner sanctum at all. But someone is paying attention. As I started looking into Page, I began getting calls from two separate “corporate investigators” digging into what they claim are all kinds of shady connections Page has to all kinds of shady Russians. One is working on behalf of various unnamed Democratic donors; the other won’t say who turned him on to Page’s scent. Both claimed to me that the FBI was investigating Page for allegedly meeting with Igor Sechin and Sergei Ivanov, who was until recently Putin’s chief of staff—both of whom are on the sanctions list—when Page was in Moscow in July for that speech. So the question continued to linger: Who is Carter Page? *** I should tell you before we get any further that Page wouldn’t talk to me for this story. I called his fund and left messages, both on the general line and his personal voice mail. I emailed him repeatedly. I asked the Trump campaign to put me in touch. I emailed the Bloomberg journalist who interviewed him, who passed the request on. I even called Carter Page’s father in Poughkeepsie, New York, who told me he would ask his son to talk to me. But alas, no dice. This was disappointing: No one who worked in Moscow when Page was there seemed to know who he was, and I just wanted to talk to someone who did. At a certain point, I just needed confirmation that he even existed. OK, I thought. Try a different route. Maybe all these prominent Western businessmen who worked in Russia for decades didn’t know Page, but maybe it was because some of them worked in different spheres of the Russian economy. He did, after all, have such an impressive résumé. Page’s biography on the website of his energy fund, Global Energy Capital, hits all the right notes. It was, at first glance, the résumé of an up-and-coming player in the opaque but lucrative Russian energy market. “He spent 7 years as an investment banker at Merrill Lynch in London, Moscow and New York where he most recently served as Chief Operating Officer of the Energy and Power Group,” his bio reads. “He was involved in over $25 billion of transactions in the energy and power sector. He spent 3 years in Moscow where he was responsible for the opening of the Merrill office and was an advisor on key transactions for Gazprom, RAO UES and others.” Those were some of the biggest energy deals of the 2000s, and Page’s tenure in Merrill Lynch’s Moscow office, from 2004 to 2007, would have put him in the right place at the right time. He says he was part of the carving up of RAO UES, a massive Russian electric power holding company. He told Bloomberg that he advised Gazprom when it bought a stake in the Sakhalin II oil and gas project. Those were huge, huge things. If he were deeply involved, he would definitely count as a player. And surely he left at least a trace in the records of those deals. So I called Ian Craig, the CEO of Sakhalin Energy from 2004 to 2009, who was doing the negotiations with Gazprom and stayed on as CEO after the deal went through. (It wasn’t really a deal, to be clear: Sakhalin II was a large project in the Far East, and Gazprom essentially elbowed its way into the project when the government forced the consortium to sell the gas giant a controlling stake.) But Craig said he didn’t know anyone named Carter Page. He was also surprised to hear about Merrill Lynch’s purported involvement in the deal. “I don’t think Merrill Lynch or anyone else was front-lining the negotiations, because it was all done at the highest level, because it was very political,” says Craig . “It closed at CEO level, and eventually Putin himself signed off on it.” When I asked a prominent Western businessman, who has worked in the former Soviet Union for over two decades and who is said to socialize with Sechin and other members of the Russian elite, about Page’s claim to Bloomberg that he advised Gazprom on Sakhalin II, he said, “I rolled my eyes at that one.” (He, too, said he hadn’t heard of Page until Trump’s announcement.) Fine. OK. Maybe Page exaggerated a bit on that one. But what about the reorganization and privatization of RAO UES, the Russian electricity giant? Maybe some of the Russians he worked with remembered a Carter Page? Turns out, they did. “His nickname was stranichkin,” from the Russian word stranichka, or “little page,” says Artem Torchinsky, who met Page during the breakup of RAO UES. Torchinsky, who was part of the company’s financial department, worked alongside Page, who, at the time worked in Merrill Lynch’s Moscow office. It was 2007, and Merrill Lynch was underwriting the sale of one part of RAO UES, and Torchinsky was resentful of Page and the other Merrill Lynchers: Torchinsky and the in-house team did all the work, and Page and his team would swoop in to give the presentation. They were the fancy Western window dressing. “It really irritated our team,” Torchinsky told me over Skype. “We worked around the clock, and then they would come in and say something incomprehensible and we’d have to correct them. These guys didn’t know what they were talking about.” As for Page, “He made no impression whatsoever. Whether he was there or not, it made no difference,” Torchinsky says. “When you’re dealing with a pro, you see it. Page, unfortunately, did not leave that impression.” OK, harsh. But then I talked to Page’s former boss, former Russian Central Bank Chairman Sergei Aleksashenko, who ran the Moscow office of Merrill Lynch for part of the time Page worked there. “He wasn’t great and he wasn’t terrible,” Aleksashenko says, exasperated and confused by the interest of all these journalists pestering him for information about someone “without any special talents or accomplishments,” someone who was “a gray spot.” “What can you say about a person who in no way [is] exceptional?” he asked me. Page was a vice president at Merrill Lynch in Moscow, which sounds senior but is a common title in the finance world; a big firm like Merrill Lynch might have thousands of VPs. In the Moscow office, there were five ranks, and VP was right in the middle. In effect, it was “just the oldest of the youngest, three from the bottom,” says Aleksashenko. When it came to finance, Aleksashenko says, Page “was not a specialist in any branches of finance or in any instruments.” When it came to energy, Page and his team were, according to Torchinsky, “mildly speaking, not competent in the field of energy.” And, says Aleksashenko, “judging by the drivel he spews on Russia, you can tell he doesn’t really understand the topic.” Trump’s putative adviser on Russia and energy and foreign policy, in other words, “did not create the impression of someone who was intellectual or well-educated, or someone who was in any way interested or knowledgeable in foreign policy,” says Aleksashenko. *** For the past few years, Page has styled himself a foreign policy expert. He has written columns in Global Policy Journal, a new peer-reviewed journal run out of Durham University. They are confoundingly written and make logically curious leaps. “In recent months, renewed calls for equal justice have brought social tension across the United States after the killing of Michael Brown and Eric Garner by police officers in Missouri and New York respectively,” he wrote. “Although commonly overlooked, the impact of other fatal mistakes by government officials in the foreign policy arena might vastly outweigh these tragic deaths in potentially catastrophic proportions.” He is the kind of thinker who writes that Kanye West’s “New Slaves” and the “artist’s creative work offers valuable ideas that could fundamentally improve the direction of U.S. foreign policy and world affairs” but does it by opening with a citation from the Oxford English Dictionary (“Slave; Pronunciation: /slāv/…”), roping in Adam Sandler, William F. Buckley and Dick Cheney. His speech in Moscow’s New Economic School was a similar construction of empty spaces held together with repetition, tautologies, and abuses of the word “ironically.” “For the last 15 years, I’ve been researching, teaching, and writing about fundamental trends in the world economy, which have really continued to evolve in this period and in the years immediately preceding it,” he began. The video of the speech also suggests that after three years living there and a lifetime studying the place, he couldn’t really speak Russian—he had to have his questions translated for him into English. Except to quote, haltingly, brokenly, Vladimir Putin: “We never meddle in the internal political affairs of other countries. Unlike the USA.” Which is troubling for two reasons: that the adviser of a presidential candidate of a major party is criticizing America abroad by citing Putin, and that the comment implied that he seemed to not know anything about anything going on in, say, Syria or Ukraine. Page also managed to find his way into a fellowship at the Council on Foreign Relations, where he cut a strange figure. Like other Westerners doing business in Russia, Page took the view that Putin was not the blood-stained and corrupt tyrant some in the West imagine him to be, defending him as a strong leader who brought order and prosperity to Russia. But unlike other entrepreneurial defenders of Putin, people at the Council recall that Page was not particularly good at it. “He had a guilty-seeming style in making these arguments, making it seem like he didn’t really want to engage,” one person from the Council says. His columns made the rounds and raised eyebrows. “That blog post about the slaves. That’s just … strange,” says the Council member. “He’s a nice guy, but of the people that I know that have Russian foreign policy experience or access and contacts, he wouldn’t be in the last decile, but he’d be in the second-to-last decile,” says one American executive with experience in Russia and its energy sector. “You’d have to dip really far and wide to find a guy like Carter Page. I mean, wow.” *** I should’ve just dropped the Carter Page story, but in the months since Trump named him an adviser, the campaign’s Russia connections have become a bigger and bigger issue. Fancy Bear, who was probably a Russian hacker, broke into the Democratic National Committee emails, seemingly handed them over to Julian Assange, who continues to leak the information in a way that is clearly designed to help one campaign and hurt the other. Trump’s second campaign manager, Paul Manafort, flamed out in August because of his shady business dealings with the pro-Kremlin side of Ukraine, and Trump himself continues to say absurd things about Russia and Putin, like publicly inviting the Russian government to continue hacking American servers. Washington was in full Hunt for Red October mode, and it was all I could do to stay on Page’s trail, which began to look more and more like an infinity sign. I was not the only one. Seemingly everyone I talked to had also talked to the Washington Post, and then there were these corporate investigators who drew a dark and complex web of Page’s connections. Then there was Page, praising Putin. I found myself juggling two mutually contradictory Page narratives: Was Page, like Manafort, followed by a long train of sordid dealings with dark and powerful players with deep pockets and deep resentments toward the West? This was the person described by the corporate investigators trying to whisper into my ear. Was Page a man wheeling and dealing in energy contracts with China and Turkmenistan, who was a vehicle for the Kremlin to influence the American election? Was he a man who, during a three-day trip to Moscow, met with two of Russia’s most powerful men and was now being investigated for it? But it was hard to see that man when I actually talked to people who knew him. Page made his way into the financial sector as it ballooned in the early part of the past decade, securing a spot at Merrill Lynch’s London and Moscow offices. Today, he claims he was cozy with Gazprom executives; his former colleagues laugh at the suggestion. “No one let him into Gazprom,” Aleksashenko says. “He didn’t go shake [Gazprom chief Alexey] Miller’s hand. He made sure there were cars, hotels and meetings for investors in London.” Another of Page’s colleagues from Merrill Lynch confirmed that Page’s role was simply arranging meetings between Gazprom and Western investors, something normally done by analysts, the lowest rank on the totem pole. “People organize meetings with Gazprom all the time,” the former colleague said. “He hosted these guys in New York City but they would have done this 10 times a year… I used to do this; it doesn’t require all that much skill. You just send out an email to 20 people saying Gazprom agreed to dinner at this place at 8 p.m., do you want to come? The main thing is just getting those two [Gazprom] guys to agree. But because they agreed doesn’t mean they’re close to him.” But the meetings did provide him with something else. “Gazprom didn’t need money at the time,” says the former colleague. “They were the most profitable company at the time. Their net profit was something like $36 billion a year. Their problem was not getting investors, but figuring out how to spend money in a non-efficient way if you read between the lines. He was probably aware of that. He would have known how inefficient and wasteful the company is.” Page became an investor in the company, and has, according to filings, advised other companies he’s worked for to invest in them. After Merrill Lynch, Page tried to set up his own fund to invest in energy projects and called it Global Energy Capital. But he tried to do this in 2008, and we know what happened to the markets in 2008. The fund is registered to his father’s address in Poughkeepsie; Page listed himself as “founder and managing partner,” even though the only other partner seemed to be Sergei Yatsenko, who was once a mid-level executive at Gazprom. He also maintained a website and handed out business cards that listed a fancy Madison Avenue address—that’s the one “around the corner from Trump Tower”— which was actually the address of a co-working space. “That’s Carter Page,” says an American businessman who has spent nearly a decade working in Russia. “That’s what he’s been doing, without any actual funding, without any actual experience, without any actual connections or core capabilities, he’s been trying to throw together these deals. He’s always been operating at a level far beneath that at which business in Russia is done. I admire that, it takes a lot of gumption.” In the interest of due diligence, I also tried to run down the rumors being handed me by the corporate investigators: that Russia’s Alfa Bank paid for the trip as a favor to the Kremlin; that Page met with Sechin and Ivanov in Moscow; that he is now being investigated by the FBI for those meetings because Sechin and Ivanov were both sanctioned for Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. “I don’t know this person,” said Pyotr Aven, one of the two founders of Alfa Bank, which is considered the Western Russian bank. Aven and his partner, Mikhail Fridman, have transferred much of their assets out of Russia and have been quite critical of Putin. As for who paid for Page’s trip, Aven was no less irritated by the question. “I give them money, I don’t know how they spend it, who they invite, when they invite them, I have no idea,” he said of the New Economic School, which hosted Page and of which Aven is the main benefactor. Exasperated by my questions, he snapped, “Don’t bring these Russian-style conspiracy theories to me.” “You are engaged in onanism,” said Leontiev, the spokesman for Rosneft and Sechin when I asked him if Page had met with Sechin. “It’s bullshit. Just bullshit. You need to understand who Sechin is to even ask this question. It’s hard to have a meeting with him at all. It’s absurd.” As for the FBI investigation, well, it’s unclear. A State Department official who works on Russia sanctions but was not authorized to speak on the record told me that, for one thing, there is “no prohibition meeting with a designated [sanctioned] individual. Moreover, sanctions violations are not criminal in nature and not enforced by the FBI. OFAC runs them.” He added, “the story doesn't add up.” What does seem to have happened is that various U.S. intelligence agencies were looking into Page’s time in Moscow, then briefed Senate minority leader, Democrat Harry Reid, who wrote a letter to FBI Director James Comey asking him to investigate, among other things, “whether a Trump advisor who has been highly critical of U.S. and European economic sanctions on Russia, and who has conflicts of interest due to investments in Russian energy conglomerate Gazprom, met with high-ranking sanctioned individuals while in Moscow in July of 2016, well after Trump became the presumptive Republican nominee.” *** I got my next surprise when I called Stephen Miller, Trump’s senior adviser. I caught him just as the Trump plane was about to take off, and asked him the tired, old question: Who is Carter Page? “Who?” says Miller, and then went off the record to expound on his lack of involvement in the campaign. “He has no formal role in the campaign,” Hope Hicks texted responding to my question. Now my interest was piqued. There were whispers all over Washington that, despite Hicks’s denial, Page was not only still part of the Trump campaign, but its conduit for Russian influence. Was he? One way to answer the question was to figure out how he even got on that list to begin with. One source suggested to me that Richard Burt, former U.S. ambassador to Germany, START treaty negotiator, and longtime lobbyist for Alfa Bank, was the nexus. It was Burt who helped draft Trump’s foreign policy speech in April, and had been advising the Trump campaign, via Senator Jeff Sessions, on foreign policy. But when I met Burt at his office at the McLarty Associates lobbying shop, he looked at me and said he had never even met him. “The only person I talked to about Carter Page is this guy at the Washington Post,” Burt told me. “And I told him I’d never met the guy. Let me put it this way: if I have met him, I’ve forgotten. He’s the former Merrill Lynch guy, right?” Someone else told me that the Page connection was Rick Dearborn, Sessions’ chief of staff, who hired Page because Dearborn knew nothing about foreign policy but needed to put together a foreign policy staff for Trump’s Alexandria, Virginia, policy shop and he happened to know Page. But Dearborn wouldn’t return my calls, and someone who once worked for that policy shop told me it was neither Dearborn nor Burt, but campaign co-chair Sam Clovis who recruited Page. “If he was part of that original group of people, I can say with 70 percent confidence it was Sam Clovis,” this person told me. “I’m not answering your questions,” Clovis told me. He refused to tell me if he was the one who found Page, but Jason Miller, the campaign’s other spokesperson, says, “Carter Page isn’t someone I’ve interacted with.” Which confirmed what a policy staffer on the Trump campaign told me: “Carter is a red herring, not a Rasputin. He’s never met Trump, never briefed him. He has zero influence, none.” *** Was Page the shadowy messenger between the Kremlin and Trump Tower, or was he the nebbishy, not-very-successful man trying to profit from the arbitrage between what Trump said—he’s my adviser—and what his associates said—“Who?” Maybe I wasn’t doing this right, and maybe everyone was lying to me, but it was hard not to come to the conclusion that, regardless of whatever game the Russians were running, Page was firmly in the latter camp. “I don’t know about his Russia fund, other than it’s never really materialized,” says the prominent player in the energy space whom Page has pitched on various energy projects. “Every conversation I’ve had with Carter has not been terribly serious. They’ve all been pie-in-the-sky ideas. There are usually issues with traction and execution capabilities.” He went on. “I couldn’t name a project that I could connect Carter’s name to, any project that actually happened.” “I don’t know how he’s earned a living off this,” the energy player says, “but I think he’s been trying to be an intermediary. If you hang around Russia long enough, it’s sort of like a pinball machine, something will hit you.” Strangely, it was not a Russian pinball that hit him; it was Trump. According to the Trump policy adviser, this winter, Clovis began to draw up a list of people who could serve as policy advisers to the campaign and give it some intellectual and policy heft. At a time when established Republican foreign policy specialists were tripping over each other to get away from Trump, “a lot of people came to Sam Clovis in February, March, and said, ‘I want to be part of the team,’” says the Trump adviser. And that’s how it happened. “He’s just a guy on a list. Trump looked at the list and said, ‘He’s an adviser.’ And now he’s milking it for all it’s worth.” Now, someone whom no one in the field had ever heard of was suddenly a Very Important Person in Washington—or at least could plausibly market himself as one. “I was not aware of him at all until he was named to the campaign, and even after that, I had never heard of him,” one Russia specialist in Washington told me. He saw Page at a Washington roundtable in June for Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi, and what he saw was a strange kind of person: one who was very differential to everyone there “in a way that someone who is junior would use it to network,” but who was dropping hints full of meaning to anyone who would listen—and be impressed. “He was saying he was planning to go to Moscow,” the Russia specialist recalls. “He didn’t say what he was going to do there, but he created the impression that there could be some meaning to the trip.” According to a congressional leadership staffer familiar with the intelligence briefings on Page’s trip to Russia, “the meetings did happen and that’s been established as a fact. I think the investigation is more what happened in them.” But it remained unclear, the staffer told me unprompted, what this even meant. “It’s not just did he met with them or not, but now looking into the bigger question of what the hell is going on?” said the staffer. “Is he acting as a conduit in ways that are against America’s national security interests? Wittingly or un-, I should add. It’s what’s hard to parse about this. Is he doing this with nefarious intent or is this just about guys who are thrilled to be living in a John le Carré novel? Or are they being played by much smarter people in the Kremlin?” This seems to be vintage Carter Page, a man whose story never quite adds up, as much as he tries to make the numbers work. But he’s also mastered the art of manipulating the distance between his story as it is and his story as he wants it to be, playing on the uncertainty in between to make himself seem more successful, more connected, even more evil than he really is—and to try to turn a profit off of that. “If Page using his status as ‘Trump advisor’ for personal gain, that’s another matter: Time for Page to join Twitter!” Michael McFaul, former U.S. ambassador to Russia, tweeted after news of the investigation broke. The Russians may be feeling out the Trump campaign via Page, but Page must be loving every minute of it. After all, meeting Russia’s energy czar is an impossible dream for a would-be investor struggling to make it in the world of Russian energy—but the dream entered the realm of the possible when Trump said three words in March: “Carter Page, Ph.D.” Now Carter Page, Ph.D., has found a perfect candidate to latch on to, like a pilot fish feeding off the carnage wrought by the oblivious Trump shark. For months now, the American press has been twisting itself in knots trying to explain men like Page and Manafort, and, through them, to answer the questions of whether Putin is trying to destroy America by their hands, and is Trump a Kremlin stooge or a just a useful idiot, and is there even a difference? There doesn’t seem to be one in the world of Trump, which in some ways resembles Putin’s: the waters of truth are muddy and deeply suggestive. And that is all that matters. Is Putin actually meddling in our election and undermining the foundations of Western democracy in a massive way, or doing just enough to make us think he is, and thereby acquiring powers he holds only because we believe him to have them? “I want to hope that this is connected with the growing influence and significance of Russia,” Putin says of the rumors of Russian meddling in the American election—as we in the media continue to squeegee them around, rarely really getting closer to the truth, and watching it disintegrate in our hands when we think we’ve finally grasped it.
Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders is planning a “very, very vigorous” travel schedule to campaign on behalf of Hillary Clinton in the weeks leading up to the November election, he said Monday. Sanders, in an interview before Monday night’s first general election debate, told MSNBC’s Brian Williams and Rachel Maddow that he plans to “go all over this country” to advocate for Clinton, the Democratic nominee and his former opponent in the party’s often-contentious primary elections. Story Continued Below “We’re working on a schedule right now, which is going to be a very, very vigorous schedule,” Sanders said. “We’re going to go all over this country. We’re going to go wherever Secretary Clinton’s people think that I am needed, and I am going to work as hard as I can to make sure that Donald Trump does not become the next president.” The two are already scheduled to appear together on Wednesday at the University of New Hampshire Field House to discuss college affordability. Clinton has struggled to capture the enthusiasm of some of Sanders’ former supporters, especially the young voters who flocked to his campaign’s promise of “political revolution” and focus on campaign finance reform. When Williams asked Sanders how “hard” he was willing to work to campaign for Clinton and her running mate, Virginia Sen. Tim Kaine, Sanders reiterated his common refrain that “the election of Donald Trump as president would be a disaster for this country.” “I am going to do everything that I can to see that that does not happen,” Sanders said. “When I campaign, I campaign very, very hard.”
Chappaqua, New York (CNN)Hillary Clinton's economic speech on Wednesday in Orlando will focus on how the United States can create an economy that values people with disabilities, an attempt to contrast the former secretary of state with Republican nominee Donald Trump. Clinton, an aide said Tuesday, will propose an economy that "welcomes people with disabilities, values their work, rewards them fairly, and treats them with respect." Wednesday's speech is Clinton's fourth in a series of addresses where the former first lady is attempting to talk more about her values and proposals and less about Trump. Clinton has so far given "Stronger Together" speeches on faith, community service and children and families. While those speeches have focused more on Clinton, they have not been devoid of Trump contrast. In all three speeches, Clinton has tried to keep her talk of Trump to a minimum, but they have cast him as an ill-prepared candidate who should not be president. And Wednesday's speech will be no different. Many low-wage workers not protected by minimum wage Clinton's campaign and Democrats view Trump's attacks on New York Times reporter Serge Kovaleski, whose arthrogryposis impairs the movements in her arm, as their most effective character attack against the Republican nominee. Trump mocked Kovaleski during a campaign event in South Carolina last year after the reporter questioned Trump for citing his story as proof that "thousands" of Muslims celebrating in Jersey City, NJ, as the World Trade Center towers burned and fell during the 9/11 terror attack. Clinton turned Trump's comments into her first general election campaign ad.  By talking about what she would do for people with disabilities, Clinton is offering voters an implicit contrast with Trump. Clinton will outline a series of policy proposals for people with disabilities on Wednesday, according to the aide, including eliminating sub-minimum wages for people with disabilities and proposing "new partnerships with businesses to improve hiring practices for those living with a disability." After the speech Wednesday, the aide said, Clinton will be "the only candidate with a plan for an economy that includes more people with disabilities." 
Senate Republicans are moving to aid Missouri GOP Sen. Roy Blunt, placing their first ad reservations and preparing for a seven-figure ad buy, according to a Republican source familiar with the plans. The National Republican Senatorial Committee placed its first, $270,000 ad buy supporting Blunt in St. Louis, the source said, but more ads are on the way. The ad buy comes just days after independent polling for the first time showed Democratic Secretary of State Jason Kander leading Blunt. Senate Democrats are increasingly shift their sights to Missouri, where they believe Blunt's long time in Congress makes him vulnerable against the 35-year-old Kander, a military veteran. Story Continued Below The Republican source suggested the ads will link Kander to Hillary Clinton, who is losing in Missouri to Donald Trump, according to public polls. "Voters will be left with no doubt that Jason Kander is a loyal Hillary Clinton partisan," the Republican source said. "Jason Kander would be Hillary Clinton’s senator, not Missouri’s." Democrats are making a significant investment in Missouri as the battle for the Senate enters crunch time. The Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee is committing $3.5 million to the state. "This is just the latest sign that Washington Republicans are worried about losing their favorite senator, Roy Blunt," said Chris Hayden, a spokesman for Kander. "Jason clearly has the momentum in the race."
Bill Clinton doesn’t want his life's work to fade quietly into the night. In a personal speech defending his legacy at the Clinton Global Initiative — from its humble roots in his Harlem office to the international, star-studded conference it has become — the former president pleaded with the crowd Wednesday evening that the work couldn't end. “You have to keep this alive,” he said. Story Continued Below But in its current version, Clinton's organization is dying. The former president's speech marked the official end of CGI, a glitzy, 12-year-old conference that convened Fortune 500 CEOs, movie stars, world leaders and nonprofit do-gooders in New York City during the United Nations meeting. There, they forged partnerships and made commitments to collaborate on projects such as saving elephants, improving AIDS relief in Africa and fighting for women’s rights across the globe. But with political pressure mounting as Election Day draws closer, the former president announced last month that the Clinton Foundation would stop accepting foreign and corporate donations if Hillary Clinton is elected president and that the annual CGI conference would cease its operations regardless of the outcome Nov. 8. In what aides billed as a swan song for the Big Dog, Clinton touted his organization as “a profound advance in the conduct and impact of modern philanthropy.” Clinton, allies said, has been frustrated that the work he has devoted more than a decade of his life to has become what he thinks is a “smeared” political target in the 2016 race. The initiative and its parent organization, the Clinton Foundation, have been the target of regular attacks from Republicans on the campaign trail, who allege that Hillary Clinton offered special treatment as secretary of state to individuals and nations who donated to the family’s charity. A series of emails from longtime Hillary Clinton aide Huma Abedin obtained by the conservative group Judicial Watch through a Freedom of Information Act request appeared to show increased access to the former secretary of state and other power brokers for Clinton Foundation donors — a suggestion that the Democratic nominee’s campaign has unequivocally denied. The former president saw the final CGI meeting that concluded Wednesday evening as his best opportunity to change the narrative and explain himself. In a speech he was writing himself until the last minute, Clinton detailed the work CGI has done both in the U.S. and abroad, defending his post-presidential legacy to date. The partners that worked together, he said, were “united only by a common mind-set, the belief that everyone has something to give and the obligation to give it, the belief that our actions really can make a difference and that as 21st century citizens, we all have a moral obligation to at least get caught trying to do that.” The former president, who was introduced by his daughter, said the initiative’s beginnings are rooted in Harlem, where Bill Clinton first set out simply to be a good neighbor and help the businesses surrounding his post-administration office. He reminisced about raising money to rebuild rural parts of India after an earthquake and raising money for college for children of victims of the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks. Overall, CGI has helped 435 million people in 180 countries, Clinton said. “You are living proof that good people committed to creative cooperation have almost unlimited positive impact to help people today and give our kids better tomorrows,” he said. “I have spent the past 15 years of my life trying to advance that idea.” “This is all that does work in the modern world. People may tell you you’re making incremental change,” he added. “But look back after 11 years and see what the aggregate is. There’s nothing incremental about helping 435 million people in 180 countries.” He made no explicit mention of his wife’s campaign or her opponent, Donald Trump, but his message dovetailed with what the Democratic nominee was saying on the stump in Orlando: that “love trumps hate.” “You have to cultivate a culture of possibility,” Bill Clinton said. “You have to know we can do more together than apart.”
COLORADO SPRINGS, Colo. — Mike Pence said there is too much talk of "institutional racism and institutional bias" in the wake of unrest following police shootings in Tulsa, Oklahoma, and Charlotte, North Carolina. "Police officers are human beings," Pence said at a pastors' roundtable at Radiant Church here. "And in difficult and life-threatening situations, mistakes are made and people have to be held to strict account, but we both believe that it's important that we have a president who, as the chief law enforcement officer of the United States, stands behind the men and women who serve in law enforcement." Story Continued Below Pence said that police officers are "the best of us." "We ought to set aside this talk, this talk about institutional racism and institutional bias," he said, calling such assertions "rhetoric of division." Asked by Bishop John Brannon, who is African-American, what Pence would "personally do" to heal divides in the country, Pence brought up the recent shootings. "When there's any loss of life, we have to speak with compassion, we have to make it clear that there will be a thorough investigation and that justice will be served and that high standards will be upheld," Pence said. Pence sought to strike a tone of unity in his remarks, repeating that "there will always be more that unites us in this country than could ever divide us." At a town hall event shortly after the pastors roundtable, Pence used the same line — that there is too much talk of "institutional racism" — to take aim at Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton. "But in the wake of these tragic events in Tulsa and Charlotte, sadly our opponent once again refers to what she calls the institutional racism in law enforcement," Pence said. "We heard this week again of the 'systemic racism' in law enforcement in this country." Pence said people expect a "thorough, immediate and transparent investigation" in the wake of police shootings. Pence went on to say that police are "not a force for racism in America, they are a force for good, they stand for our families, they protect our homes and they deserve our support and respect." He also said he respected protesters' constitutional right to assemble, but added "there is no right to engage in violence against our citizens or against our property." Trump expressed his own concern about the Tulsa shooting on Wednesday, suggesting the shooting happened because the officer in question was “choking” under pressure.
It was a sober night Monday for those whose debate drinking games counted on the candidates throwing around campaign buzzwords like Benghazi, the border wall and the Clinton Foundation. While those issues dominated various phases of the 2016 run for the White House, none were uttered during the first presidential debate. Story Continued Below Hillary Clinton may have been so surprised by the lack of mention of the Benghazi attacks that she felt emboldened to actually allude to the tragic episode herself, arguing late in the debate that her ability to endure 11 hours of questioning from the House Benghazi Committee disproved Donald Trump's claim that she lacked the "stamina" to be president. Moments after the debate, Trump grumbled on Twitter about topics he thought moderator and NBC anchor Lester Holt should have raised, but didn't. "Nothing on emails. Nothing on the corrupt Clinton Foundation. And nothing on #Benghazi," Trump wrote, in a tweet that did not mention Holt by name. Many commentators and some Trump supporters noted that Trump did nothing to raise allegations of improprieties involving Clinton Foundation fundraising or what the GOP has alleged is Clinton's failure to make sure the U.S. diplomatic compound in Benghazi had adequate security at the time four Americans were killed there in 2012. Trump did bring up the ubiquitous email issue himself, saying he'd release his tax returns when she released 33,000 emails she deleted before turning a roughly equal number over to the State Department in 2014. Clinton says she no longer has those messages, but she never directly answered Trump's question about why they were deleted nor did she respond when Holt briefly followed up on the point. Trump also failed to mention Clinton's claim that about half of his supporters were "deplorables"—a statement she has withdrawn and apologized for. While Trump lamented that Clinton's vulnerabilities didn't receive much attention in the debate, some of Democrats' hobby horses about Trump also got brushed aside. Allegations that the Trump University real estate seminar program was a fraud that bilked participants of up to $35,000 apiece have been fodder for campaign ads and lawsuits and even led to Trump's startling claim that a Latino judge should be removed from the case because of his heritage. But there was no mention at all of Trump U. Monday night, nor of the controversy over the Trump Foundation's illegal donation to a Florida political group or the foundation's unusual affinity for purchasing oversized portraits of its namesake. Some of the world's most urgent crises, like the ongoing violence in Syria estimated to have killed more than 400,000 people, got no discussion at all from the debate stage in Long Island. It could be that such subjects will get more focus at the second presidential debate, set for Oct. 9 and expected to focus on global affairs. Holt had announced three topics for Monday night's debate—America’s Direction, Achieving Prosperity and Securing America—so one might have expected the latter to lead to a substantial discussion of immigration policy and the vetting of refugees, but those issues got only glancing treatment. The NBC News anchor never raised the immigration issue, but Trump brought it up a couple of times. He noted, in garbled language, that he'd been endorsed by a union representing immigration and customs agents. Trump also made a somewhat confusing reference to a recent Department of Homeland Security inspector general report that found hundreds of instances where immigrants were naturalized without complete fingerprint checks that would have shown them to have been previously ordered deported. "We were deporting 800 people....These people we were going to deport ended up becoming citizens.....Now it turns out it might be 1,500 and they don't even know," Trump said. If foreign policy was to be left for another night, major domestic policy issues should have had a good chance Monday. But another favorite punching bag for Republicans—President Obama's health care law—escaped entirely unscathed. Some of the issues that Holt didn't ask about, like climate change or Obamacare, may have been on his question list. But he seemed to ask relatively few questions, allowing prolonged exchanges by the candidates and indulging Trump's requests for rebuttal time. The issue of health care was almost completely bypassed, with the candidates making only the briefest references to it. Clinton added "health" to the list of things Trump wasn't supporting if he didn't pay federal income taxes in recent years. Trump said one reason the U.S. doesn't have "new hospitals" is because the country has "squandered" money on many of Clinton's "ideas." Another touch area the candidates didn't delve into Monday: Clinton's health. Trump did say he thought she lacked the "stamina" to be president, but he didn't elaborate and he never referenced her recent bout with pneumonia or the video of her appearing to collapse after an outdoor Sept. 11 commemoration ceremony in New York. While the debate tiptoed around the health issue, many Twitter commentators didn't. They noted that Trump seemed to be under the weather, sniffling occasionally and sounding a bit nasal. Perhaps Trump passed up the health-related hit on Clinton because he feared she might have a tart reply suggesting he was being worn down by life on the campaign trail.
(CNN)Aaron Sorkin could be earning royalties off the 2016 campaign. "The West Wing" creator's storylines are proving remarkably prescient in the epic Donald Trump-Hillary Clinton White House battle. A Democratic campaign grappling with a health crisis? Check. (See Hillary Clinton's pneumonia and Jed Bartlet's far more serious multiple sclerosis). Gaffes by politicians that conveniently help their cause? There, too, this year. A soon-to-be nominee iffy at best about his running mate? That happened on the NBC drama as well. The similarities are poised to cross into reality this weekend when most of the series' cast members will campaign for Hillary Clinton in Ohio. There's a certain irony to this, as many series plotlines about the White House of fictional commander in chief, Bartlet (Martin Sheen), were based on events from Bill Clinton's administration. "The West Wing" premiered with about 14 months left in Bill Clinton's presidency, and a swath of his former aides worked on the show as writers and producers. So in the already "West Wing"-tinged 2016 campaign, what's next in made-for-television events? Five episodes offer clues. Unhealthy secrecy Bartlet is depicted in the series as an exemplar of virtue, both in public and private realms. A Nobel Prize-winning economist and former New Hampshire governor, he earnestly wrestles with public policy decisions based largely on his progressive principles. Bartlet is a devout Catholic and father of three daughters seemingly without hint of personal scandal. But he's not infallible. It's revealed midway in the first season that Bartlet has been hiding a years-ago diagnosis of multiple sclerosis. And he had full complicity from his physician wife Abby (Stockard Channing), who delivered shots of a mitigating drug, betaseron. The secret is so closely-held that the Bartlets initially keep it from the candidate/president's close friend, Leo McGarry (John Spencer) -- who convinced Bartlet to seek the White House in the first place. McGarry is eventually let in on it after the president collapses in the Oval Office. But the trio keeps White House senior staff members in the dark for more than a year. A miniature version of this drama recently played out in the 2016 campaign, although over a considerably less serious medical issue for Clinton. Compared to Bartlet's years-long conspiracy of silence over a potentially life-threatening condition, for only two days she neglected to inform the public about a common health concern, pneumonia, from which she quickly recovered, according to medical information provided by her campaign. Clinton in September was slow to reveal the pneumonia diagnosis, after a spate of coughing fits during a speech and on her campaign plane. And she doesn't appear to have informed many of her top aides about it. Her doctor revealed the candidate's pneumonia diagnosis on the afternoon of Sunday, September 11, through her campaign. But that was two days late, and only after the Democratic nominee stumbled and exited a 9/11 commemoration ceremony early -- in full public view. Many people even inside the Clinton campaign did not know about the pneumonia diagnosis. An aide said that Clinton "thought she could push through this ... she was feeling better" -- until that Sunday morning. In both cases, neither politician actually presented false information to the public. "Nobody lied," an exasperated McGarry says tells White House Communications Director Toby Ziegler (Richard Schiff), during one one particularly dramatic "West Wing" scene. Political 'gaffes'? Riffing at a campaign fundraiser in New York on September 8, Hillary Clinton veered into seemingly dangerous political territory. "To just be grossly generalistic, you can put half of Trump supporters into what I call the basket of deplorables," Clinton said. "Right? Racist, sexist, homophobic, xenophobic, Islamophobic, you name it." Clinton then said some of these people were "irredeemable" and "not America." Predictable outrage soon followed from the Trump campaign and supporters. Clinton -- kind of -- walked it back. "I regret saying 'half' -- that was wrong," she said in a statement in which she also vowed to call out "bigotry" in Trump's campaign. The episode seemed like the self-inflicted wound of Clinton's political career. She insulted a broad swath of the electorate, and gave her opponents an opening to play victim of mean-spirited attacks. But her "deplorables" jab at Trump voters had another effect -- it put Trump and allies on the defense to show its campaign supporters weren't racist. In doing so, it stirred a lively -- and ongoing -- conversation about some of the more controversial elements of the Trump coalition. In other words, Clinton set the terms of argument -- and potentially helped rally her Democratic base. The incident called to mind a similar Bartlet "gaffe" made in the course of a heated presidential race, which ended up helping his cause. In a 2002 episode, Bartlet is caught on camera "accidentally" questioning the intelligence of his GOP opponent, Florida Gov. Rob Ritchie. After touting his administration's energy plan, he disparages his rival -- a thinly-veiled George W. Bush stand-in -- as a ".22 caliber mind in a .357 Magnum world." For days, the Bartlet White House is on the defensive for an unsportsmanlike insult at a campaign rival. But it turns out Bartlet's blunder was anything but. The errant comment triggers waves of coverage about his rival's smarts -- or lack thereof -- while raising awareness about the energy proposal. "It didn't turn out too bad at all," White House Press Secretary C.J. Cregg (Allison Janney) muses to Bartlet in the episode's closing scene. "In fact, the whole country's talking about whether Ritchie's smart enough to be president. And you didn't take a hit, because it was an accident." Party crashers When Trump entered the 2016 GOP primary race, he faced a wall of establishment-type pols -- Marco Rubio, John Kasich and many more. He beat them all. Jed Bartlet, too, was an outsider candidate who shocked the political establishment. He started out far behind Texas Sen. John Hoynes (Tim Matheson), but his populist message eventually overtook his Democratic rivals. Bartlet at times shows existential angst over his place in the party firmament. Notably in the Season 2 finale "Two Cathedrals," he ponders whether to run for re-election after a primetime news conference revealing his MS condition, and juggling several crises, foreign and domestic. In a dream sequence with his recently-deceased secretary, a big-sister-like figure for decades, Bartlet observes, "I've got a secret for you, Mrs. Landingham: I've never been the most popular guy in the Democratic Party." Trump, though, has shown no such self-reflection. He routinely boasts of beating out 16 GOP primary rivals. As Ms. Landingham predicted would happen for Bartlet and the Democrats, the Republican National Committee and party apparatus have rallied around Trump. You can't always get what you want A recurring "West Wing" subplot depicts long-simmering tension between Bartlet and his vice president, the past primary rival. A more conservative Democrat, Hoynes was a one-time favorite for the party nod who ultimately lost to the upstart Granite State challenger. Bartlet put Hoynes on the ticket out of necessity to win Southern states -- a New England-Texas alliance reminiscent of John F. Kennedy tapping Lyndon Johnson as his running mate in 1960. Both odd-couple tickets led to transactional relationships at best. LBJ was famously cut out of Kennedy's inner circle. "West Wing's" Hoynes is seen repeating trying to undercut the president. In fact, it's a Hoynes New Hampshire trip that forces Bartlet's hand into revealing the president's MS condition. In 2016, Republican nominee Trump isn't on such fraught terms with his running mate, Indiana Gov. Mike Pence. Outwardly, they seem cordial enough, with Pence playing the good solider, dutifully defending Trump's many controversial remarks. But it's no love affair, either. In searching for an understudy, Trump over the summer reportedly narrowed his search to three finalists -- Pence, New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie and former House Speaker Newt Gingrich. Trump finally went with Pence. But he was so unenthusiastic about it that the night before the campaign's scheduled announcement he frantically called advisers and friends about how to reverse the decision. By that time, Pence was already ensconced in a New York hotel room, with the full expectation that he would be announced as Trump's choice. It was simply too late for a change. But a less-than-subtle signal about Trump's feelings came the next day when he spent a full 30 minutes talking before letting his running mate have a few words at the microphone. The Trump campaign rally theme song that then blared -- "You Can't Always Get What You Want" by The Rolling Stones -- seemed particularly apt for the moment. The lawsuit election Clinton's use of a private email server while secretary of state has led to a series of ongoing headaches in her 2016 campaign. While let off the hook by the FBI about whether she improperly dealt with classified material on an unprotected network, conservative critics are still on her case. And one group, Judicial Watch, has drawn a measure of political blood. The group filed a Freedom of Information Act lawsuit against the State Department in 2015, and in August, it released 296 pages of emails from the Democratic presidential nominee -- including 44 that Judicial Watch says were not previously handed over to the State Department by Clinton. The emails, many of which are heavily redacted, raise questions about the Clinton Foundation's influence on the State Department and its relations during her tenure. In one instance, top Clinton Foundation official Doug Band lobbied Clinton aides for a job for someone else in the State Department. In the email, Band tells Hillary Clinton's former aides at the department -- Cheryl Mills and Huma Abedin -- that it is "important to take care of (redacted)." Band is reassured by Abedin that "Personnel has been sending him options." The revelations haven't derailed Clinton's campaign -- but they weren't helpful, either. And the documents recall an early "West Wing" story arc including a conservative legal group, "Freedom Watch," which forces Bartlet administration senior staff members to testify in depositions about alleged White House drug use. The group's target is McGarry, a recovering drug addict and alcoholic. Freedom Watch obtains supposedly-private records from McGarry's treatment center. It forces McGarry, a former Labor secretary, into an embarrassing public admission. Even during "West Wing's" original run, Freedom Watch looked familiar. The fictionalized conservative watchdog group was, not surprisingly, based on Judicial Watch. The real life group has a long history with the Clintons, having filed lawsuits over 1990s-era controversies like the Vince Foster suicide. 
Chuck Schumer is sitting on a mountain of cash. And now he’s starting to dole it out to fellow Democrats who might make him majority leader. The New York senator is transferring $1 million to the Senate Democrats’ campaign arm on Tuesday. He’s also given $3.2 million to state parties over the past week, Democratic sources said. Story Continued Below Earlier this month, Schumer shifted an additional $2 million from his campaign war chest to the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee. Altogether in September, Schumer has transferred $6.2 million of the $27 million he has on hand to help Democratic hopefuls. Republicans control 54 seats, but Democrats are favored to win three back, so control of the chamber is seen as a toss-up. As the party begins making difficult decisions about where to spend and where to cut, a significant transfer from Schumer could go a long way. “The Kochs do not have a finite amount of money, they have unlimited money. We have a finite amount of money,” said Senate Minority Leader Harry Reid (D-Nev.) in an interview on Monday. “We’re just trying to allocate our resources so they’re meaningful to us and our candidates.” Schumer’s money could give Democrats some breathing room as they slash expensive ad buys in Florida and Ohio and eye instead cheaper races in North Carolina and Missouri. No one has more to gain from a Democratic takeover of the Senate than Schumer, who will ascend to the leader job in 2017 as Reid retires after a 12-year stint as party head. Schumer’s donation is both a vote of confidence in his party’s candidates and a reflection of Democrats’ future challenges. Democrats are defending 25 seats in 2018 compared with just eight GOP seats, so if Democrats come up short in November they are unlikely to take back the majority this decade. Schumer has also raised $2 million directly for candidates’ committees, and a joint account that he leads has collected $800,000 combined for the DSCC and individual candidates. He’s planning a fall event in New York to benefit Senate candidates that’s projected to bring in “upwards of another million,” according to a person close to the New York senator. “Schumer has been relentless,” said a DSCC official. Schumer and Reid have also appeared at numerous events for Senate Majority PAC, a super PAC backing Democratic Senate hopefuls run by former aides to Reid, including his onetime chief of staff, Susan McCue. The group, which can accept unlimited donations from donors, has spent more than $30 million this cycle. Democrats complain that Republican super PACs have far outspent them. “Leader Reid and Senator Schumer are working around the clock to raise awareness about the avalanche of money Republicans are pouring into Senate races through independent expenditures. The amounts are staggering,” McCue said in a statement. Schumer still will have roughly $20 million on hand after the transfer. He is up for reelection in New York, with the latest polls showing him trouncing his GOP challenger by more than 40 points. However, if past is prologue, Schumer is likely to spend some money on it despite token opposition. Schumer spent about $13 million in 2010, but that was a historically bad year for Democrats. Schumer’s colleagues won’t rule out the possibility that he’ll donate more to his party’s Senate takeover effort. “If he thinks it will make a difference, he’ll do it. He’s very calculating,” said a Democratic senator. “Chuck will be there if you need him.” Sen. Debbie Stabenow (D-Mich.), a close ally of Schumer, agreed that the presumptive Democratic leader might provide more. “He’s going to watch everything closely. It’s my sense he’s 1,000 percent committed to taking back the Senate,” Stabenow said. There’s no decision yet on where the DSCC might allocate the additional money from Schumer. It could go toward races in New Hampshire, Pennsylvania or Nevada, states that are all exceedingly close, or help compete in pricey Florida. Using the cash in red-leaning states is another option. “We’re going to make some tough decisions, which haven’t been made yet,” Reid said. The National Republican Senatorial Committee has been outraised by the DSCC to the tune of $36 million. Outside groups like the Senate Leadership Fund are making up the difference, but Republican officials are leaning on their rank and file to help fill the campaign coffers, with McConnell coming up with nearly $4 million in transfers thus far. Sen. John Thune (R-S.D.) made a big splash with a $2 million transfer, but even though he has millions more on hand, Thune said he’ll need to hang on to the rest of his cash. “I don’t think I can probably keep pace with Schumer,” Thune said in an interview. Republicans are now trying to wring every last bit out of their members, after Sen. Richard Shelby of Alabama spurned transferring any of his $10 million. Now the GOP hopes that NRSC Vice Chairs Dean Heller of Nevada and Tom Cotton of Arkansas may make a last-minute transfer. They have yet to give money directly to the group, GOP sources said, though they have helped raise funds directly for the NRSC. The third vice chair Joni Ernst of Iowa gave last week, an aide said Tuesday morning. Republicans, however, simply don’t have their own Chuck Schumer. Instead, they are relying on a tightening presidential race, deep-pocketed outside groups and candidates who are running far ahead of Trump to eke out a win. “He’s a machine,” Senate Majority Whip John Cornyn of Texas said of Schumer, his workout partner. But “it may not make a difference,” the Texan added.
The Donald Trump campaign has improved logistics for the traveling press following the candidate, putting the journalists in the motorcade and on a dedicated chase plane. Though reporters covering the Republican nominee will not necessarily travel at all times on the same plane as Trump, they will now be in a dedicated "chase" plane and will drive within the Trump motorcade. These moves will significantly improve travel for the media covering Trump, who last week were left behind when reporters got stuck in New York City traffic trying to get a different airport than the one Trump, whose motorcade cuts through traffic, was flying out of for an event in New Hampshire. Despite requests to wait for the traveling press, Trump started the event without his traveling press corps and mocked them for being late. Reporters will travel with Trump on his plane "when logistically feasible," the campaign said, according to one member of Trump's traveling press corps. Trump campaign spokeswoman Hope Hicks, when asked whether the improved logistics were in reaction to last week's problems, said the move "has been in the works for weeks." Neither campaign has a full protective pool, meaning reporters cover the candidate as the president is covered by the White House press corps, from leaving their residence to return. Hillary Clinton's press corps have a quasi-protective pool, and have been traveling with her on her plane and within her motorcade since the Labor Day holiday. However, her press corps is not with her at all times as was evidenced earlier this month when Clinton fell ill and left a 9/11 memorial service early, leaving the press corps behind and without information for nearly two hours.
Miami (CNN)A manufactured storyline. A promise of a "major statement." And an ulterior motive. Donald Trump on Friday pulled off his latest media stunt, scoring more than 20 minutes of free live TV time to tout the endorsement of more than a dozen veterans and to talk up his new hotel in Washington after he and his campaign had promised he would address his longstanding, controversial "birther" position. Then, he made a 67-word statement stating that he now believes President Barack Obama was born in the US, and quickly abandoned the podium -- leaving reporters bellowing questions into the ether. None of us were surprised. After all, Friday's circus was nothing short of standard operating procedure for the real estate mogul and his media-bashing campaign -- and just the latest example of how Trump fueled his political rise through his unparalleled mastery of the media. But this time, there weren't just a few shouted questions from reporters. Instead, Trump stepped away from the mic amid a cacophony of cheering supporters -- more than 100 of whom separated Trump from the press -- and reporters, some standing on chairs, shouting dozens of questions at the top of our lungs. "When did you change your mind about Obama being born in the US?" I shouted. "What took you so long to make this decision?" shouted another reporter. "Why won't you answer our questions?" And then, he's gone. Trump had just changed a signature position he's held for years with a few dozen words and no explanation of why he had suddenly changed his mind. And he also notched 51 days since his last news conference. The moment was emblematic of Trump's treatment of the press throughout the campaign -- particularly in the last 24 hours. Reporters covering this campaign -- as I have for the last 15 months -- have long grown used to Trump lobbing insults our way, shouts of "scum," "dishonest" and "disgusting" reverberating as thousands of his supporters, many of them snickering at the spectacle, turn toward the press pen, booing. Some of us have even come to expect a call from the would-be-president every so often to hear the candidate gripe about a particular article and shame us as "dishonest." But on Thursday night, Trump took his mistreatment of the press to new lows, taking the stage at a rally in New Hampshire moments before the traveling press corps' plane touched down in the state, and proceeding to mock us. "I have really good news for you. I just heard that the press is stuck on their airplane. They can't get there. I love it," Trump said, to his supporters' glee. We arrived for the last three minutes of his speech -- a circumstance caused by Trump's refusal to travel on the same plane as reporters covering his campaign, defying decades of precedent in the coverage of Democratic and Republican nominees. Trump boasts about dumping traveling press corps The event on Friday was his coup-de-grace. Having promised a "major statement," via Twitter, Trump talked up his hotel -- "under budget and ahead of schedule" -- and invited a parade of military veterans to come to the podium and tell the world why they were supporting Trump's presidential bid. The event was no longer about a Republican presidential nominee reversing his position on an issue supported by a fringe slice of America. It was about brave military men embracing this controversial figure, flaws and all. All the while, the cameras continued to roll, the remarks carried live on cable news in anticipation that Trump would clarify his position on birtherism as he had promised that morning. It's the kind of free, unfiltered media coverage that every politician dreams of, but few will ever grasp. Finally, after 28 minutes, Trump lifted the suspense and got to the point. He falsely claimed that his opponent Hillary Clinton "started the birther controversy" in 2008 and stated, matter-of-factly, that "President Barack Obama was born in the United States" -- something Obama proved beyond a shadow of a doubt in 2011 when he released his long-form birth certificate. He spent more time talking about his hotel than explaining how he was changing his position on the issue that skyrocketed him to national political prominence and earned him his earliest notes of support from the far-right. Trump laid his media trap the night before when his campaign put out a statement hours after a Washington Post interview published in which Trump declined to disavow his birther views. The interview took place a day earlier, but the campaign waited another day, until 12 hours before the event in Washington, to blast out a statement. It remains to be seen whether Trump's move helped him. CNN and Fox News cut away at points in the presentation. Networks spent the day talking about Trump's history as a birther. The Trump campaign had also previously billed a March campaign event as a possible news conference, only for the candidate to not take any questions. The event, which had been scheduled earlier, came just days after his campaign manager was accused of grabbing a reporter. Before Friday, the campaign's most recent deception came Wednesday when campaign advisers told reporters that Trump would not be releasing results of his latest medical exam on the "Dr. Oz" program. And then Trump did just that, with a reality show-style surprise. As we filed into the event hall for his rally Friday night, we were still nowhere closer to understanding why Trump had suddenly flip-flopped on birtherism. The campaign had ignored all our requests for comment. We hadn't had an opportunity to prod Trump on the when and why of his sudden change of heart, especially when he had declined to disavow the position just days earlier. But as we awaited the familiar sound of Lee Greenwood's "God Bless the USA," a more ominous tune played instead. It was a song from Broadway's "Les Misérables," the words "Les Deplorables" flashing on the screen above the stage, harkening to Clinton's comment about his supporters from earlier this month. I flicked at my iPhone, and powered on the video recorder. But moments later, Trump wondered aloud what would happen if Clinton's Secret Service detail were disarmed. And that was the news. 
NEW YORK – All politics is geopolitical in this year's presidential race -- and top Democrats and Republicans fear that will reshape America’s relationships around the world no matter who wins. This week, the uncertain state of those relationships will be on full display in New York as the United Nations General Assembly gathers and the presidential contenders stage meetings meant to project which alliances they favor and which expertise they want to claim. Story Continued Below On Monday, Hillary Clinton will meet with Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko—a clear dig at the developing partnership between Vladimir Putin and Donald Trump. She’ll also sit with Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe, her campaign announced Sunday night, rejecting the suggestion that her opponent is better positioned to guide the global economy or to counter the rise of China and North Korea while reminding Americans of Donald Trump’s suggestion that America should pull its support from Japan and South Korea. Clinton and Trump both have scheduled meetings with Egyptian President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi—an American ally, though one with dictatorial tendencies. The Democratic nominee set hers up first, aiming to project to voters that she’s up-to-speed on counter-terrorism and other issues roiling the region. Trump’s came second and was an attempt by Sisi to ensure even dealings, according to Egypt’s state news agency. Nonetheless it might offer the Republican nominee a chance to frame up a position on Middle East issues that goes beyond simply banning Muslim immigrants from America. Keeping presidential politics domestic has long been more stated tradition than reality: Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu not so subtly telegraphed support for Mitt Romney four years ago and Obama’s summer 2008 foreign tour was built around a 200,000-person rally in Berlin that was projected to voters at home that they should catch up to the forward-looking Europeans and support the upstart young senator. But none of this compares to the degree to which this year’s race is defined by global affairs – the result of the first former secretary of state in 200 years to be nominated for president and the challenges Trump has made throughout his campaign to fundamentals of American foreign policy. Clinton is already planning, if elected, to concentrate on convincing foreign capitals that Trump and the number of votes he gets in November isn’t a sign that they need to be worried about America turning away from them. “She’s very concerned,” said a Clinton aide. “There’s no doubt that when you have a major presidential candidacy saying what he’s said, it has an effect on foreign policy.” Certainly, presidential politics simply no longer stops at the water’s edge, and this year, it has lapped aggressively, perhaps dangerously, over America’s borders. “It will have lasting impact,” said Sen. Ben Cardin (D-Md.), the ranking member on the Foreign Relations Committee “It has been changed,” agreed Rep. Peter King (R-N.Y.), a former chairman of the Homeland Security Committee and a Trump supporter. “It gets a little bit risky when you try to bring foreign support into it.” There has been a long list of international never-befores in 2016, including Trump’s decision to accept an invitation from Mexico’s president and then commandeer a joint press conference at the presidential palace to declare America’s sovereign right to build a wall separating the two countries. And that’s hardly all. There was the alleged Russian-led hacking of Democratic campaign committees to dump emails and other information through WikiLeaks, Trump operatives pulling tougher language about the invasion of Crimea from the GOP party platform, Italian Prime Minister Matteo Renzi saying he’s personally rooting for Clinton, Vice President Joe Biden saying Trump doesn’t “understand” NATO on a trip to Latvia last month, President Barack Obama getting asked by foreign leaders for a year to weigh in on the presidential election. And just Friday, London Mayor Sadiq Khan, speaking in Chicago, accused Trump of “playing into the hands” of ISIL. Officials openly wonder what Clinton’s approach as president would be now to Mexican President Enrique Peña Nieto, or how quickly and forcefully NATO would restructure if Trump wins. What if China or Russia or North Korea moves to test the new president right after Inauguration Day? What if an international economic or humanitarian crisis erupts? While many in Washington’s diplomatic community say they have a clearer sense of how Clinton, as opposed to Trump, would want to respond, doubts are growing that either would be able to summon the national resolve to do. Her meetings this week are about twisting the knife politically on Trump, the aide acknowledged, but they’re also about thinking through what being on the job on Jan. 20 might entail. Take Poroshenko, who is rebuking Putin just by being in office: “It’s impossible not to read politics into it somewhat, but because of the way Trump’s been talking over the course of the campaign, Secretary Clinton thinks it’s important from a policy standpoint,” the aide said. If Trump wins, he’ll have to quickly confront leaders around the world who would be shocked that U.S. voters had elected him, and afraid that he would ushering in a new and dangerous world order. “They will certainly want to see where we’re coming from,” King said. “He will have to clarify and make it clear where he’s coming from.” If Clinton wins, she’ll have a clean-up that Cardin and others compare to the repair mission Obama first gave her as secretary of state after the global souring on George W. Bush. Cardin, who’s firmly behind Clinton, ran through a litany: sitting in Harare earlier in the year, watching Zimbabwean President Robert Mugabe laughing as the conversation turned from his own human rights abuses to Trump’s success, the conversations with leaders in bilateral meetings who quickly ditching the old diplomatic decorum to start griping, drinks afterward with officials who are even blunter. “Can you imagine if Trump were president and we’re trying to get a coalition against ISIL and we need to get the support of moderate Sunni states, and we need to do things that are perhaps against their local popular position? Can you imagine what Donald Trump’s comments about Muslims coming to America would have on a leader of a moderate Muslim state?” Cardin said. “It’s that type of problems that have now been caused.” This has all made for tricky travels for Obama, as he’s spent significant time abroad this year nailing down his foreign policy legacy as president as the campaign has intensified. Being abroad doesn’t stop people from asking for his take on Trump and the race, whether in closed bilateral meetings or at press conferences. Obama tends to draw his own line for where to stop himself, but critics and even occasionally his own aides can feel like he goes too far. “It's not a mystery to people overseas that Democrats and Republicans in the United States have their differences,” said a senior administration official. “So that's why leaders traveling overseas don't make as much of an effort to conceal it.” From the beginning of his presidency, Obama saw himself as embodying a generational shift in the world order, from shifting more of the burden in the Middle East to Arab nations to the kind of interlocking international effort that put sanctions on Putin and brought the Iranians to the nuclear negotiating table, to reopening Cuba. He’ll make that case and the case for going forward in his own speech to the U.N. General Assembly Tuesday morning. But the argument is going to be largely defined by who his successor is. Trump didn’t run his Mexico trip by the White House. Clinton didn’t run her meetings this week by the White House either. “We’re having a serious debate,” said Ivo Daalder, now the president of the Chicago Council on Global Affairs, and Obama’s first U.S. permanent representative to NATO. “We’re going to live with the consequences and the impact of the debate.”
In preparing for Donald Trump's rumble with Hillary Clinton on Monday night, campaign manager Kellyanne Conway said Wednesday that her team is "well acquainted" with footage of its adversary's past bouts on the debate stage, assessing the former secretary of state's approach as "so lengthy" and "so lawyerly." Clinton "got tripped up quite a bit" in the primary debates against Bernie Sanders, Conway remarked on Fox News Radio's "Kilmeade & Friends," suggesting that the former secretary of state was " trying to be a little bit more of a centrist, a little bit more of a moderate like her husband was, his winning formula in 1992, not realizing that the modern Democratic Party … would never welcome Bill Clinton 1992 now." Story Continued Below "It’s considerably to the left, so she was easily tripped up by Bernie Sanders on foreign policy, on her record of failures. We’re very aware of that," Conway said. "And of course, we’re very aware of Mr. Trump’s both style and his substance in these debates against these other Republicans. He started out at the Fox News debate on Aug. 6, 2015, dead center in the middle because he was leading in the polls, Brian, and he never left that place." Addressing people who "are questioning" Trump's preparation, Conway remarked that the candidates set to appear on stage at Hofstra University are "two very different people," pointing to the Commander in Chief Forum earlier this month as an example. After that event, Conway said, "all of the polls" said Trump beat Clinton. "Why? Well, her answers are so lengthy, they’re so lawyerly," Conway continued, noting that Clinton only received "six or seven questions ... that night because she just takes forever. She’s apologizing, she’s dissembling, she’s deflecting. Donald Trump’s answers are concise and they’re confident, and they’re pointed the way a leader, the way a leader answers questions, frankly." Asked whether upon reviewing the tapes she could ascertain a difference between Clinton's debate performances in the 2008 cycle and those eight years later, Conway said, "Clearly." "The 2008 Hillary Clinton had the confidence of a frontrunner. This was her race to lose. She was talking more about, remember, she was against same-sex marriage, she had been for closed borders in her career," she continued. "She was, I think at the time even for safe, legal and rare abortions the way her husband tried to pretend he was in the early ‘90s. In 2016, she tried to out-Sanders Sanders, and part of it is because again, how leftward her party has gone, away from the mainstream." Where Clinton had confidence against Barack Obama and other Democrats on stage in the 2008 cycle, the Clinton of 2016 was "easily flummoxed by Bernie Sanders," Conway said. The Clinton campaign, meanwhile, is concerned that moderators might hold the candidates to different standards of scrutiny. "I think that, my biggest concern is not a view of any moderator but just that people accommodate their questions and lower the bar of their questions to suit the candidate in front of them," communications director Jennifer Palmieri told reporters, going on to say that Trump has been asked easier questions "because he has not put forward detailed material, which you can … question him on." Thus, Palmieri continued, Trump "ends up getting much more one-dimensional, simple questions, and that is not what should be expected of somebody" participating in a debate for president of the United States. "And I think the moderators need to ask substantive questions, factual questions, and to keep them on even playing field even though he has failed to put forward the kinds of detailed or multi-tiered policy positions as she has," Palmieri added.
Hillary Clinton’s decision to stand by her husband and attack former White House intern Monica Lewinsky when news of a sexual relationship between the two broke in 1998 prove that the former secretary of state is “too stupid to be president,” Rudy Giuliani said Monday night. The former New York City mayor made the remark, captured on video and posted to Twitter by Elite Daily writer Alexandra Svokos, in response to a question about Clinton’s attack on Trump’s past comments about women. Giuliani defended Trump, labeling him a “feminist” because of how he treats the women he employs, and said he would have responded to Clinton’s attacks much more harshly than the GOP nominee did. Story Continued Below “I sure would’ve talked about what she did to Monica Lewinsky, what that woman standing there did to Monica Lewinsky, trying to paint her as an insane young woman when in fact Monica Lewinsky was an intern,” Giuliani said. “The president of the United States, her husband, disgraced this country with what he did in the Oval Office and she didn’t just stand by him, she attacked Monica Lewinsky. And after being married to Bill Clinton for 20 years, if you didn’t know the moment Monica Lewinsky said that Bill Clinton violated her that she was telling the truth, then you’re too stupid to be president.” Trump himself said Monday night and again Tuesday morning that he had considered raising the former president’s history of marital infidelities as a response to the former secretary of state’s attacks. He opted against it, he said, because the couple’s daughter, Chelsea Clinton, was in attendance and he though such an attack would be in poor taste. The Manhattan billionaire did not rule out leveling such an attack at future debates. “Well, I may hit her harder certain ways,” he told Fox News Tuesday morning. “I really eased up because I didn't want to hurt anybody's feelings. So, I may hit her harder in certain ways.”
Washington (CNN)Former "Miss Universe" Alicia Machado said she cried when she heard Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton talk about her during the first presidential debate at Hofstra University Monday. "Well, last night I was with my family, with my mom and with my daughter, we were watching the debate and you know, I was really surprised," she said in Spanish during a phone call with reporters set up by the Clinton campaign. "And I started crying. I started crying because I never imagined that such an important person like her would care about my story, know about my story." Machado was referencing a moment during the debate when Clinton slammed Donald Trump's for his past comments toward women -- which has become a key campaign issue that hits on his vulnerabilities with both Hispanics and women. "And one of the worst things he said was about a woman in a beauty contest -- he loves beauty contests, supporting them and hanging around them -- and he called this woman 'Miss Piggy,' then he called her 'Miss Housekeeping' because she was Latina," Clinton had said. She continued: "Donald, she has a name. Her name is Alicia Machado. And she has become a US citizen and you can bet she is going to vote this November." Trump, seemingly caught off-guard, repeatedly interjected: "Where did you find this?" Clinton, according to aides, had been prepped on Machado's story going into the debate and aimed to use it as a way to counter sexism on Trump's part. The Democratic nominee's campaign quickly turned the exchange into what they hoped would be a lasting moment: They published a video about the former beauty pageant winner shortly after the debate, in addition to holding the press call. "I lament that I could be an uncomfortable person for Mr. Trump, but that's how things were," Machado said in the phone call. "And I know very well what's he's capable of, this man. And that's why I am fighting to make the community understand, now more than ever, that Latinos need to support the US, that we need to return all the beautiful and grand things the US has provided for us." When asked how the back-and-forth has played with Spanish speaking media, a Clinton aide had a one-word response: "H-U-G-E." On Tuesday, Trump refused to back down from his criticism of Machado, telling "Fox and Friends" in an interview that Machado had "gained a massive amount of weight and it was a real problem." "She was the winner and you know, she gained a massive amount of weight and it was a real problem. We had a real problem," Trump said. "Not only that, her attitude, and we had a real problem with her, so Hillary went back into the years and she found this girl -- this was many years ago. And found the girl and talked about her like she was Mother Theresa. And it wasn't quite that way but that's OK. Hillary has to do what she has to do." Beauty queen encouraged to lose weight Machado competed and won the "Miss Universe" title representing Venezuela in 1996 when she was 19 years old -- but then she gained nearly 60 pounds, according to a CNN report at the time. "Some people when they have pressure eat too much. Like me. Like Alicia," Trump said at the time. He was then executive producer of the Miss Universe Pageant. In 1997, rumors surfaced that Machado would be forced to give up her Miss Universe crown -- but Trump said he wouldn't let it happen, according to the CNN report. "We had a choice of: termination or do this," he said at the time. "We wanted to do this." By "this," he meant encourage her to lose weight. Machado told Inside Edition in May that she actually gained closer to 15 pounds and that Trump called her "Miss Housekeeping," because she is Latina, and "Miss Piggy." It made her feel "so fat" that it made her "very depressed," she said. Trump told the New York Times that he pushed her to lose weight. "To that, I will plead guilty," he said." But Machado said that she was affected by the comments. "After that episode, I was sick, had anorexia and bulimia for five years," she said. "Over the past 20 years, I've gone to a lot of psychologists to combat this." On Monday, after the presidential debate, she tweeted in Spanish, "Thank you Mrs. Hillary Clinton your respect for women and our differences make you great! I'm with you!" She later tweeted, "I received my passport ! I'm ready to vote For my country for you @HillaryClinton for my daughter For women workers". CNN's Dan Merica and David Wright contributed to this report.
The Axe Files, featuring David Axelrod, is a podcast distributed by CNN and produced at the University of Chicago Institute of Politics. The author works for David Axelrod. Chicago (CNN)The Republican Party of 2016 has strayed so far from its principles that even Ronald Reagan would be unable to navigate his way through its thorny politics, according to Michael Steele, who was Republican National Committee chairman from 2009 to 2011 and is now a political analyst for MSNBC. "Ronald Reagan, if he were a candidate running for any office today, would not win a Republican primary," Steele said to David Axelrod on "The Axe Files" podcast, produced by the University of Chicago Institute of Politics and CNN. "Because the things that he would espouse, the policies, the values, the principles that he would lay out there, would be rejected," Steele said, before describing Reagan's position on taxes and immigration that would now be viewed as anathema to many Republicans. Instead of speaking to issues that have a real impact on people's lives, Steele sees a Republican Party that's grappling with a nominee who uses his national platform to focus on "nonsensical" issues like President Barack Obama's birth certificate, a matter that Steele bluntly called "bullshit racism." Whether Donald Trump wins or loses in November, Steele predicts that the tensions within the party will go unresolved. "The Trump supporters will say, 'You didn't support him, that's why we lost.' That's a fight. The corporate class will say, 'God, why did we nominate him? That's why we lost.' (Capitol) Hill and the political class will say the same. The activists will be further dismayed and frustrated." But Steele doesn't see this problem as being unique to Republicans. He views Bernie Sanders's candidacy as a manifestation of a similar tension between establishment figures and a progressive faction that wants to pull the party further to the left. "The last time I checked, Bernie Sanders was not going away," Steele said. "His millennial voters are pissed. They have transformed the party internally, operationally, through its (policy) platform. That is not Hillary Clinton's platform," Steele said, before predicting, "More fun to come." To hear the whole conversation with Steele, which also covered the racism he encountered during his 2002 campaign for Lieutenant Governor of Maryland, his views on what it means to be a leader, and the lessons he applied from Howard Dean and Obama that helped Republicans capture the House in 2010, click on http://podcast.cnn.com. To get "The Axe Files" podcast every week, subscribe at http://itunes.com/theaxefiles.  
Election Day may be more than six weeks away but, starting today, some voters can cast votes at a physical polling place as statewide in-person, no-excuse voting gets underway in Minnesota and South Dakota. With more than two-thirds of states offering some kind of early voting, the practice will trend upward in 2016, as it has in recent decades, and will play a major factor in battleground state ballots, some election experts predict. An estimated 34 percent of voters will vote early, according to Michael McDonald, a political science professor at the University of Florida and fellow at the Brookings Institution. The steep climb in early voting has resulted from states’ making early voting more widely available, along with incremental year-to-year increases as voters become more familiar with early-vote procedures, McDonald told ABC News. Watch the first presidential debate on ABC News and ABCNews.com at 9 p.m. ET. on Monday.     While all states offer absentee voting, 37 states and Washington, D.C., will allow some form of early in-person voting this year before Election Day, according to the National Conference of State Legislatures. Early voting comprises both early absentee voting and early in-person voting. New York, South Carolina and Michigan are among the states that don't allow early, no-excuse voting. Voting early offers flexibility and convenience to voters who may not be able to show up to the polls on Nov. 8, or prefer to avoid long lines on Election Day. Whatever the motivation, early voting is likely to make up a significant chunk of the total vote in some key battleground states, Josh Putnam of the election blog Frontloading HQ told ABC News. He expects large early turnout in Florida, Georgia, Iowa, Nevada and North Carolina. High early-vote turnout in battleground states is borne out by data from the previous elections. In 2012, early voting made up more than half the overall vote in Florida, Nevada and North Carolina. In Georgia, early voting accounted for 48 percent of the overall 2012 vote, and in Iowa that percent grew to 43 percent in 2012, up from 35 percent in 2008. While Ohio traditionally does not have a big early vote, more than 524,000 absentee ballots had been requested as of this week, according to The Associated Press. That marks an 8 percent increase of 40,000 compared to this time in the last presidential election. Early voting in Ohio in 2012 and 2008 comprised some 30 percent of the overall vote. Watch the first presidential debate Monday at 9 p.m. ET. Full live coverage and analysis of the debate will begin on ABCNews.com/Live at 7 p.m. ET.
Bill Clinton defended his wife and the Clinton Foundation in an interview that aired Monday, saying he trusted the State Department to make sure there wasn’t a conflict of interest between the foundation’s donors and Hillary Clinton’s work at State. “I trusted the State Department wouldn't do anything they shouldn't do, from a meeting to a favor,” the former president said in an interview with NPR. Story Continued Below He said some donors may have given to the foundation to build a relationship with the Clintons, but most contributed because they supported the work of the foundation. “Melinda Gates didn't get involved in the No Ceilings project with Hillary because she needed to support her, or me, or the foundation for access,” he said. Clinton also suggested that his wife’s unpopularity with voters is due in part to the negative coverage of the ongoing email scandal. “They're responding to the fact that this email thing was treated like the most important event since the end of World War II,” he said. “I wonder if there's a man in America that could have taken what she's been through in the last year and a half.”
If not for the presidency, Bobby Knight is pushing Donald Trump for sainthood. “I actually enjoyed the day with Saint Donald and I've enjoyed watching him. I've really enjoyed watching him, I think go about things the way that he thought things should be.,” the legendary basketball coach said Friday on “Fox & Friends,” echoing a sobriquet he has begun using for the Republican nominee in recent days. “I think the man has a lot of really, really good things to bring to the table.” Story Continued Below Remarking upon Trump’s transformation as a presidential candidate, the famously hot-headed Hall of Fame coach said he was not sure if he would say the boastful businessman has become “milder.” “But I just have seen him take a different approach to how things should be and go about attacking things and what's wrong,” Knight said. “I've really been impressed with the interest that he has in seeing that things are done in the right way.” Asked whether he had discussed the ongoing unrest in Charlotte, North Carolina, after police shot and killed an African-American man, Knight replied, “Not really.” “I mean that's -- you know, what is there to say?” he remarked. “It was wrong. It was—You know, you could go forever. That was not something that we really directed our attention to.” As far as what the two did discuss, Knight made note of Trump’s business records and ability to solve problems. “And that's what I think is the most important thing he brings to this job. The guy is going -- hey, this isn't working, we got to figure out what's wrong with this and we got to get this straightened out,” Knight said. “That, to me, is what being president is all about, and I don't think -- has there ever been a president that hasn't had problems?” The best president at that “might have been Reagan,” Knight said, adding, “that’s what Donald Trump brings to the table.” When it comes to Hillary Clinton’s assertion that Trump lacks the temperament to be commander in chief, Knight invoked his favorite presidents to argue the opposite. “Well, I think that being pretty strong willed is a pretty good asset to have,” he added. “I mean, who had -- has there ever been a president that was better than Harry Truman and Harry Truman had a damn good temperament.”
Hillary Clinton didn't hold back in her attacks on Donald Trump Monday night, but Donald Trump intimated that he pulled a key punch — passing on making a reference to Bill Clinton's past infidelities. “I was going to say something extremely rough to Hillary, to her family, and I said to myself, I can't do it,” Trump said in reply. “It's inappropriate. It's not nice.” Story Continued Below Trump's veiled reference followed a tough attack from Clinton, who referenced his past comments about women being “pigs” and “dogs” and said Trump “loves hanging around beauty contests” during Monday night’s debate. “He tried to switch from looks to stamina. But this is a man who has called women pigs, slobs and dogs,” Clinton said. Trump also said that Clinton has been hitting him “with tremendous commercials. Some of it's in entertainment.” Trump added that Rosie O’Donnell, the focus of some of his comments has “been very tough to me.” Clinton has spent “hundreds of millions of dollars on negative ads ... many of which are untrue, and they're misrepresentations, and I will tell you this, Lester, it's not nice, and I don't deserve that, but it's certainly not a nice thing that she's done,” Trump added. “I’m very happy that I was able to hold back on the indiscretions with respect to Bill Clinton,” Trump told reporters after the debate. “Because I have a lot of respect for Chelsea Clinton and I just didn’t want to say what I was going to say.” And what exactly, a reporter asked, was that going to be? “I’ll tell you maybe at the next debate, we’ll see,” he responded.
Hillary Clinton’s campaign is making one plea ahead of Monday night’s big debate: Don’t let Donald Trump get away with it. And Trump’s campaign is firing right back, arguing that the press is biased against the Republican nominee and, in any case, Clinton’s team is just trying to “game the refs.” Story Continued Below The debate is playing out against a backdrop of polls that indicate a tightening White House race, with Trump drawing even or ahead in national and battleground-state surveys. Polling averages now show that Clinton’s post-convention lead has evaporated, and no less a guru than Nate Silver declared on Monday morning that the race is a “dead heat.” “The latest polling is consistent with a Clinton lead of only ~1% nationally. State firewall breaking up. Trend lines awful,” Silver tweeted. During the critical hours of expectation-setting ahead of the 9 p.m. showdown at Hofstra University, both camps claimed their candidate would be held to an unfair standard, with Clinton’s aides explicitly requesting that moderator Lester Holt fact-check Trump in real time. “We are concerned that Donald Trump may lie, he may throw misinformation out there, and that Hillary will have to spend all of her time trying to correct the record rather than talking about the things she wants to accomplish,” Clinton campaign manager Robby Mook told “CBS This Morning,” adding that all the campaign is asking of Holt is that if Trump lies, “that that simply be checked.” “The thing that concerns us is not the moderator themselves, who have been selected by the commission, because they will be seen as fair and even-handed. What bothers us, Mark, is the very public and very coordinated attempt to game the refs," Trump campaign manager Kellyanne Conway shot back in an interview on MSNBC. But Conway was soon put in the awkward position of defending Trump’s claim that Holt may be unfair to him because he’s a Democrat and the system is “very unfair.” The “NBC Nightly News” anchor has been a registered Republican in New York since 2003. “I don’t know that he knew what Lester Holt’s voter registration was,” said Conway, who went on to dodge multiple queries of why Trump lied. “He didn’t lie,” Conway said at one point, explaining that “a lie would mean that he knew the man’s party registration.” In a presidential cycle that’s seen endless debates about debates, Monday’s theme was conflicting interpretations of what it means to be a moderator. After suggesting a debate with no moderator, Trump has already signaled to Holt that he shouldn’t try to be Candy Crowley, who famously injected herself into the 2012 presidential debate between President Barack Obama and Mitt Romney with a fact-check of the GOP nominee. But Clinton’s campaign has beat up on Holt’s NBC colleague Matt Lauer, who was widely panned in the media for allowing Trump’s false assertion that he didn’t support the Iraq war go unchecked during a national security forum earlier this month. The nonpartisan Commission on Presidential Debates, which selected the debate sites and moderators, weighed in Sunday. “In our history, the moderators have found it appropriate to let the candidates be the ones that talk about the accuracy or the fairness of what the other candidate or candidates might have said,” Janet Brown, the commission’s executive director, told CNN’s “Reliable Sources.” When it comes to fact-checking, Brown warned, “I don’t think it’s a good idea to get the moderator into essentially serving as the Encyclopedia Britannica.” For her part, Clinton won’t let Trump’s lies “go by the wayside,” press secretary Brian Fallon told CNN on Monday, insisting that Holt shouldn’t, either. “There is enough lies that Donald Trump tells consistently that everyone, by now, should be able to call them out,” he said. “Lester Holt, Hillary Clinton will, too, but I think that even the observers and reporters tonight watching that are grading the two candidates’ performances should take it into account. By now, we all know he likes to lie about his record when it comes to the Iraq war, he lies about his support for the intervention in Libya, he lies about who started birtherism, he lies on any different number of issues and he tells them so frequently that we all know them now. If he says them again, that should be disqualifying. He can’t possibly be given a passing grade if he repeats those lies.” Former Trump campaign manager Corey Lewandowski, a paid CNN contributor who is still receiving severance from the Trump campaign, dismissed the idea that a fact-checking moderator is of any concern. “I think what the concern is from both of the campaigns — and what it should be — is that the moderator is not the person who’s running for president of the United States. So I think you let the candidates debate, you let the candidates answer,” he said. “You can hold people accountable, there’s no question, but I don’t think it’s the role of the moderator to inject themselves in so they’re making themselves part of the debate structure and people are talking about the moderator after the debate.” Trump’s campaign, including his former aide Lewandowski, also pushed the narrative that Clinton is robotic. That charge was leveled in response to the Clinton camp’s preparation for two Trumps. “We don’t want Donald Trump’s lies and distortions to be a distraction. We’re hoping that can get checked so that Hillary can focus her time on what she wants to do,” Mook told NBC’s “Today.” Asked about Clinton’s rules of engagement versus Trump, Mook added that “it just depends on what Donald Trump shows up to the debate, and we just don’t know that.” But Conway shot down the notion that there’s any other Trump, while echoing the criticism that the former secretary of state lacks human compassion. Lewandowski cast Clinton as a policy wonk whose challenge is “to become human” during the debate, senior communications adviser Jason Miller tweeted that “Overprogramming leads to short circuits,” and Conway joined the pile-on. “He’s not going to be robotic and scripted. Hillary Clinton is,” Conway said. “And that’s a problem in debates likes this because people want to see a future commander in chief and president of the United States who is nimble and resilient and can answer questions that haven’t been pre-programmed in their head through all this secretive debate prep and mock debates.” After Mook warned against “a double standard where Donald Trump can get the Most Improved award but Hillary Clinton, you know, is getting judged on the fine points of policy,” Conway added that the two campaign managers “are living in parallel universes.” “I mean, Donald Trump has been criticized all weekend long. I think that the Clinton campaign has clearly been gaming the refs, has been talking to the media for a week now saying it’s your job to make sure that Donald Trump is fact-checked in real-time,” she said. “I'm just surprised a campaign manager would try to lower expectations that dramatically for his own candidate. But look, they know that campaign debates are not Hillary Clinton's sweet spot. Yes, she's experienced at doing them, but the experience hasn’t necessarily been beneficial.” Aside from how Holt will moderate, Conway cited pre-written narratives and what she claimed was Clinton’s willingness to say anything to get elected as her top concerns. “I’m worried that some of the headlines are already written, that they’re conclusions in search of evidence,” Conway said, adding that newspapers and reporters have already begun trying to undercut Trump ahead of the debate. “What I would ask you all to do is start looking at the Twitter feeds of, quote, objective reporters, particularly our embeds. These are not profiles in courage, and this is not journalism. There are people who cover our campaign who actually just slander our candidate on Twitter,” Conway said. “Ninety-two percent of at least two of our embeds’ tweets are negative towards Donald Trump. Why are they on our campaign plane? Why are they covering our campaign? ... Excuse the Trump campaign if we feel like we can’t get a fair shake from certain people.” Conway also indicated that Clinton may play the woman card, skewing headlines that take away from the real estate mogul’s performance. “So if she ends up saying to him, ‘That’s just not true, you’re distorting my record, you’re being mean to a woman,’ and then people will say, ‘He was mean to a woman,’ and the headlines will scream and Twitter will blow up — even if it’s not true,” she said. “So that would be my concern, that he’s not able to get out all of his responses because, as Joe [Scarborough] correctly points out, people are so worried that she’s not a great debater, that she’s not really ready for tonight the way he is, that she’s going to try to interrupt him and confuse the people watching in such a way that he was somehow rude to a woman and he somehow lied on the stage.” Rudy Giuliani, the former New York mayor and a prominent Trump surrogate, said he had advised Trump to "just let loose" and be himself — and not try to compete with Clinton's detailed policy expertise. "She's been in government since I was a child. I don't remember a time she hasn't been in government in one way or another," Giuliani said on "Fox and Friends." "So she's going to have obviously more specific knowledge than he has, but I think he's going to comport himself very, very well, and he's going to be — he's just going to be like you see him on — when he comes here [on Fox News] and when you talk to him on the phone. He's going to be Donald Trump."
(CNN)Mike Pence will attend Monday's presidential debate, an adviser to the vice presidential candidate told CNN. The Indiana governor's running mate, Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump, will face Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton at Hofstra University in New York in the first of their three face-offs. It's unusual for a VP hopeful to attend a presidential debate. Since presidential debates resumed in 1976, running mates have generally watched their top-of-the-ticket partners from a distance, such as at campaign headquarters or via television surrounded by friends, family and supporters. The adviser said the decision wasn't so much a strategy move, as Pence "likes to be there for Mr. Trump in big moments." This adviser was not sure if the Indiana governor would attend the "spin room," where candidates and their campaigns address the media, after the debate. Pence links up with his running mate weekly for key policy speeches and appearances. Pence introduced Trump during two events on Wednesday in the battleground state of Ohio. 
Ivanka Trump now has her own Secret Service protection, sources familiar with the matter tell ABC News. Before now, Trump's adult children only received protection while physically near the candidate. But Ivanka Trump will now receive Secret Service protection assigned to her directly. Earlier this month, Chelsea Clinton received her own Secret Service protection, as well. Donald Trump Jr. and Eric Trump still do not have their own protection, as of the latest information.
Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan chalked up Donald Trump’s proposal to ban Muslims from entering the U.S. to simple political posturing and said that such a plan would not be “remotely possible.” Speaking through a translator in an interview with MSNBC, Erdoğan was asked if Trump’s campaign rhetoric would prompt him to advise Turkish citizens, most of whom are Muslim, not to visit the U.S. if the Manhattan billionaire wins the White House. He responded by saying he thinks such a ban would never actually come to fruition. Story Continued Below “Well, I don't think that this is remotely possible because politics is a marathon and it's a long process,” he said. “Many things can be said throughout the rallies before elections and things will turn out to be very different post-elections. No political figure, no politician in this world is confined to their own local grounds.” Trump has backed away from that Muslim ban, first introduced during the Republican primary, in favor of a ban on all immigration from nations compromised by terrorism. In some speeches and interviews, he has said he would ban immigration from all nations where sufficient vetting cannot occur. Erdoğan was also asked which candidate, Trump or Democrat Hillary Clinton, would be have the better relationship with Turkey if elected, a question he refused to answer. “Well, you are entrapping me. I'm not going to fall into that trap,” Erdoğan said. “The best thing for me is to see the will of the people being served in the United States, the choice of the American people will be the right choice. I believe democracy more than anything else.”
NEW YORK — Police released a photo of a 28-year-old immigrant wanted for questioning Monday in bombings that rocked a Manhattan neighborhood and a New Jersey shore town, and New York's governor and mayor said the blasts are looking increasingly like an act of terrorism with a foreign connection. Ahmad Khan Rahami, a naturalized U.S. citizen from Afghanistan with an address in Elizabeth, New Jersey, should be considered armed and dangerous, New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio said in one of a series of TV appearances just minutes after the photo was released. Story Continued Below In addition to the blast in Manhattan's Chelsea neighborhood on Saturday, a pipe bomb exploded in a New Jersey shore town before a charity 5K race and an unexploded pressure cooker device was found blocks away from the explosion site in Chelsea. On Sunday, five explosive devices were discovered at an Elizabeth train station. New Jersey State Police said Monday, citing the FBI, that the bombings in Chelsea and the New Jersey shore town Seaside Park were connected. No one was injured in the Jersey blast. New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo said as investigators gathered information they learned there were "certain commonalities among the bombs," leading authorities to believe "that there was a common group behind the bombs." "We want to get this guy in for questioning," de Blasio said on CNN. "We need the facts to be able to piece all this together. ... I think we're going to know a lot more in the course of the day. Things are moving very quickly." Early Monday, FBI agents swarmed an apartment above a fried chicken restaurant in Elizabeth that's tied to Rahami. The activity came hours after one of five devices found at the nearby Elizabeth train station exploded while a bomb squad robot attempted to disarm it. No one was injured. Saturday night's blast in the bustling Chelsea neighborhood injured 29 people, and another unexploded device made out of pressure cooker was found several blocks away. In the immediate aftermath of that bombing, de Blasio and Cuomo were careful to say there was no evidence of a link to international terrorism. Both said Monday that appears to be changing. "The more we learn with each passing hour, is it looks more like terrorism," de Blasio said in a later interview on NY1 News. Cuomo, in a separate interview on MSNBC, said: "Today's information suggests it may be foreign related but we'll see where it goes. ... My operating premise is anytime, anywhere, seven days a week you could have an incident like this." The White House said President Barack Obama was briefed throughout the night and early Monday on the investigation into bombs found in New York City and New Jersey. Spokesman Josh Earnest said Obama will comment publicly later Monday. On Sunday night, FBI agents in Brooklyn stopped "a vehicle of interest" in the investigation of the Manhattan explosion, according to FBI spokeswoman Kelly Langmesser. She wouldn't provide further details, but a government official and a law enforcement official who were briefed on the investigation told The Associated Press that five people in the car were being questioned at an FBI building in Manhattan. The officials spoke on condition of anonymity because they were not authorized to talk about the ongoing investigation. No one has been charged, and the investigation is continuing, Langmesser said. Cuomo, touring the site of Saturday's blast in Chelsea, said the unexploded pressure cooker device appeared "similar in design" to the bomb that exploded in Chelsea. On Sunday, a federal law enforcement official said the Chelsea bomb contained a residue of Tannerite, an explosive often used for target practice that can be picked up in many sporting goods stores. The discovery of Tannerite may be important as authorities probe whether the two New York City devices and the pipe bomb at the Jersey shore are connected. Cellphones were discovered at the site of both bombings, but no Tannerite residue was identified in the New Jersey bomb remnants, in which a black powder was detected, said the official, who wasn't authorized to comment on an ongoing investigation and spoke to the AP on condition of anonymity. The pipe bomb exploded Saturday in Seaside Park, New Jersey, before a charity 5K race to benefit Marines and sailors. The race was canceled and no one was injured. The bombings in New York City and New Jersey happened the same day that a man stabbed and injured nine people at a Minnesota mall before an off-duty police officer fatally shot him. The St. Cloud police chief said the man reportedly made at least one reference to Allah and asked a victim if he or she was Muslim before attacking. The Islamic State group has claimed responsibility.
Italian Prime Minister Matteo Renzi joked on Monday that his wife was looking forward to seeing former President Bill Clinton in a new role as first gentleman at the next G-7 meeting, scheduled for next May in Sicily. Renzi’s joke came at the end of a forum hosted by the Clinton Global Initiative, moderated by the former president and featuring not just the Italian prime minister but also Argentinean President Mario Macri, London Mayor Sadiq Khan and Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala, the chair of Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance and a former Nigerian finance minister. Story Continued Below “Mr. President, also [in] the name of my friends, only one thing, thirty seconds to give this message,” Renzi said after asking Clinton to make one final point at the end of the issues-based discussion. “Those issues will be discussed in the next G-7 in Italy in May 2017 in Sicily. My wife waits for you as first gentlemen in G-7, in G-7 meeting.” Macri quickly jumped in, adding that he looked forward to seeing Clinton at the next G-20 meeting in 2018. If Clinton’s wife Hillary Clinton is elected to the White House, it remains somewhat unknown which, if any, of the traditional first lady roles that the former president would absorb. The Democratic nominee has indicated that her husband might be charged with working on economic issues but also said he would not be given a cabinet-level position.
The U.S. Attorney’s Office in Manhattan is investigating Anthony Weiner’s alleged sexting with a minor, according to two officials briefed on the case. An inquiry was opened, although no formal complaint has been filed. Federal officials have issued a subpoena for Weiner’s cell phone records. Federal prosecutors will not confirm nor deny the existence of an investigation, per Justice Department policy. The investigation was first reported yesterday by the Daily Mail. Asked for comment at an unrelated press conference, New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo said, "If the reports are true, it's possibly criminal and it is sick. And frankly, I’ve heard enough about Anthony Weiner and I think that goes for all New Yorkers."
(CNN)A federal appeals court ruled Friday that Ohio's method of removing names from its voter rolls violates federal law, and sent the case back to the district court for a remedy. The ruling by the Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals is a victory for the American Civil Liberties Union of Ohio and other groups who had argued the program violated the National Voter Registration Act and expressed concern that the purge would effect "many thousands" of Ohio voters. They hope the lower court will move quickly to direct that names that were improperly removed should be put back on the voting list or that voters not on the list be allowed to file a provisional ballot. The appeals court said that Ohio's so-called "Supplemental Process," where "a voter is purged from the rolls after six years of inactivity -- even if he or she did not move and otherwise remains eligible to vote," is in violation of the NVRA. "We are very happy that the court found that (Secretary of State Jon Husted's) process of purging voters in Ohio is illegal and must stop," Mike Brickner, Senior Policy Director at the ACLU, said in a statement. "We don't believe that any voters should be removed from the rolls simply because they haven't voted in a few elections." Friday's ruling reverses a district court ruling that had gone in favor of Secretary of State Jon Husted. The lower court had held that Ohio's "public interest is being served" and that the "procedures of maintaining the voter registration rolls ensure the integrity of the election process. " In a statement, Husted said the ruling "overturns 20 years of Ohio law and practice, which has been carried out by the last four secretaries of state, both democrat and republican." He questioned how the lower court -- charged with finding an appropriate remedy -- will proceed. "It is one thing to strike down a longstanding procedure; it is another to craft a workable remedy. To that end, if the final resolution requires us to reinstate voting eligibility to individuals who have died or moved out of Ohio, we will appeal." 
TULSA, Okla. — Prosecutors charged a white Oklahoma police officer with first-degree manslaughter Thursday, less than a week after she fatally shot an unarmed black man on a city street and just days after police released graphic videos, saying in court documents that the officer "reacted unreasonably." Tulsa County District Attorney Steve Kunzweiler charged Tulsa officer Betty Shelby in the Sept. 16 shooting death of 40-year-old Terence Crutcher. Kunzweiler said arrangements were being made for Shelby's surrender. Story Continued Below Shelby "reacted unreasonably by escalating the situation from a confrontation with Mr. Crutcher, who was not responding to verbal commands and was walking away from her with his hands held up, becoming emotionally involved to the point that she over reacted," according to an affidavit filed with the charge. The swift action in Tulsa stood in contrast to Charlotte, North Carolina, where police refused under mounting pressure Thursday to release video of the shooting of another black man this week and the National Guard was called in to try to a head off a third night of violence. Demonstrations in Tulsa since Crutcher's death have been consistently peaceful. Dashcam and aerial footage of the shooting and its aftermath showed Crutcher walking away from Shelby with his arms in the air. The footage does not offer a clear view of when Shelby fired the single shot that killed Crutcher. Her attorney has said Crutcher was not following police commands and that Shelby opened fire when the man began to reach into his SUV window. But Crutcher's family immediately discounted that claim, saying the father of four posed no threat to the officers. They also pointed to an enlarged photo from police footage that appears to show Crutcher's window was rolled up. And police said Crutcher did not have gun on him or in his vehicle. An affidavit filed Thursday says Shelby told police homicide investigators that "she was in fear for her life and thought Mr. Crutcher was going to kill her. When she began following Mr. Crutcher to the vehicle with her duty weapon drawn, she was yelling for him to stop and get on his knees repeatedly." Crutcher was wearing "baggy clothes" but that Shelby "was not able to see any weapons or bulges indicating a weapon was present," the affidavit states. Among the definitions in Oklahoma for first-degree manslaughter is a killing "perpetrated unnecessarily either while resisting an attempt by the person killed to commit a crime, or after such attempt shall have failed." If convicted, Shelby could face a minimum of four years in prison. Tulsa Mayor Dewey Bartlett said police worked quickly to provide Kunzweiler with the information he needed to decide whether to charge the officer. "I appreciate their efforts as well as the District Attorney's usual thorough evaluation of the rules of law for which we are all accountable," Bartlett said in a written statement. "These are important steps to ensure that justice and accountability prevails. "We will continue to be transparent and ensure the system carries out its responsibility to provide justice." Shelby, who joined the Tulsa Police Department in December 2011, was en route to a domestic violence call when she encountered Crutcher's vehicle abandoned on a city street, straddling the center line. Shelby did not activate her patrol car's dashboard camera, so no footage exists of what first happened between the two before other officers arrived. The police footage shows Crutcher approaching the driver's side of the SUV, then more officers walk up and Crutcher appears to lower his hands and place them on the vehicle. A man inside a police helicopter overhead says: "That looks like a bad dude, too. Probably on something." Police Sgt. Dave Walker has said investigators found a vial of the drug PCP in Crutcher's vehicle. Shelby's attorney, Scott Wood, has said that Shelby completed drug-recognition expert training and thought Crutcher was acting like he might be under the influence of PCP. Attorneys for Crutcher's family said the family didn't know whether drugs were found in the SUV, but that even if they were, it wouldn't justify the shooting. A toxicology report could take several weeks. In the videos, the officers surround Crutcher and he suddenly drops to the ground. A voice heard on police radio says: "Shots fired!" The officers back away and Crutcher is left unattended on the street for about two minutes before an officer puts on medical gloves and begins to attend to him. "The tragic circumstances surrounding the death of Mr. Crutcher are on the hearts and minds of many people in this community," Kunzweiler said. "It's important to note that despite the heightened tensions felt by all, which seemingly beg for an emotional response and reaction, our community has consistently demonstrated the willingness to respect the judicial process." At least two dozen people gathered outside the courthouse after the district attorney announced the charges, with some saying they were not happy that Shelby wasn't charged with first-degree murder. "We will be out here every single day until she gets murder," Tulsa resident Tammi Sims said. Earlier this year, a former volunteer deputy with the Tulsa County Sheriff's Office was sentenced to four years in prison after he was convicted of second-degree manslaughter in the shooting death of Eric Harris, who was also black and unarmed.
Democratic National Committee interim chairwoman Donna Brazile said Donald Trump’s refusal to apologize for spearheading the so-called “birther” movement that questioned the citizenship of Barack Obama is a “wound that won't heal.” Recalling her visit over the weekend the newly-opened National Museum of African-American History and Culture as well as her own family’s history, Brazile said Trump’s hectoring of America’s first black president about his birth certificate recalled for her and many others the nation’s painful past. Story Continued Below “Donald Trump should take just a walk through that museum and see what it means to have to produce papers. I mean, my ancestors could not get papers simply because they were brought here as slaves. And it took centuries before we could finally get papers,” she told CNN’s “New Day” Tuesday morning. “To bring this up over and over again, and to smear the first black president of the United States, Donald Trump should be ashamed of himself, and he should apologize. I get emotional. I got a birth certificate. My parents had a birth certificate. My grandparents did not. My great grandparents did not.” The issue of Trump’s support for the birther movement was raised late in Monday night’s presidential debate by moderator Lester Holt, who asked Trump what he would say to Americans hurt by his championing of the issue. As he did at a press conference two weeks ago, Trump blamed Hillary Clinton and her associates for first raising the issue and took credit for bringing the matter to rest. To those who might have been offended, the Manhattan billionaire said “Well, I say nothing, because I was able to get him to produce [his birth certificate].” Brazile admitted that the apology she wants from Trump is “not forthcoming, so I know I'm speaking into the wild darkness of Donald Trump, but I think he should be ashamed of himself to bring that up and to say -- and this is what he said, ‘I'm the one who got him to produce the birth certificate.’ It's amazing.” “I think it's a shame we put the president of the United States through this. It's just awful. And every time we talk about it, it's the wound. It’s the wound that won't heal,” she said. “And this is what Donald Trump should understand, it's the wound that will never heal as long as people go out there and exploit what I call real racial pain and animus in this country.”
(CNN)Donald Trump reacted to a series of bombing threats and attacks over the weekend with a warning on Monday that "this is only going to get worse." "I think this is something that will maybe get -- will happen perhaps more and more all over the country," Trump told "Fox and Friends." "It's a mess, and it's a shame, and we're going to have to be very tough." Trump also said he agreed with early reports of a possible foreign connection to the bombings. "I think there is -- I think there's many foreign connections," he said. "You have many, many groups, because we're allowing these people to come into our country and destroy our country and make it unsafe for people," the Republican nominee added, arguing that the stricter immigration policies he has proposed would better protect the US from terror. Trump also took aim at "magazines" and other media that publish instructions on how to make explosive devices, saying, "Those people should be arrested because they are inciting violence." "So I see the other day, and they're all talking about it so wonderfully because it's called freedom of the press -- where you buy magazines and they tell you how to make the same bombs that you saw. I would -- now people will go crazy, they'll say Trump is against freedom of the press. I'm totally in favor of freedom of the press. But how do you allow magazines to be sold -- these are magazines that tell you, from step one, go to the store and buy such-and-such, right?" He continued, "Those people should be arrested because they are inciting violence, OK. They are making violence possible. They should be arrested immediately. They have websites that tell how to make bombs, how to make all sorts of things that are totally destructive, and you know where they are coming from, and yet we don't want to touch them because of freedom of speech." 
Donald Trump should apologize for pushing the “unseemly” birther conspiracy regarding where President Barack Obama was born, South Carolina Sen. Lindsey Graham indicated Tuesday. Trump last week explicitly acknowledged that Obama was born in the U.S., though he went on to blame Hillary Clinton for igniting the so-called “birther” controversy despite no evidence and refused to apologize for questioning the validity of the country's first black president. Story Continued Below “I would apologize,” Graham, a frequent and colorful Trump critic, told Bloomberg Politics on Tuesday. “I think the whole movement was unseemly. I had a lot of distaste for it. No factual basis. I think he would be taking the high ground, but that’s up to him.” Graham referred to the birther conspiracy as a “fringe issue” that he didn’t take seriously and said Trump didn’t do “the country a service by pushing this.” Graham, a former GOP presidential candidate, has encouraged other Republicans to un-endorse Trump and hinted that the next president will likely be a “she,” though he has said he won’t vote for either candidate.
Orlando, Florida (CNN)Hillary Clinton faces off against Donald Trump on the debate stage for the first time on Monday night, in a crucial prime-time event that could alter the narrative of the presidential election just six weeks out from Election Day. CNN interviewed Clinton supporters in Orlando Wednesday afternoon, at what is expected to be the Democratic nominee's last public campaign event before the first debate. We asked what they think Clinton needs to do to outperform Trump, and what her biggest vulnerability might be under the spotlight. One woman said Clinton should keep her cool if Trump tries to provoke her. Another urged Clinton to stick to what she knows best -- policy. Some Clinton supporters expressed concern that Trump will try to hit her on issues like the email controversy and Benghazi. Here's a look at their advice for the Democratic nominee. Pat Fagan, 73, retired county parks and recreation director who lives in Clermont, Florida What does Clinton need to do at the first debate? "She needs to continue being herself. I personally think how she handles herself with the public is the only way to go. Getting up there and then calling each other names and so forth -- I don't think that gets you anywhere." What vulnerability do you think Clinton has at the debate? "Personally I don't really know of any vulnerabilities she has. I think she's going to win the election by at least 10 points. I think she is going to rip him a new one in the debate." Patti Fagan, 60, retired, lives in Clermont, Florida What advice do you have for Clinton heading into Monday's debate? "I would like her to listen to her own heart and not to be afraid of Donald Trump because he's just a punk. I just wish her well and I know he's going to ... anger her, he's going to try to antagonize her. I've seen him when he debates others and he gets really low and I just hope she remains high." What do you think will be Clinton's biggest vulnerability at the debate? "Her biggest vulnerability is she overthinks. She's trying to say everything so perfectly and so correctly that I think some people take that as -- they don't trust her, they feel that it's forced. ... Don't overthink it because she's got it right and her instincts are right." Mary Sharpe, 73, retired, lives in Lady Lake, Florida What does Clinton need to do to have a successful first debate? "He's a pushover for baiting. I'd love to see her bait him into some crazy discussion. I think his tax returns, get him off on a tangent about his tax returns -- I think that'd be fun." What do you think will be Clinton's biggest challenge at the debate? "I think he is probably going to go for the Benghazi thing that they are trying to keep going. I don't think he will bring up the Clinton Foundation because now he's in trouble with his foundation. So I don't think he's going to go there." Joe Caldwell, 80, Vietnam War veteran from Orlando, Florida What would you like to see Clinton do at the first debate? "I would really like to see her (discuss) the health care issue, the (Americans with Disabilities Act), the veterans and social issues -- those types of issues because there are so many veterans out there that can't get the care that they need not because they don't know where to go but because it's not available to them and it's pitiful." What do you think will be Clinton's her biggest vulnerability at the debate? "I really hate to say this -- I do think that the most serious vulnerability is this thing that they keep bringing up that's history. Like the tapes, like the cell phone issues ... that's history. Let bygones be bygones. Start anew. It's a new day! She can handle it. Oh yes, she can handle it." David Rucker, 70, retired from the Orange County public schools and lives in Orlando, Florida What do you want to see from Clinton at the debate? "What I'd like for her to talk about is the police department. I think that needs to get into depth a little bit more to try to get an understanding between the two: the community and the police and sheriff's department. We need to have that camaraderie and we don't ... There are too many young black males getting killed for no reason at all. I realize that they're real nervous sometimes when confronting us but there still has to be a better way." What do you think is Clinton's biggest weakness? "I don't know if she's going to have a weakness ... I think she'll come out on top. I'm not worried at all. He's more of a reactionary guy and he'll try to follow Hillary and I think she'll eat him up." Brittany Arroyo, 27, works at an engineering company and lives in Melbourne, Florida What is Clinton's biggest strength as she head into her first debate against Trump? "Her biggest strength is her experience and intelligence. Ultimately she knows the most about every political issues especially compared to Donald Trump. Her level of experience just far outweighs almost any other political figure and even if she's not prepared for a question, she'll have plenty of knowledge on it." What will Clinton's biggest challenge be at the debate? "Unfortunately, I hate to say it, but as a woman I've seen it. She has to walk this fine line between being cute and likeable but also being tough and wise and intelligent and it's too hard -- you can never win. Even though we'll be watching and we won't care if she smiles, I know a lot of Republicans apparently do." 
Author and political commentator Ann Coulter delves into what in her genetic makeup allows her to endure and even delight in being called unsavory names (most recently at the Comedy Central Roast). Coulter also discusses why she is so drawn to Donald Trump and what influence she's had over his immigration platform.
Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump are deadlocked in three swing states, according to a new set of polls, underscoring the stakes of Monday night’s debate for the final stretch of the election. The former secretary of state holds narrow leads in Florida, Iowa and North Carolina, all within the polls’ margins of error, with Clinton only well ahead of Trump in Virginia in this set of the surveys. A Florida Chamber of Commerce poll puts the Democratic nominee just two points ahead of her GOP rival, 43 percent to 41 percent, with the state’s likely voters. Gary Johnson, the Libertarian candidate, polled at 8 percent, while the Green Party’s Jill Stein did not register any support. In a head-to-head race that excludes Johnson, Clinton's lead grows by a point, 45 percent to 42 percent. In North Carolina, Clinton’s advantage over Trump among likely voters is just a single point, according to a High Point University poll. The former secretary of state leads Trump 43 percent to 42 percent, with Johnson polling at 10 percent. Stein is not on the ballot in North Carolina. The two-way presidential race is closest in Iowa, where a Loras College poll puts Clinton’s lead over Trump at just three-tenths of a point, 42.3 percent to 42 percent. The Manhattan billionaire edges slightly ahead in a four-way race, leading 38.3 percent to 37.7 percent over the Democratic nominee. Johnson earned the support of 9 percent of respondents while Stein polled at 1.2 percent. The best news for Clinton came from Virginia, where a Christopher Newport University poll put her ahead by 10 points, 48 percent to 38 percent, among that state’s likely voters. The state was also the strongest for Johnson, who polled at 15 percent in a five-way race that also included Stein (3 percent) and independent candidate Evan McMullin (3 percent). Clinton’s advantage over Trump in that five-way race dropped to six points, 39 percent to 33 percent. In POLITICO’s Battleground States Polling Average, which includes 11 swing states, Clinton still edges Trump 43.7 percent to Trump’s 40.9 percent. The Florida Chamber of Commerce poll was conducted from Sept. 15-20, reaching 617 likely voters in that state with a margin of error of plus-or-minus 4 percent. The High Point University poll reached 404 North Carolinian likely voters from Sept. 17-22, with a margin of error of plus-or-minus 4.9 points. Loras College’s poll of Iowan likely voters was conducted from Sept. 20-22, reaching 491 respondents with a margin of error of plus-or-minus 4.4 percent. The Christopher Newport University poll was in the field from Sept. 15-23, reaching 1,003 likely voters in Virginia. Its margin of error is plus-or-minus 3.9 percent.
I’ve watched every presidential debate ever broadcast, including the little-remembered John F. Kennedy-Hubert Humphrey contest just before the 1960 West Virginia primary, and for nearly 40 years I've analyzed how candidates win and lose them. But when I ask myself what kind of strategy I would devise for Hillary Clinton tonight against Donald Trump, I’m pretty much baffled. The problem is not just the unpredictable (to put it mildly) nature of her opponent. (Will Trump be low-key and calm? Will he attack her honesty? Will he turn on Lester Holt after the first tough question and walk off the stage?) The problem is that almost all of Hillary Clinton’s strengths, in this strange election year, can so easily be turned into her weaknesses—especially her vast experience in government. The more she emphasizes her qualifications, the more Trump is likely to respond with some version of: “You’ve been at the center of power for 25 years? Then you’re one of those who’s created the mess we’re in.” So reciting her work with foreign leaders, for example, and contrasting it with Trump's utter lack of grounding in the world, doesn't seem to be promising. Story Continued Below Indeed, this debate offers Trump the chance to perform what I’ve called “political judo”—turning an opponent’s strength against her. (“Yes, Mrs. Clinton, your experience helped drag us into Iraq, and turned Syria, Libya, the whole Middle East into a staging ground for ISIS. Maybe that’s why your husband's CIA director, and Bobby Kennedy’s chief speechwriter, are backing me.”) Further, there's a sense—a highly limited sense—in which Trump is in something like the position Ronald Reagan was in back in 1980. Among college-educated whites, who have resisted him so far, his task is to use the debates to say, “I'm a reasonable person who knows what's gone wrong and who has the instincts to fix it.” It's a second cousin of the 1980 situation where many voters did not want Carter, but needed reassurance about Reagan, which they got. (There is a limit to this analogy, because for all of her difficulties, Clinton is in a much stronger position than President Carter was). By contrast, how does she try to gain strength on the issue of “honest and trustworthy”? If Trump can be convinced by his handlers—assuming they exist—to avoid overkill here, all he has to do is to note what the FBI director or the New York Times editorial page has said. She can of course cite chapter and verse on Trump—bankruptcies, Trump University, David Farenthold's expose of his charities in the Washington Post—but those issues are ill-suited, I think, to a face-to-face debate. One of her problems, longstanding, is that the stuff of which campaign collapses are made have been leveled at Trump—and he's still standing. Does any of this mean that Clinton is facing doom Monday night? No. It does suggest that her campaign should remember what debates do and don’t do, based on a half-century or so of history. The Focus Is on “Moments”—But They’re Not Always The Key Ask any political journalist to recite the history of debates, and it would go something like this: “Nixon looked pale and drawn; Ford prematurely liberated Poland from Soviet Control; Reagan said to Carter ‘there you go again,’ then asked Americans ‘are you better off?’ Four years later, he was incoherent, but then recovered by joking about Mondale’s ‘youth and inexperience.’ Dukakis was insufficiently emotional at the prospect of his wife’s rape and murder. Lloyd Bentsen told Dan Quayle was no Jack Kennedy. George H.W. Bush looked at his watch. Al Gore stalked George W. Bush, who froze him with a nod.” These are the moments that are played over and over again in the run-up to debates. They illustrate the fact that these events are watched intensely for the quip, the gaffe, the thrust, the parry that can sum up 90 minutes. It’s why debate prep spends an inordinate amount of time trying to come up with punchy, memorable lines—“zingers”—to win the attention and admiration of the audience. (It’s also why the late political journalist Lars Erik-Nelson scornfully said of his colleagues, “You’ve all become theater critics.”) But in fact, this view of debates is not the whole story. Sometimes, it’s the cumulative effect of the exchanges that can determine who prevails. Look back at the first Romney-Obama debate in 2012. There was no one exchange, no one Obama stumble or Romney answer, that provided the ”aha!” moment that journalists wait for the way hounds wait for the first call of the fox. It was, rather, Obama’s petulant, defensive, sometimes indifferent answers that made even the president’s most ardent supporters believe he had been badly beaten. The presence of Trump clearly raises the odds that we may see a “moment” unlike any in debate history; that’s clearly what an army of reporters and tens of millions of viewers will be waiting for. But it may just be that it will be the totality of the hour and a half that will persuade a viewer to say: “he seemed pretty reasonable” or “she knows what she’s talking about and he doesn’t.” This has special relevance for Clinton, who, as her longtime friend and one-time aide Patti Solis-Doyle observed, always seems as if she is testing every word before it leaves her mouth. A sustained, relaxed presentation over the course of the debate could be her best weapon against a Trump, whose ability to stay within himself when untethered to a Teleprompter is questionable. There Are Three Debates, Not One—And That Can Matter A Whole Lot One key reason why the 1980 Reagan-Carter debate was so important is that it was the only debate between the two. Carter had refused to debate with third-party candidate John Anderson, so Reagan faced off against Anderson on September 21st. When the independent fell below the polling threshold, Carter and Reagan met for the first and last time on October 28th—barely a week before the election. Every other time, there have been three debates; which has meant there is a chance to make up for a less than successful debut. That’s what happened with Reagan in 1984, and with George W. Bush in 2004; it’s also what happened last time out, when Obama emerged from his daze and outperformed Romney in their two other meetings. Here, I think, is an opening for Clinton—especially in the town hall meetings, where she should be able to turn a question—and they are usually very lame "what can you do for my daughter?" questions—into answers that fuse personal concern with a command both of her proposals, and of Trump’s astonishing inability to remember what he has proposed from one day to the next. The danger for her is channeling her inner Al Gore, who challenged Bush’s commitment to health care by repeatedly demanding: "What about Dingell-Norwood?" The opportunity for her is to argue—from experience—that what she has worked for in public life has made the lives of real people better. (Further, the Town Meeting format—with dozens of “real” people as participants—makes the resort to personal insults highly risky). Trump Is Not the Only One Who Can Deploy Political Judo The potential for Trump to turn strength into weakness has its roots in the most singularly successful use of political judo. It came in 1992, when independent Ross Perot was asked if voters should be bothered by his lack of experience. “Well,” he said, “they've got a point. I don't have any experience in running up a $4 trillion debt. I don't have any experience in gridlocked government where nobody takes responsibility for anything and everybody blames everybody else. I don't have any experience in creating the worst public school system in the industrialized world, the most violent, crime-ridden society in the industrialized world.” Judo, however, can cut both ways. There’s a clear opening for Clinton if Trump were to boast of his leadership skills, and his business success. “Well, you might be successful, Donald, but we really don’t know because you’re the first presidential candidate ever who won’t show us his taxes. But you know, you should look at the business leaders who support me: Mike Bloomberg, who’s worth four times what you claim to be worth, and who didn’t start with millions from his father, says you’re a con, a fake. So does Marc Cuban, who built his success from the ground up. But I do have to admit—you’re way, way ahead of them in, unpaid workers, fleeced contractors and lawsuits.” Debates Are NOT Decisive One last note. It’s easy to assume that the fate of the world is at stake Monday night. A lot of post-election narratives over the years have located debates as the center of the story (“Reagan recovered from his first debate-gaffe and went onto win a landslide.” “Obama was far more effective in the later debates and was re-elected…”). But is correlation really causation? Maybe the economic boom of 1984 has a lot more to do with Reagan winning 49 states; maybe the clear if modest economic recovery played the key role in Obama’s clear if modest popular vote victory. In their influential 2013 book, The Gamble, political scientists John H. Sides and Lynn Vavreck tried to measure the impact of debates, gaffes, and other “game-changers” with real-time public opinion measurements. What they found was that even a dramatic event like Romney’s first debate performance had a relative small, and relatively short-lived, impact. Compared to the “fundamentals”—economic performance and the ever-growing impact of a polarized electorate—the stuff of which a hundred overwrought post-debate analyses are made may be of only marginal significance. Of course, this cycle the “fundamentals” point to a very close race. So you’ll probably want to tune in anyway
Election Day is more than a month away, but voters are already casting ballots to pick their next president. Voting opened on Monday in Wisconsin Rapids, Wisconsin, making the town's voters among the first in the nation to do so. So far, voting is limited to a smattering of counties and municipalities in states that allow local governments to set their own schedules. On Friday, however, voters statewide in South Dakota and Minnesota will be allowed to cast early ballots. And other states are joining soon: New Jersey starts early voting on Saturday, and Vermont plans to start early voting as soon as the ballots are ready. (State rules say no later than Saturday.) Story Continued Below In total, 37 states and the District of Columbia will allow early voting in 2016. Some of those states allow voters to request mail ballots and send them in, while others open physical polling places weeks or even months before the election. In the 2012 presidential election, approximately 30 percent of the votes cast came via mail or early balloting, meaning many voters will weigh in before the candidates have had a chance to make their closing case. Typically, Democrats lead in early voting, especially in-person early voting, because their voters are not as likely to go out to the polls as Republicans, said Michael McDonald, an election expert and associate professor at the University of Florida. The GOP, however, tends to make up ground through mail in absentee ballots, McDonald said. Here’s when early voting begins in each state. (Note, the below dates represent the earliest date that voters statewide can send for a ballot or vote in person without a special exemption.) Alabama — There’s no universal early voting in Alabama, as voters need a state-approved excuse to vote absentee. Alaska — Oct. 24. Arizona — Oct. 12. Local counties are still finalizing the locations where voters can vote in-person, but ballots for mail-in voting begin going out on the 12th. Arkansas — Oct. 24. California — Early voting opening dates are set by the county/municipality. Oct. 10 is the first day to vote early in Los Angeles County. Colorado — Oct. 24. Connecticut — There is no early voting in Connecticut, as voters need a state-approved excuse to vote absentee. District of Columbia — Oct. 22 at One Judiciary Square, Oct. 29 for all other locations. Delaware — There is no early voting in Delaware, as voters need a state-approved excuse to vote absentee. Florida — All counties are required to allow voting from Oct. 29 to Nov. 5. Some have the option to start earlier. Georgia — Oct. 17. Voters can sign up for an absentee ballot starting Sept. 20. Hawaii — Oct. 25. Idaho — Sept. 23. Counties must send out absentee ballot requests no later than the 23rd, but are allowed to offer early voting. Early voting opening dates are set by the county/municipality. Illinois — Sept. 29 to Nov. 7. Starting Sept. 29, voters can only cast their ballots at their local election authority or a temporary location, but early voting expands to permanent polling places starting Oct. 24. Indiana — Oct. 12. Early voting starts at the local county election board office or another designated location, but with an excuse, voters can cast a ballot by mail. Iowa — Sept. 29. Kansas — Oct. 19. Counties are allowed to set earlier extended early voting dates. Kentucky — There is no early voting in Kentucky, unless voters have a state-approved excuse to vote absentee. Louisiana — Oct. 25 to Nov. 1. Maine — Oct. 9 is the general opening date, but the state allows you to vote as soon as the ballots are printed, and some people have already cast their ballots. Maryland — Oct. 27 to Nov. 3. Massachusetts — Oct. 24 to Nov. 4. Michigan — There is no early voting in Michigan, as voters require a state-approved excuse to vote absentee. Minnesota — Sept. 23. Mississippi — There is no early voting in Mississippi, as voters need a state-approved excuse to vote absentee. Missouri — There is no early voting in Missouri, as voters need a state-approved excuse to vote absentee. Montana — In-person early voting begins as soon as ballots are ready, which is expected to be around Oct. 11. Nebraska — Oct. 3. The counties mail out requests starting on the 3rd, but the first day to vote early in-person is Oct. 7. Nevada — Oct. 22. New Hampshire — There is no early voting in New Hampshire, unless voters have a state-approved excuse to vote absentee. New Jersey — Sept. 24. In-person early voting may begin sooner (it starts as soon as ballots are available), but mail-in ballots are sent out beginning on the 24th. New Mexico — Oct. 11 to Nov. 5. Voters can apply for an absentee ballot on Oct. 11, but starting on the 22nd they can vote early in person. New York — There is no early voting in New York, as voters require a state-approved excuse to vote absentee. North Carolina — Sept. 9, Oct. 20 to Nov. 5. Absentee ballots have already been sent out, but the formal early voting period does not start until October. North Dakota — Sept. 29. Absentee and mail ballots can be sent out by county officials starting on the 29th, but the exact date might vary from one location to the next. Ohio — Oct. 12. Oklahoma — Nov. 3 to Nov. 5. Oregon — Oct. 19. Pennsylvania — There is no early voting in Pennsylvania, as voters need a state-approved excuse to vote absentee. Rhode Island — There is no early voting in Rhode Island, unless voters have a state-approved excuse to vote absentee. South Carolina — There is no early voting in South Carolina, unless voters have a state-approved excuse to vote absentee. The state does, however, give voters more absentee leeway than many. South Dakota — Sept. 23. Tennessee — Oct. 19 to Nov. 3. Texas — Oct. 24 to Nov. 4. Utah — Oct. 25 to Nov. 4. Virginia — There is no early voting in Virginia, unless voters have a state-approved excuse to vote absentee. Vermont — Sept. 23 to Nov. 7. Early voting could start before the 23rd, but it will not begin any later than that date. Washington — Oct. 21. Some voters may receive their ballot earlier, but this is the latest counties can mail them out. West Virginia — Oct. 26 to Nov. 5. Wisconsin — Early voting opening dates are set by the county/municipality. Wisconsin Rapids began voting Sept. 19. Wyoming — Sept. 23 to Nov. 7.
Donald Trump’s campaign is claiming vindication after one of Hillary Clinton’s longtime confidants was accused last week of spreading false rumors about Barack Obama’s origins during the 2008 Democratic primary. But the real story turns out to be a little more complicated, and does nothing to prove Trump’s argument that Clinton and her campaign “started” the so-called birther controversy. Story Continued Below Last Thursday, after former McClatchy editor James Asher tweeted that Clinton associate Sidney Blumenthal “told me in person” that Obama was born in Kenya, the Trump campaign pounced. “SIREN: Former McClatchy DC Bureau Chief speaks out,” senior communications adviser Jason Miller tweeted. McClatchy followed up with a story that quoted a statement from Asher, “During that meeting, Mr. Blumenthal and I met together in my office and he strongly urged me to investigate the exact place of President Obama’s birth, which he suggested was in Kenya. We assigned a reporter to go to Kenya, and that reporter determined that the allegation was false.” Blumenthal swiftly denied pushing any birther rumors. And Asher, when pressed for more detail, was less definitive in an email to POLITICO. “To the best of my recollection, these are the facts about my interaction with Sidney Blumenthal in late winter of 2008,” Asher said. “Blumenthal visited the Washington Bureau of McClatchy, where he and I met in my office. During that conversation and in subsequent communications, we discussed a number of matters related to Obama. He encouraged McClatchy to do stories related to Obama and his connections to Kenya.” “On the birther issue, I recall my conversation with Blumenthal clearly,” Asher said, but acknowledged having “nothing in writing memorializing that conversation.” “This story is false,” Blumenthal reiterated in an email. “I never spoke to Mr. Asher about this. Period. Donald Trump cannot distract from the inescapable fact that he is the one who embraced and promoted the birther lie and is responsible for it.” “Well I still have his biz card. So it's his word against mine,” Asher tweeted on Friday after other news outlets published Blumenthal’s initial denial. But two other former McClatchy staffers, including McClatchy’s Nairobi correspondent at the time, Shashank Bengali, said they were aware that Asher and Blumenthal were in touch. “Sid was definitely speaking to Asher,” Bengali said. Bengali, who is now a Los Angeles Times correspondent based in Mumbai, said he had been asked to investigate “Obama’s Kenya ties” at Blumenthal’s behest, but couldn’t remember whether anyone had asked him “to check out the birther angle specifically. No one in Kenya took that seriously." “What I remember is that you told me to look into everything about Obama's family in Kenya. I can't recall if we specifically discussed the birther claim, but I'm sure that was part of what I researched,” Bengali said in an email to Asher that was shared with POLITICO. Bengali interviewed Obama's siblings and friends of his father, but came up empty. “There was nothing there. We didn't even publish a story," he said. Blumenthal won’t say if the meeting with Asher ever happened, but did not deny urging him in an email to have Bengali report on whether Obama had offended Kenyans by making disparaging remarks about his late father, an economist who once worked for the Kenyan government. The email, which was dated March 17, 2008, and shared with POLITICO, reads: "Jim, on Kenya your person in the field might look into the impact there of Obama's public comments about his father. I'm told by State Dept officials that Obama publicly derided his father on his visit there and that was regarded as embarrassing and crossing the line by Kenyans for whom respect for elders (especially the father, especially a Muslim father, in a patrilineal society) is considered sacrosanct. Sidney" Asher says he also asked Bengali, after discussing the matter with Blumenthal, to look into “any connections between Obama and Raila Odinga, who had described himself as Obama’s cousin and would run for president of Kenya; and, second, possible relationships between Odinga and unspecified controversial Muslim groups.” Asked about the email, Blumenthal would not clarify the nature of his interactions with Asher. But he wrote, “What you sent has nothing to do with birtherism at all. It is untrue I had anything to do with birtherism. Obama's relationship with his father is at the heart of his memoir, ‘Dreams of My Father,’ and has been a commonplace subject of interest for everyone.” Nor would Blumenthal say if he had discussed ties between Obama and Odinga with Asher. “I can say with certainty that I never trafficked in birtherism,” he repeated when asked. Blumenthal sent along an email he sent to friends in February 2011, pointing to POLITICO’s write-up of a poll showing that half of Republican primary voters at the time that Obama was born abroad. He said his subject line -- “It's official: they're nuts” -- “reflects my constant view of the matter.” He also pointed to a series of tweets Asher made in which he attacked Clinton in strident terms and used a pro-Trump hashtag. ”#Snowden should be pardoned since #hillary wasn't #indicted. Only fair! #wikileaks #Election2016,” one tweet reads. “#HillaryClinton #Election2016 #TrumpPence16 Note Colin #Powell's reference to #HRC's #‘character,’" reads another. A third tweet reads: “What is really going on with #HillaryClinton? #Election2016 #HillarysHealth.” Asked about those tweets on Monday, Asher said, “I support neither Trump nor Clinton. It would be incorrect to read support for Trump into my tweets about Clinton.” The conflicting accounts came after Trump on Friday accused Clinton of starting what he called “the ‘birther’ controversy” -- a campaign of scurrilous rumor-mongering that he did more than anyone to stoke, only to concede last week that he was mistaken. The Clinton campaign’s response to Trump’s charge came fast and furious, and POLITICO found no evidence to suggest that the former secretary of state or her 2008 operation ever trafficked in birther rumors. "As multiple, independent fact checkers have affirmed in the years since, neither the 2008 campaign nor the candidate ever questioned the president's citizenship or birth certificate,” Clinton press secretary Brian Fallon said when asked about Blumenthal, who was never paid by the 2008 Clinton campaign. Indeed, Clinton’s former campaign manager, Patty Solis Doyle, told CNN on Friday that she fired a volunteer coordinator in Iowa who had forwarded a birther-esque email, calling it “so beyond the pale of the campaign Hillary wanted to run.” Blumenthal, a longtime confidant of both Bill and Hillary Clinton, emerged as a frequent correspondent in the former secretary of state’s email records, peppering her with hundreds of notes offering advice, sharing tart observations about her administration rivals, or passing along articles and “intelligence” reports from his contacts. He also sometimes boasted of having planted articles in the press on her behalf, though there is no evidence that she ever asked him to do so. Blumenthal’s relationship with the Clintons dates back to their battles with the right-wing media during the 1990s, in which he was a sharp-elbowed participant. After writing a well-received book about those years, “The Clinton Wars,” he returned briefly to journalism before playing an informal advisory role during the 2008 campaign. He sought a job in the State Department when Clinton was named secretary of state, but White House aides blacklisted him due to his role in pushing negative stories about Obama during the Democratic primary. He remained in the Clinton orbit, however: In 2009, the Clinton Foundation put him on its staff and paid him $10,000 per month, though the arrangement ended in March 2015. Blumenthal then did consulting work for American Bridge, Correct the Record and Media Matters, three groups that support Clinton’s presidential bid and are run by another close Clinton ally, David Brock. In a portion of a deposition that was accidently put online, Blumenthal told a congressional committee that he was paid around $200,000 by the Brock groups. Hillary Clinton has never repudiated Blumenthal, though she has distanced herself from him, while he has continued to be her ardent defender. As recently as May, he described himself as a “friend” of Clinton’s, though he did not say whether they still exchange emails. In her testimony before the House Benghazi Committee last year, Clinton described him as a “personal friend” but downplayed the extent to which she relied on him for advice as secretary of state. "He was not advising me," Clinton told the committee. "I did not ask him to send me the information that he sent me," she said, though the emails show that she did sometimes thank him for the information or ask him to “please keep them coming.” She also sometimes forwarded his emails and asked State Department officials to look into his findings. During her subsequent interview with the FBI, Clinton described him as “a prodigious writer whose information was sometimes accurate and sometimes not,” according to the bureau’s report summarizing its investigation into her private email server. When Blumenthal’s emails first emerged, Clinton was slightly less circumspect. “He sent me unsolicited emails, which I passed on in some instances, and I say that that’s just part of the give and take,” she told reporters last year. “I have many, many old friends and I always think that it’s important when you get into politics to have friends you had before you were in politics and to understand what’s on their minds,” Clinton said. “And he’s been a friend of mine for a long time.”
Obamaworld laughed as it watched Donald Trump’s hostile takeover of the GOP. After eight years of Republican opposition, inconsistent policy demands and racialized hate against the first black president, President Barack Obama’s aides, past and present, thought Republicans had gotten what they deserved--and more, all but forfeiting the 2016 race to the woman they defeated eight years ago. They’re not laughing anymore. Story Continued Below Going into Monday night’s debate, Obama’s team is feeling that same anxiety expressed by some top Hillary Clinton aides: maybe the country isn’t what they thought, maybe the resistance to Obamacare and gay marriage and the progress they’re so proud of is broader than the vocal fringe they’ve always dismissed. Maybe, the president’s aides – current and former – now concede, they’re going to have to live with the fact that Trump could end up in the Oval Office in part due to a backlash against Obama. “I’m trying to think of a series to compare it to, which was a series that started as a comedy and became a high stakes drama,” said Ben LaBolt, a former White House aide and press secretary for Obama’s 2012 reelection campaign. “I feel like we’re maybe in the fifth season of ‘Breaking Bad’ here. We’re way beyond the laughs, and just sitting on the edge of our seats in terror.” “There's not a lot of mirth in the circles I run in about him,” said another former senior Obama campaign staffer. Privately, Obama has expressed mixed feelings, according to people close to the president. He’s still nursing amusement at Republicans for being hapless enough to get railroaded by Trump, but it’s mixed with frustration that there are so many Americans he failed to reach. People who've spoken to him say the president wonders what he might have done differently to break through in a way that would make people who’ve benefited from his policies—like those enjoying added health benefits courtesy of Obamacare—support Democrats. For Obamaworld staffers who had just been starting to settle into a new buoyancy about the president's climbing approval numbers, Trump’s growing strength is an agonizing reminder of how far short they have fallen in delivering on ‘hope.' Even if Clinton wins, the Republican has shown not only that America is divided between red and blue but that there’s an America that Obama never connected with at all, and where all his data and rational arguments and appeals to sensibilities are as useless as Monopoly money. “We are still the country that elected Barack Obama in 2008, and we are capable of that and more,” said Jim Papa, a former special assistant for legislative affairs in the White House. “But we’re also capable of making bad choices and being seduced by someone who plays to fears and anxieties and racial differences.” Trump’s already done things they never thought he could, like mainstreaming racist rhetoric and racking up so many small donors that they worry about the extent of his support. And that was even before he riled up Obama doubters again with his birther pirouette. And the result: Trump’s doing better in the polls at this late stage than Obama’s team imagined. With 43 days to go, Trump and Clinton are essentially tied, polls sitting within the margin of error, even in battleground states. Though only a few weeks ago, current and former Obama aides would joke about how the president’s great political legacy might be the Republican Party destroying itself in front of him. Now, on the record, they push back on the very suggestion that Obama’s legacy should be viewed in any frame that Trump also occupies. “I don’t think he thinks it’s his legacy, I don’t think any of us think it’s his legacy,” said Dan Pfeiffer, a former senior adviser to the president. “Trumpism is a lot of things in this country. President Obama is the face of that for some Republicans, but the Republican Party got themselves into this mess.” But they worry about what even a Trump loss says about Obama’s America. “I think he will lose badly in this election, but I think the impact he’s had on our political process is incredibly damaging, and will be lasting,” said Tommy Vietor, a former national security spokesman who noted that his own amusement at Trump ended a year ago. “He’s made us look stupid. I think he is stupid.” For any efforts Obama made in urging people to disagree without being disagreeable, as the president likes to say, “Trump has shattered that,” Vietor said. “He has brought back a brand of politics that is you punch your opponent as hard as you can, it doesn’t matter if it’s a low blow, it doesn’t matter if it’s not of substance. That’s a bad lesson for people to learn.” According to Earnest, Obama is serious about wanting a functional opposition and wishes that he’d had one to negotiate with on immigration reform, trade, infrastructure and other priorities. The sense of lost opportunity eats at them, as does the sense that it’s not going away, despite their confidence in Clinton’s chances. “I’m not saying we’d all be playing acoustic guitar in a circle on the National Mall, but I am saying we would have progress to show for our efforts,” said White House press secretary Josh Earnest, who's been with the president since the first campaign. Not everyone’s inside Obamaworld is down. Some schadenfreude remains. “He's still exposed and ripped apart factions of the GOP, enhanced their brand as hostile to a rising electorates, and will leave them with no infrastructure,” said a more upbeat former Obama 2008 campaign spokesman Hari Sevugan. And Democrats’ sense of the vacuous GOP that Trump represents continues to resonate, particularly as they see the Republican nominee attack an economy that’s gone wrong with the support of many of the same people who opposed the policies that the president credits for the economic rebound that includes the longest period of sustained growth and taxpayers repaid with interest from the bailouts that caused so much trouble. “The eight-year legacy of the recovery from the Great Recession is clear evidence that the Tea Party movement,” said Earnest, “is intellectually bankrupt—or about something other than the economy.” But that doesn't take care of their grief about the state of American politics. “I’d rather live in a world where the two parties really compete,” Papa said, “than have a political edge on the Republican Party but have to live in a world where white supremacists have a channel and are legitimized.”
For son Eric Trump, Donald Trump will ultimately win over millennials against Hillary Clinton because like Facebook co-founder Mark Zuckerberg, the Republican nominee “has been an entrepreneurial guy” who became “the epitome of the American dream.” “He’s gone from nothing into a man who’s just — “ Trump said Friday on Fox News’ “Outnumbered,” as Democratic strategist Julie Roginsky cut him off: “Nothing? He got a million bucks? Come on, Eri c…” Story Continued Below Trump defended his statement, saying his father has “built an unbelievable empire” and has “epitomized what America’s all about: Opportunity and working hard and being able to achieve your dreams and what you want to succeed, right?” “It’s no different than a Zuckerberg, right?” he continued. “Who went out with a great idea like a Facebook and developed this idea and built it and grew it and grew it and grew it. That is achieving something, right? And I think it’s very different than a person who has been a career politician.” The 32-year-old businessman then remarked that “in all fairness” he did not “think millennials relate to policy very well because they haven't lived their lives long enough to understand so many of the issues that influence, I mean in broad stroke of issues, right?” “They obviously understand a lot of issues as it pertains to them. Student debt, and this and that. But I think maybe taxes and things like that might be a little less significant than other issues,” Trump said. “And so I just think there is disconnect between somebody who is constantly talking about, you know, policy and this and that and then a man who built a great company.” As the conversation shifted to the Trump campaign’s social media presence, Eric Trump sought to contrast his father’s approach with that of the Clinton operation. “We're humans that are speaking to that social media platform,” Trump said of his tweets, along with those of his siblings. “Hillary has 100 people who work on her social media team. My father’s has myself. I’ve got myself. I do all my social. I was tweeting as I was walking into the room. I think that’s very, very relevant. Going on to call it “the difference between a robot speaking and a person speaking,” Trump called it “very, very transparent” before mocking the Clinton campaign’s use of “-H” in tweets to signify that the candidate herself sent it. “If you have to put H after a tweet, you're not really communicating to somebody,” Trump said.
(CNN)Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump are still hours away from squaring off in the first debate of the 2016 race, but the pre-debate spin between each campaign is already well underway. Here's a glimpse at the expectations game waged by campaign surrogates who made the television rounds Monday morning. Trump 'can't hide' - Clinton running mate Tim Kaine at a rally Monday "The thing about 90 minutes is boy, you can't hide. Now Donald Trump likes to say, you know, 'I'm going to build this wall, then I'm not taking any questions,' but okay, when you've got 90 minutes and there's just a moderator and two of you on stage, you can run but you can't hide." Moderators on notice - Trump running mate Mike Pence on Hugh Hewitt's radio show "My confident hope in the debate tonight and our debate and the other two presidential debates (is that) the moderators will ask the questions and they'll allow the candidates to answer the questions. And the rest of you people afterwards can do all the commentating and let the American people decide." Fact-checker - Clinton campaign press secretary Brian Fallon on CNN's "New Day" "There is enough lies that Donald Trump tells consistently that everyone should be able to call him out -- (debate moderator) Lester Holt, Hillary Clinton will, too. But I think that even the observers and reporters tonight watching, that are grading the candidates' performances should take it into account." He'll 'be himself' - Trump campaign spokesman Jason Miller on CNN's "New Day" "Mr. Trump is going to be very prepared for this evening, but the key point to make about Mr. Trump is that he's going to go in there with the clarity and conviction of a candidate who knows exactly what his vision is, exactly how he wants to help the country. And so he's going to go in there and essentially be himself. And that's something that's really easy to prepare for. Secretary Clinton has a much bigger challenge, she's trying to program all of her lines and figure out what poll-tested methods are going to work tonight." Just the facts - Clinton campaign manager Robby Mook, appearing on NBC's "Today" show: "All that we're asking from Donald Trump is that he stick with the facts, that he give clear plans and that he have a command of the issues. That's how we think the candidates should be judged. "That's how they've been judged in the past. What we don't want to have is some kind of double standard where Donald Trump can get the most improved award but Hillary Clinton is getting judged on the fine points of policy." Lowering expectations - Trump campaign manager Kellyanne Conway, appearing on NBC's "Today" show "Robby and I are living in parallel universes. Donald Trump has been criticized all weekend long. I think that the Clinton campaign has clearly been talking to the media for a week now saying it's your job to make sure that Donald Trump is checked -- fact-checked in real time. I'm just surprised the campaign manager would try to lower expectations that dramatically for his own candidate. "Look, they know that campaign debates are not Hillary Clinton's sweet spot. Yes, she is experienced at doing them but the experience hasn't necessarily been beneficial. I've been asking voters formally, can you name anything from a debate that you've seen from Hillary Clinton that really moves you or that you remember and they can't. She's been in 34 of them." 14 Season finales of "The Apprentice" - Republican National Committee Chairman Reince Priebus on CNN's "WOLF" "He's studying and he's preparing and they're going through hypotheticals and what scenarios might come up. But he's very comfortable, he did a great job in our primary debates. He's also been through 14 season finales, he will be prepared." Season finales are "showmanship" - Mook responds to Priebus on CNN's "WOLF" "You asked him about Donald Trump's qualifications in his approach tonight and he stressed he's had 14 season finales of the Apprentice, and I think they really are hoping to coast on style and his television showmanship." Watch the women - Clinton supporter Rep. Jim Himes, a Connecticut Democrat, appearing on CNN's "New Day" "Remember, Donald Trump has never gone one-on-one in a debate with anyone, much less a woman. So I think there's huge risk if he goes after her in that fashion that a lot of in particular women will say, 'holy smokes that's out of bounds.'" Trump is unpredictable - Trump supporter Rep. Peter King, a New York Republican, appearing on CNN's "New Day." "I'm confident he will adapt and say what he has to say or protect his style. Ted Cruz is different than Hillary Clinton and he sort of adapted his attacks to each opponent. I think you'll see a line of argument and attack, if you will, that is different. Again, we have to wait and see because I don't think anyone can predict what Donald Trump will do, but I think he will do very well." CNN's Betsy Klein, Elizabeth Landers, Tom LoBianco and David Wright contributed to this report.
NEWARK, N.J. — Gov. Chris Christie was told of the George Washington Bridge lane closures as they were occurring in 2013, a federal prosecutor told jurors on Monday in U.S. District Court. David Wildstein, who has already pleaded guilty to playing a role in the incident, and Bill Baroni, who is now on trial for his alleged role in the scheme, “bragged” about the traffic gridlock that lane closures were causing when they spoke with the Republican governor at a Sept. 11 memorial in Lower Manhattan, Assistant U.S. Attorney Vikas Khanna said. Story Continued Below The two Christie-appointed former Port Authority officials mentioned the Democratic mayor of Fort Lee, Mark Sokolich, whom they are accused of trying to punish after he refused to endorse Christie’s reelection campaign, the prosecutor said. “The evidence will show that Baroni and Wildstein were so committed to their plan that, during the precious moments they had alone with the governor, they bragged about the fact that there were traffic problems in Fort Lee and that Mayor Sokolich was not getting his calls returned,” Khanna told jurors during his opening remarks Monday morning. Khanna did not elaborate on what was allegedly said during the conversation with Christie, but he told jurors that “evidence in this case may show that others could have, should have, perhaps knew certain aspects of what was going on.” Baroni, the former deputy executive director of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, and Bridget Anne Kelly, Christie’s former deputy chief of staff, were indicted in May 2015 on charges of conspiracy, fraud and civil rights violations. Christie, who is currently a top adviser to Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump, has denied any knowledge or involvement in the lane-closing incident. And an ostensibly independent report commissioned by Christie said, referring to a much publicized picture of Christie and Wildstein chatting at a public event three days into the manufactured traffic jams at the bridge, that there was “no evidence we have seen that the Governor and Wildstein actually had any substantive discussion of the Fort Lee lane realignment at that public event.” Wildstein, a sharp-elbowed political operator who was a boyhood schoolmate of Christie, has already implicated the two others and will testify during the trial. The trial is expected to last six weeks. The allegation that Christie was told about the George Washington Bridge Fort Lee access lane closings as they were happening doesn’t exactly contradict the governor's own words. But the prosecution's version of the incident does not square with the governor’s own claims, or with the report on Bridgegate produced by the outside firm hired by the Christie administration. The allegation that the lane closings were mentioned to Christie at a 9/11 commemoration ceremony in Lower Manhattan in 2013 is not new. But that 2014 report by the law firm Gibson Dunn & Crutcher — commissioned by Christie and paid for with millions in taxpayer funds — not only denied evidence of a "substantive" discussion, but also said, “It seems incredible that, in a public setting leading up to a 9/11 Memorial event, surrounded by other government officials and scores of constituents seeking photographs and handshakes, anything substantive or inculpatory would have been discussed." The report went on to say that “even if credited, any passing reference by Wildstein made in a social, public setting at the time of a public 9/11 Memorial event to traffic issue in Fort Lee would not have been meaningful or memorable to the Governor” and that Christie “recalls no such exchange.” The prosecution's statement that Wildstein and Baroni bragged to the governor about what they had done runs directly counter to any characterization of the verbal update as a "passing reference" and makes it harder to imagine the exchange as one the governor could possibly fail to recall. Baroni’s attorney, Michael Baldassare, told jurors during his opening statement that Wildstein — the government’s star witness — told prosecutors that other officials played a role in the alleged scheme. “David Wildstein implicated so many people in this activity that it will boggle your mind,” Baldassare said. “They’re people at the highest levels of government in New Jersey, and at the very top of the Port Authority.” At one point, Baldassare called Wildstein a “ventriloquist’s doll, sitting on Christopher J. Christie’s lap.” While Baldassare said his client had no hand in shutting down the lanes or covering up the incident, he spent much of his time with the jury focused on Wildstein, whom he said the governor’s office had sent to keep an eye on Baroni. Baldassare worked to impeach Wildstein’s reputation, even cursing his name and apologizing before doing so. He repeatedly called Wildstein a liar, saying he lied under oath before the grand jury that handed up the indictment in the case. “David Wildstein is a vicious guy,” Baldassare said, referring to comments he said former coworkers of Wildstein had made about him. “He’s a bully. I’m sorry judge, everyone — he’s an asshole. He’s a horrible person. He’s the most complicated person I’ve ever met. He is a vindictive individual who would destroy your life.” “He had a twisted mind,” he added, again referring to others. “He’s maniacal. I apologize, again — David Wildstein is a miserable prick. The governor referred to David Wildstein as his fixer. His fixer. And the governor used to joke that David Wildstein was his Mr. Wolf. Mr. Wolf from the movie ‘Pulp Fiction.’” The character, played by actor Harvey Keitel in the Quentin Tarantino film, was an underworld fixer who helped two of the movie’s main characters dispose of a body. At an appearance at a town hall event in Morris County, Christie avoided reporters' questions about the trial. Linh Tat contributed to this report. UPDATE: After this story was published, Baldassare emailed to say that some of the derogatory comments he made about Wildstein during the trial were quotes from people Wildstein had once worked with. The story has been modified to reflect that.
(CNN)Donald Trump and his running mate appeared to be on different pages Tuesday on whether climate change is man made. Roughly an hour after Trump campaign manager Kellyanne Conway said the real estate mogul does not believe global warming is a man-made phenomenon, GOP vice presidential nominee Mike Pence appeared to take the opposite view. "Well, look, there's no question that the activities that take place in this country and in countries around the world have some impact on the environment and some impact on climate," Pence said during an appearance with host Chris Cuomo on CNN's "New Day." Clinton puts Trump on defense at first debate But during her own appearance on the program earlier Tuesday morning, Conway said Trump "believes that global warming is naturally occurring," and confirmed the candidate does not believe it is man made. The Trump campaign did not immediately respond to a request for comment. There is near universal consensus in the scientific community that climate change is man made. Conway and Pence were both asked to clarify the campaign's position on the issue following Monday night's debate, when Hillary Clinton accused Trump of believing that climate change "a hoax perpetrated by the Chinese." Trump flatly denied that, even though he has called climate change a "hoax" repeatedly in the past. In a tweet from 2012, for example, Trump said that the "concept of global warming was created by and for the Chinese in order to make U.S. manufacturing non-competitive." Trump later claimed he was only joking. In his interview on Tuesday, Pence dismissed that tweet as "humorous," and said that he and Trump are opposed to certain environmental policies. "What Donald Trump said was a hoax is that bureaucrats in Washington, D.C., can control the climate of the earth and the reality is that this climate change agenda that Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton want to continue to expand is killing jobs in this country," he said. Pence faced another question about a conflicting position on the GOP ticket when he was asked about the Trans-Pacific Partnership, or TPP, trade legislation he initially supported but that Trump has longed opposed. "I wholly agree with Donald Trump's view about TPP," Pence said. 
During a campaign stop in Philadelphia, Vice President Joe Biden slammed Donald Trump’s debate performance Monday night –- specifically taking umbrage with the GOP nominee's comments on the housing crisis. "This is a guy who said -- and wants to be president -- that it was good business for him to see the housing market fail. What in the hell is he talking about?" Biden said during a rally at Drexel University. "Every president I have served with, including Republicans, has had a moral center about what it was to be an American, about what we’re supposed to do, about what basic fundamental rights are." Biden asked the crowd if they could imagine Ronald Reagan, "saying it's good business to take advantage of people’s misery, rooting for that misery?" "He does not have the basic fundamental sensibilities and values that almost every American politician left, right and center I know have," Biden said. "They disagree on how to make things better for you, but they don’t take pleasure from 'You’re fired.' They don’t take pleasure knowing that they will benefit." During the first presidential debate, Hillary Clinton said Trump was rooting for a collapse in the housing market, to which the real-estate mogul responded, "That's called business, by the way." "When you’re sitting atop Trump Tower, in a semi-golden palace, not a joke, what do you care about the people that I grew up with?" Biden said of Trump. The vice president also criticized Trump's suggestion that not paying taxes "makes me smart." "He acknowledged that he didn’t pay taxes because, he said, he’s smart. Makes him smart," Biden said. "Tell that to the janitor in here who’s paying taxes. Tell that to your mothers and fathers who are breaking their neck to send you here who are paying their taxes. No I really mean it. It angers me.” He added that the views Trump expressed in the debate demonstrate his outlook on the country. "If this choice isn’t clear, I don’t know –- my lord," Biden said about the debate. "What bothers me about this race is how palpable his cynicism is about the American people."
Hillary Clinton’s running mate Tim Kaine slammed Donald Trump’s debate performance, saying the GOP nominee wasn’t prepared and near the end “looked like he was running out of gas and leaning on the ropes.” “I don’t think he was prepared, so in terms of the specifics, he offered very few specifics on any policy issue,” Kaine said Tuesday morning on the Today show. “He did attack — that’s true. He didn’t offer specifics, with the exception of his big tax plan, which is huge cuts for the folks at the top." Story Continued Below Kaine said Trump didn’t answer basic questions, such as about his tax returns, and he “showed that he was easily rattled.” He said Clinton’s best moment came when Trump was challenged on whether he said Clinton has the “look” to be president. During Monday’s debate at Hosftra University in New York, moderator Lester Holt asked Trump about previous comments he made that the Democratic nominee doesn’t look presidential. Trump responded that Clinton doesn’t have the stamina, at which point Clinton shot back that as secretary of state she had traveled to hundreds of countries and testified for 11 hours on the Benghazi killings before a House committee, among other things. “She looked like she was ready for another 11 hours of debate, and he looked like he was running out of gas and leaning on the ropes,” Kaine said.
The “he said/she said” method of reporting—in which journalists observe the profession’s convention and get at least two sides of every story—has been taking it on the chin ever since New York University journalism professor Jay Rosen placed it in his gunsights in 2009 and started ack-acking it with regularity. But the "he said/she said" debate didn’t move from the margins to the mainstream until last week when the New York Times abandoned mechanical balance and published a Page One, above-the-fold piece by Michael Barbaro, shredding Donald Trump as a pitiful serial liar and obfuscator for his latest “birther” declaration. The Times piece elated critics of the "he said/she" said construct. In an Atlantic piece titled “The Death of ‘He Said, She Said’ Journalism,” Peter Beinart pronounced Barbaro’s work a journalistic sea change. Trump had broken all the rules of political conduct, Beinart stated, and the Times had rightly ditched a few of its own. Abandoning the usual journalistic etiquette, which calls for mendacious politicians to be described as committing a falsehood when what they’re actually doing is lying, the Times piece dealt with Trump with “astonishing bluntness,” Beinart wrote, repeatedly calling Trump’s birther nonsense a “lie.” Trump was given no opportunity in the piece to deny the charges, which sits just fine with the "he said/she said" critics. Story Continued Below While I consider Trump to be a first-rate liar and don’t mind saying so, I’m not convinced that jettisoning the "he said/she said" blueprint is such a good idea. Every politician lies. If we were to police all politicians in the news pages the way Barbaro did Trump, it would be entertaining. But political journalism as we know it could expire as profiles and news stories collapsed into spreadsheets grading the truth value of political utterances. Isn’t that what the fact-checker columns are for? In his widely applauded critiques of "he said/she said" journalism, Rosen holds that by reflexively seeking the “other side” of every public dispute and shying away from expressing the truth, the media creates a bogus symmetry between the “he said” voices in a story and the prevaricators serving up the “she said” dissent. “Do users really want to be left helpless in sorting out who’s faking it more?” Rosen asked, proposing that journalists put a higher premium on seeking truth and avoiding distortion. The "he said/she said" structure constitutes “one of the lowest forms of journalism in existence,” he would later remark. Donald Trump, the thinking goes, has gamed the "he said/she said" convention to contaminate the political debate with his lies, obfuscations and double-talk whenever the press seeks comment on an issue, a clarification of something he’s said, or a response to a point raised by his opponent, Hillary Clinton. This is true. In speeches and interviews, he’s expressed a broadband stream of lies, such as denying that he’s used terms like “fat pig” to describe women, insisting that he never called George W. Bush a liar, claiming that he opposed the Iraq War, making fallacious boasts about his acts of philanthropy, asserting that the NFL had contacted him about the debate schedule, and more, much more. But they are lies, all lies. And every time the media quotes one of Trump’s “she said” lies without a correcting fact-check, it undermines the truth of the “he said” side of the debate. At least, so the thinking goes. But has journalists' practice of giving Trump the right of reply, allowing him to pearl his lies with another coating of deceit really been such a disaster? One result of the straight, "he said/she said" coverage of the Trump style has been his record lows in the Washington Post/ABC News favorability poll. Thanks to this coverage, many voters are able to see through Trump’s “post-truth” style of politics and don’t need the news pages directly calling him a lying liar who lies every time he speaks. Among his supporters, many don’t care that he mangles the facts and others take secret glee in the trickster’s campaign he’s waging for the presidency: He’s serving baloney and his supporters can’t get enough of it. As bracing and as full of truth-telling as the Barbaro piece was, I hope it doesn’t embolden other news pages to abandon convention. The formula, when properly executed, forces reporters to perform due diligence in their articles. The form is even more useful for skeptical “show me” readers, who want those extra bits of evidence to help them make up their mind about a candidate or an issue. This, I realize, can be especially challenging with Trump because the Mouth of Manhattan has made a career of taking both sides on nearly everything. He is the hermaphrodite of opinion makers—both "he said and she said"—and, like any good circus freak, that makes him too exceptional to build rules from. One reason I admire "he said/she said" journalism is that I often find myself sympathizing with the "she-said" side of the equation, and its presence assures me that the reporter is conducting something approximating an open inquiry. Whenever the "she-said" component of a story goes missing, leaving only the dominant position expressed, I get the feeling I’m being fed bunk. Even the Holy Bible gives Satan a forum for his dastardly views. So why not news stories? I don’t believe a story must balance out like a chemistry equation until both sides (or multiple sides) hover in the ether in perfect equilibrium. But intellectual history informs us that the dominant positions in any field—ruling paradigms, if you don’t mind the language—have a tendency to erode over time when exposed to minority critiques. In order for thought to progress, the minority report—however seemingly misguided—must be heard. The history of science is pockmarked with paradigms that were blown away by she-saiders. Early in the last century, for example, the scientific and cultural elites espoused the misguided philosophy of eugenics, which held that feeblemindedness was directly inheritable and that forced sterilization, institutionalization or lobotomization for these lessers was right and just. To oppose eugenics was to place yourself outside the established consensus, to define yourself as a crackpot, to be reduced to a "she-said" if you were lucky enough to get quoted in a news story. Today, we think of the eugenicists as troglodytes. Or consider the story of Alfred Wegener. He 1912, he proposed his plate tectonic theory much to the derision of the scientific establishment who laughed at the idea of continental drift. Not until the 1960s did his ideas gain proper respect, and his critics take his place as geology’s crackpots. Or take the example of Australian doctor Barry Marshall, who conjectured in the early 1980s that bacteria and not stress was the cause of ulcers, a condition that afflicted up to 10 percent of all adults. Even after Marshall induced an ulcer in his own stomach by drinking a potion containing Helicobacter pylori he was still derided and marginalized by the establishment. “You think, ‘It’s science; it’s got to be accepted,’” Marshall told Discover magazine. “But it’s not an absolute given.” By the mid-1990s, the idea finally took root, undermining the business model of thousands of gastroenterologists who treated and retreated the affliction with ineffective drugs and surgery. In 2005, Marshall and a colleague were awarded the Nobel Prize in medicine for their Helicobacter pylori work. Science abounds with equally dramatic stories. Obviously, the critiques of every she-saider don’t automatically end in the triumphs Wegener and Marshall enjoyed. But when you catalog the ruling paradigms in science and technology that have been toppled in recent years, the toppler was almost always marginalized in the early going. Fracking has all but destroyed the peak oil hypothesis. The “one-size, fits all” advice on mammograms has been abandoned. Our views on saturated fat, once almost holy writ, have been chucked. Until 1973, the American Psychiatric Association classified homosexuality as a mental disorder. (All is not progress: Some now argue that “homophobia” is an indicator of a disorder.) Marijuana makes you mad. (Today, the equally suspicious paradigm is that marijuana is good for whatever ails you.) Coffee, once thought to be bad for you, turns out to be good for you, at least for now. Moving over to the policy realm, the once dominant “super-predator” thesis was once supported across partisan lines. It is now discredited. Remember how Japan’s economy was supposed to overtake the United States’? Remember how Federal Reserve Board Chairman Alan Greenspan said the U.S. economic system was stable? Experts predicted wild inflation after quantitative easing. Others posited that housing prices would never decline nationwide. And so on. The dissents of the she-saiders are generally beneficial. Whether right or wrong, the dissenters have a way of increasing everybody’s knowledge. If they are wrong, as Michael Shermer has written, their untruths force the dominant paradigm to self-examine, and if warranted, use new evidence to improve its position. If the she-saiders are right, they advance human thought. That’s how science works, and I believe journalism should work that way, too. Vaccine pioneer Jonas Salk summarized the predictable moves of the knee-jerk paradigm-defenders with this progression. “First,” Salk writes, they say “that it can’t be true.” Second phase: “Well, if it’s true, it’s not very important.” Third phase: “Well, we’ve known it all along.” Before anybody puts words in my mouth, this is not my long-winded way of saying I don’t subscribe to the global warming hypothesis. I do—but at the same time, I keep my options open. The protectors of the ruling paradigm have an intellectual responsibility to mount disciplined defense against all comers. Even against crackpots. The last and best reason for supporting “he said/she said” journalism: So many readers and viewers have self-segregated by limiting their news consumption to outlets that reflect their personal views. These days, many readers get only the "he said" side of the story or just the "she said" side, remaining deliberately oblivious to the vibrant debate that might actually be going on. While I value partisan media, I also value nonpartisan news operations—like POLITICO—that make ideas duel in their news pages. NPR News Director Michael Oreskes puts this practical spin on why his organization shies away from calling liars liars: “[I]f you present the facts calmly and without a tone of editorializing, you substantially increase the chance that people will hear you out and weigh the facts. That is why the tone of journalism matters so much. We need potential listeners and readers to believe we are presenting the facts honestly, and not to confirm our opinions.” If you’re not getting a steady diet of "she said" quotations in your news consumption, you’re at risk of starving to death. "He said/she said" keeps journalists honest, even if, on occasion, it looks like it’s only accruing to the benefit of a beast like Donald Trump. ****** A sumptuous meal of news, news, news. Make mine extra rare, garcon. Send news recipes via email to Shafer.Politico@gmail.com. My email alerts are breakfast. My Twitter feed is lunch. And my RSS feed is a stingy snack.
Donald Trump made his way into the spin room moments after the close of the debate and told reporters he was proud that he did not bring up former president Bill Clinton’s extramarital affairs. “I’m very happy that I was able to hold back on the indiscretions with respect to Bill Clinton,” Trump said to a gaggle of reporters. “Because I have a lot of respect for Chelsea Clinton and I just didn’t want to say what I was going to say.” Story Continued Below And what exactly, a reporter asked, was that going to be? “I’ll tell you maybe at the next debate, we’ll see,” he responded. A candidate’s presence in the spin room, where surrogates and advisers typically pitch their take on the debate to reporters, was unusual. But Trump, with his wife Melania at his side, took a few questions. “I think it went better than I ever thought,” he said of the debate. “I loved it, I loved it.”
Federal prosecutors are pushing back against a demand by defense lawyers that New York and New Jersey bombing suspect Ahmad Rahami be arraigned immediately on federal charges he is facing. Late Tuesday, defense attorneys wrote to federal magistrate judge Gabriel Gorenstein asking that Rahami be promptly informed of the charges against him at a court proceeding that would also formally advise him of his right to counsel and his right to remain silent. However, prosecutors from the office of U.S. Attorney for the Southern District of New York Preet Bharara said in a letter to the magistrate Wednesday that Rahami isn't in federal custody so there is no legal obligation for the federal courts to get involved. "The defendant in this case, Ahmad Khan Rahami, a/k/a 'Ahmad Rahimi,' has not been arrested on any federal charge. He is not in federal custody. He is in the custody of the State of New Jersey, on state charges, and is subject to a bail package issued by the New Jersey state court," federal prosecutors wrote. "While a writ of habeas corpus ad prosequendum has been lodged with the United States Marshals Service, it has not been executed, and there has been no such federal arrest." The writ referred to in the federal prosecutors' letter would require state or local officials to hand over Rahami to federal authorities for prosecution. Rahami is facing five attempted murder charges in a New Jersey court in connection with a shootout Monday morning in which the suspect and two police officers were wounded. Rahami is currently in a Newark hospital. A judge has set $5.2 million bail and an initial county court appearance for Sept. 28. Defense lawyers contend that Rahami has been "without the benefit of counsel" since his arrest, but it's unclear whether he's been advised of his Miranda rights or whether he's made some decision not to meet with an attorney. Lawmakers briefed on the investigation say he has not been cooperating. While Attorney General Loretta Lynch said Wednesday that Rahami would be taken to Manhattan in the "near future," the letter from prosecutors evinces no urgency to such a move. Prosecutors say Rahami has no rights in the federal system at the moment, including a right to counsel. The letter indicates that lawyers from the Federal Defenders office in New York have sought appointment in Rahami's case, but prosecutors say that's "plainly premature" until he is brought to court. Prosecutors cited a series of terrorism cases where judges ruled defendants were not entitled to court-appointed counsel until they appear in court. Court records show no immediate action from Gorenstein on the request for Rahami's arraignment or the defense lawyers' request to be appointed as his counsel in the case.
The Republican candidate's campaign launched a nationwide filter on the popular social network Monday. While some candidates including Hillary Clinton have paid for local Snapchat filters during regional events in the past, this is the first sponsored political filter available nationwide. Snapchat users now have the option to take selfies and photos with a picture frame design that says "Debate Day: Donald J. Trump vs. Crooked Hillary" before sharing with friends. The filter also features fireworks on the sides and a banner at the bottom with his campaign slogan, "Make America Great Again."  Related: Say hello to Snap Inc. Anyone can create a filter on Snapchat using the app's Geofilters feature, but its availability is typically limited to proximity to an event, location or community. It's unclear how much Trump's campaign paid for the filter to show up for users nationwide. A spokesperson for the Trump campaign did not immediately respond to a request for comment. Sponsored filters have long been a way for Snapchat -- now rebranded as Snap Inc. -- to bring in ad dollars, in addition to showing sponsored videos within the app. Related: 100 million? Ratings expectations for first Trump-Clinton debate Trump and Clinton have used other social media networks, including Twitter (TWTR, Tech30) and Facebook (FB, Tech30), to target younger audiences. But Snapchat is notoriously popular with teens and millennials -- a core group of voters both candidates hope to win over. "Rather than actually try and persuade people, the Trump campaign is throwing money into a fire pit," the Clinton campaign said in a statement. "[This features] a joke that, given Trump's deep unpopularity with young voters, will be used mainly at their own expense." Looks like @BernieSanders campaign bought sponsored @Snapchat geotag filter at @HillaryClinton event pic.twitter.com/Yk6ZEMLUH1 Recent polls suggest Clinton has failed to gain the kind of enthusiasm that drove younger voters to the polls four and eight years ago. Between the two major party candidates, Clinton has used Snapchat more so far. Earlier this year, Clinton's camp launched a filter which targeted those attending a Trump rally in California. Clinton also released one during the Republican National Convention, which featured a quote from Trump about how Clinton would make a great president. During the primaries, presidential hopefuls like Bernie Sanders also used a filter during a Clinton rally. NMLS #1136
U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry made an impassioned plea in front of the United Nations Security Council today for all sides in the Syrian conflict to live up to their obligations under a cease-fire agreement. The move may be the best chance for the U.S. to help bring an end to the violence, humanitarian crisis and displacement of thousands of Syrians. Kerry's determination to restore the cease-fire comes in wake of the most flagrant yet of the violations: Two days ago, a United Nations humanitarian aid convoy headed to opposition-held areas of Aleppo was destroyed in a prolonged airstrike.     "On Monday, 20 aid workers were killed in an outrageous, sustained, two-hour attack directed at a fully authorized humanitarian mission near Aleppo — fully authorized," Kerry told the Security Council this morning. "All of the permits had been given. Everybody was on notice." U.S. officials believe Russian aircraft, not Syrian, were responsible for the strike but have yet to publicly accuse Moscow. Yesterday the White House said it could have been only Russians or the Syrian regime and that either way, Russia is accountable for the strikes, given its leverage over Syria and its commitments under the cease-fire. In spite of all this, rather than abandon the cease-fire, Kerry today urged the Syrian regime to adhere to its terms, calling for the grounding of all regime aircraft. "Our purpose in this negotiation was to put an end to the kind of horrific and indiscriminate attacks that have been the primary cause of fear, of suffering, of displacement," Kerry said. "And under our plan, all of this could be quickly accompanied by serious negotiations between the parties, aimed at a political transition and a conclusion to the conflict." Meanwhile, the Russians have released a series of conflicting statements in an effort to justify the strike on the U.N. convoy. They suggested at one point the convoy was accompanied by an armed opposition vehicle and most recently suggested the strike might have been carried out by a U.S. drone flying in the region. The U.S. Defense Department quickly denied that, saying it doesn't fly aircraft over that area of Syria. Moscow has yet to respond to Kerry's request to ground all regime aircraft, but negotiations will likely continue through the rest of the week at the U.N. General Assembly in New York. Members of the International Syria Support Group are expected to convene again in the coming days. "The future of Syria is hanging by a thread, and I urge this council not to give up," Kerry said today. "And I urge the entire international community to get behind the best chance that we have yet had to reduce the violence, to provide humanitarian assistance and to open up the space for negotiations."
Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump are virtually tied in Pennsylvania and Colorado, according to CNN/ORC polls of the battleground states released Monday. Clinton and Trump are separated by a single point in both states — well within the margin of error — with Clinton’s advantage coming in Pennsylvania while Trump leads in Colorado. Clinton tops the field in a four-way matchup in Pennsylvania with 45 percent support to Trump’s 44 percent. Libertarian nominee Gary Johnson follows with 6 percent support, while Green Party nominee Jill Stein sits at 3 percent, among likely voters. In Colorado, it’s Trump who leads the field, with 42 percent support, followed by Clinton at 41 percent, Johnson at 13 percent and Stein at 3 percent. In a head-to-head, though, Clinton holds narrow advantages over Trump in both states. She leads Trump 50 percent to 47 percent among likely voters in Pennsylvania and 49 percent to 47 percent in Colorado. The polls come hours ahead of Monday night’s presidential debate between Clinton and Trump. While nearly 8-in-10 voters in Pennsylvania and Colorado said they’ve already made their minds up on who they will vote for in November, more than 20 percent in each state said they could change their mind, suggesting Monday’s performance could impact the race. The surveys of 771 likely Pennsylvania voters and 784 likely Colorado voters were conducted Sept. 20-25 via landline and cellphone. They have a margin of error of plus or minus 3.5 percentage points.
KENT, OHIO—A lonely Hillary supporter stood with a sign outside the rec center at Kent State University on Saturday, a gray and muggy afternoon for a rally. “INSECURE, SMALL PENISED WHITE GUYS FOR TRUMP!!!” his sign read. Near him, grizzled men in fatigues and sunglasses and a fraternity brother held pro-Trump signs. But the main swirl of activity ahead of Bernie Sanders’ speech in this Ohio college town was the dozen fervent Jill Stein supporters, formerly fervent Bernie supporters, holding signs and signing up volunteers. “We have a better choice,” one sign—puffy paint on rumpled printer paper—said. “The two-party system is messed uuuup!” sang Patty Friedrich, a local Green Party organizer, as she pranced around, handing out fliers to people going to the rally. “Embrace the suuuuuck!” Story Continued Below “I think our democracy is over after this election,” said Kristyn Nye, who works in marketing. “It doesn’t matter who wins.” Bernie had opened her eyes, she said, and when he left the race, she was bereft of choice and angered by his speech at the Democratic National Convention in July. “He should’ve just dropped the mic,” Nye said. “I wish he would’ve just stuck it to them. What does he have to lose? People in Vermont love him!” After a rally in Akron, Bernie Sanders had arrived in Kent on a mission that might be critical to the election: coaxing disaffected Ohioans not just to vote, but to vote for the woman whom he’d been calling corrupt just a few months ago. With Donald Trump moving up in the polls—and even, according to some polls, leading in this crucial swing state—the Clinton campaign sent in the reinforcements: Bernie Sanders. Hillary for America, which organized the event, was evidently hoping that Sanders, with his anti-establishment appeal and image of fiery authenticity, could bring his herd—and maybe a few stragglers—more securely into the fold. But it was not clear how well it was working: Nye had internalized Bernie’s message so fully that she had decided to vote for Jill Stein, the Green Party candidate. She was for Jill mostly because she disliked Hillary, who voted for the war in Iraq, is constantly surrounded by scandal and, in Nye’s view, “doesn’t stand for anything.” She also may or may not have Parkinson’s. “But I know a person with Parkinson’s, and I don’t know how she would be able to control the shakes,” Nye muses out loud. “She would have to be on so many drugs that she’d be so out of it, but she seems sharp. How does she do it?” Maybe she just doesn’t have Parkinson’s? I offered. Nye blinked at me, not understanding. “She’s just so untrustworthy, that I just don’t know,” she finally responded. “Is it pneumonia?” And another thing, Nye said. Clinton wants to start a war with Russia, which she heard on Russia Today. When I pointed out that this was a channel paid for exclusively by the Kremlin, she wondered how that was any different from, say, NPR. She wasn’t going to the rally inside the rec center to hear Bernie speak, and neither were the other Bernie diehards there that day. “Why? To hear a man who sold his soul?” said Michele Bline, 54, a disabled veteran of Desert Storm. “Bernie sold ooouuuut!” sang Friedrich nearby. “They threatened his familyyy!” “We’ve heard it all before,” Bline went on. “We know where he stands,” “He’s not going to sway me,” a grad student named Gwen West chimed in. Inside, past the humming treadmills and clanging weights, on the far edge of the basketball courts, walled off from the dribblers and dunkers by a wall of semi-transparent white netting, Sanders stood slouching over the lectern, his rumpled pants falling on clunky black shoes, holding forth to a crowd of about 300. A Sanders rally of yore this was not. Earlier that day in Akron, only about 150 came out to hear the old prophet of political revolution. Here, he tried to fulfill his promise to do whatever he could to prevent Trump from being president. To cheers and finger snaps, he talked about the man’s bigotry and “the so-called Bertha movement.” “Now let me be very clear about what the Bertha movement really is,” he went on in his Brooklyn accent about the faux controversy Trump spawned about Obama’s provenance. “It’s not about disagreeing with Obama—you can disagree any time you want. What they were trying to do, led by Donald Trump, is to delegitimize the presidency of the first black president we have ever had. ... What an outrage! What a racist attack!” “This is an enormously, enormously, enormously important election,” he pressed on, the crowd beaming up at him. “And for those of your friends who say, ‘Well, I don’t like anybody, I’m not going to vote’ ... ask your friends why the Koch brothers are spending hundreds of millions of dollars if this election is not important.” It took him a while to get around to saying it, but he did: “Hillary Clinton believes as I believe” that the minimum wage must be raised, that women should control their own bodies, that “our gay brothers and sisters have the right to get married.” “You have to do everything you can to make sure that Secretary Clinton and [Democratic Senate candidate] Ted Strickland win in this state!” Afterward, he was mobbed for handshakes and selfies. “Did you get to shake his hand?” Lorie Sewell, a local teacher, asked her husband Jim. “Twice!” Jim grinned. They had voted for Bernie in the primaries and were still fans, but, said Jim, who teaches at Kent State, “there was no convincing necessary” to get them to support Clinton. He went on, “We would’ve rather voted for Bernie, but the choice is pretty darn clear.” Three freshmen, Samantha, Quincy and Molly, were exhilarated by the various media interviews they had given after the rally, and their parents—it was parents’ weekend—waited patiently until they could get a bite to eat. The girls were all ardent Bernie supporters—and one of their dads was, too—but they liked Clinton fine, too. Their parents had supported her, and it was a natural switch for them. “I was always going to vote for Hillary if Bernie didn’t win,” Samantha said. Nearby, three young female students, two of them black, told me they had voted for Bernie but were willing to support Hillary in order to keep Trump from being elected—which, one of them laughed, would usher in “World War 17.” They weren’t huge fans of Hillary and her “sketchy” history, but they understood the stakes and Sanders’s lobbying for her was compelling. “Bernie’s supporting her,” Kelyanne, a junior, said, “so there must be a side of her that’s good that we just don’t see.” There was a small commotion in the wings—the student volunteers were meeting privately with Bernie, who thanked them for their support and took a group photo with them. Afterward, two of them, both College Democrats who had voted for Bernie in the primaries, gushed about that moment. “He had his hand on his shoulder!” Brian DiPaolo said, pointing to his comrade Anthony Erhardt. They still loved Bernie, but the switch hadn’t been wrenching for them either. “I was never a Bernie-or-Buster,” said Erhardt. “It was not hard” to watch Bernie concede in Philadelphia and pass the baton to Clinton. “It was a celebratory moment,” he said. There are still some things on which Erhardt disagreed with Clinton, but ultimately, he said, “the pros outweigh the cons.” “I’m voting for her because she’s more qualified,” DiPaolo said matter-of-factly, clearly proud of the maturity of his reasoning. “I like to say that we’re not selling out, we’re buying in.” Sure, they had some friends who were holding out and planning on sitting out the election—all the students I talked to did—and they just hadn’t bothered to even come see Bernie that afternoon. This struck them all as “selfish” and “self-centered” and the people outside, the Jill Stein supporters, are “just doing harm to Bernie’s image.” Or, as Erhardt put it, “I love Bernie, I still do. I just hate his supporters.”
Washington (CNN)Hillary Clinton is leading Donald Trump by 6 points ahead of the first debate on Monday, according to a new national poll released Wednesday. A four-way matchup shows Clinton has 43% support of likely voters while Trump has 37%, in the new NBC/Wall Street Journal poll. Libertarian Party nominee Gary Johnson is at 9% and the Green Party's Jill Stein is at 3%. In a two-way matchup, Clinton leads Trump by 7 points, 48% to 41%. Clinton on police shootings: 'too many people have lost their lives who shouldn't have' The poll was conducted after a rough patch for Clinton, highlighted by her temporarily leaving the campaign trail after she was diagnosed with pneumonia. Despite a recent effort to court African-American voters, Trump garners just 7% support compared to Clinton's 81% with the voting bloc. On the issues, Trump has the advantage with voters when it comes to the economy -- 46% to 41%. But Clinton leads when it comes to being in charge of nuclear weapons (51% to 25%), being a good commander in chief (48% to 33%) and on immigration (50% to 39%). Trump and Clinton are virtually tied when it comes to terrorism and homeland security (44% to 43%). A new CNN Poll of Polls, including the NBC/WSJ data, finds Clinton's edge over Trump has inched up by 1 point. The Poll of Polls averages the results of the five most recent nationwide telephone polls of presidential preference among likely voters and finds her ahead, 43% to 40%. The NBC/WSJ poll surveyed 992 likely voters between September 16-19 and has a margin of error of plus or minus 3.2 percentage points. 
The “horrible” shooting death of an unarmed black man in Tulsa, Oklahoma, on Friday is “just unbearable and needs to be intolerable,” Hillary Clinton said Tuesday. Speaking to radio host Steve Harvey, Clinton anxiously contrasted herself and her opponent, Donald Trump. “Oh my gosh, can I have the whole hour?” Clinton said when asked what separates her from the Republican presidential nominee. “I think it really comes down to our visions and our values. You know, I have a vision where we continue to pursue equality and justice and opportunity for everybody.” Story Continued Below Clinton highlighted how she’s been a champion for minorities and women and touted her plans to raise incomes, create more good jobs, make colleges — including historically black colleges and universities — more affordable and address systemic racism before talking about the Tulsa shooting unprompted. “This horrible shooting — again. How many times do we have to see this in our country?” Clinton asked, referring to the incident in which Terence Crutcher, an unarmed black man, was shot dead by police despite having his hands up as he walked to his SUV with armed officers behind him. “In Tulsa? An unarmed man? With his hands in the air? I mean, this is just unbearable and it needs to be intolerable.” For her part, Clinton suggested that she could be part of the solution to reform policing practices and remove bias by appealing to white Americans. “You know, maybe I can, by speaking directly to white people, say, ‘Look, this is not who we are.’ We’ve got to do everything possible to improve policing, to go right at implicit bias,” Clinton said. “There are good, honorable, cool-headed police officers. We’ve seen them in action in New York over the last, you know, 48 hours because of the terrorist attack. We can do better. We have got to rein in what is absolutely inexplicable, and we’ve got to have law enforcement respect communities and communities respect law enforcement because they have to work together.” The former secretary of state also recalled meeting Marian Wright Edelman, who founded the Children’s Defense Fund, as a law school student. “That gave me the opportunity to really see what we need to do because I believe you’ve gotta change both laws and hearts,” Clinton said. “We’ve gotta change laws to protect people, to protect everything about them, and we’ve got to be a clear and loud voice for our society being what it should be: the city on the hill striving for the more perfect union,” she continued. “And that’s my view. And I don’t think that’s how my opponent sees it.”
Washington (CNN)The cast of "The West Wing" is back -- but this time, instead of the fictional Jed Bartlet, they're backing a different Democrat for president. Members of the massively popular NBC drama will appear with Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton at several events in Ohio on Saturday and Sunday. Actors Richard Schiff, Allison Janney, Bradley Whitford, Dulé Hill, Joshua Malina and Mary McCormack will make campaign stops in the Mahoning Valley, Cleveland, Sandusky and Toledo areas on Saturday, and in the Dayton and Columbus areas on Sunday. Joss Whedon's Avengers take shots at Trump in get out the vote video The actors will talk about why they're supporting Clinton and encourage the public to register to vote, according to a campaign statement. This isn't the first time "West Wing" -- the plot of which centers on a Democratic presidential administration -- clashes with real life. Janney, who played White House press secretary C.J. Cregg, made an unexpected appearance in the White House press briefing room in April. The surprised press corps had been expecting actual White House spokesman Josh Earnest for their usual press briefing. The Emmy Award-winning show has been off the air since 2006, but remains popular even a decade later. 
After Fox News host Sean Hannity appeared in a pro-Donald Trump political video over the weekend, the network will prohibit him from appearing in promotional political materials through the end of the election, a spokesperson said Tuesday. “We were not aware of Sean Hannity participating in a promotional video and he will not be doing anything along these lines for the remainder of the election season,” the spokesperson said in a statement to POLITICO. On Sunday, Trump’s presidential campaign uploaded an eight-minute video that showed a number of conservative figures expressing their support of the Republican candidate. One of those figures included the Fox News show host, who spoke for about 30 seconds expressing his support of the candidate. The Washington Post’s Erik Wemple was the first to report on the video. Hannity has been a long-time supporter of Trump, and said in June that he would be voting for the Republican nominee. But his appearance in the campaign video released Sunday was the first of its kind this election season. It’s unclear how the network will address Hannity’s appearance in the video during a town hall with Trump on the network Wednesday, which Hannity is scheduled to host. A spokesperson said at press time that there were no updates when asked about Hannity’s involvement in the town hall.
President Barack Obama and Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu are holding what is expected to be their final meeting as heads of government on Wednesday—and there is every reason to expect that this one in New York, at the United Nations General Assembly, will be as fruitless as previous encounters. It is no secret that U.S.-Israel relations have become volatile and tense over the past eight years, with Obama and Netanyahu sparring over Israeli settlements and the all-but-moribund peace process, Iran’s nuclear program, and the uprisings of the Arab Spring. But the likelihood of a sputtering end to the Barack-and-Bibi relationship does lead one to ask: Which of the two candidates who are running to replace Obama next January—Hillary Clinton or Donald Trump—might do somewhat better in restoring the U.S.-Israel relationship and pushing for peace? Story Continued Below Trump surrogate and former New York Mayor Rudy Giuliani claimed at the Republican convention that Netanyahu and other government ministers favored Trump. Our sources say the Israeli security cabinet is divided but on the whole views Clinton as the safer course. There is, in any event, no doubt that the governing Likud Party has become closely aligned with Republicans in recent years, and that Netanyahu was betting on a Mitt Romney victory four years ago. “The notion that they don’t intervene in our politics and we don’t intervene in theirs is pure nonsense,” as Aaron David Miller, a Middle East negotiator for successive U.S. administrations, has put it. “Netanyahu has clearly made his preferences clear on the Republican side.” But Netanyahu is himself often second-guessed by Israel’s national security elites. And the answer to the question of who really would be better for a future U.S.-Israel alliance, a President Clinton or a President Trump, requires starting with a more basic issue: What does it mean to be a good ally to Israel? The current Israeli government seems to think that a good American ally would stop nagging Jerusalem about West Bank settlements, forget about the Israel-Palestine peace process, provide a blank check for security assistance, use military force in the region more readily, tear up the nuclear deal with Iran, and also supply weapons for Israel to strike Iran unilaterally if it thought it was necessary at some point. Hillary Clinton certainly would not follow this agenda to the letter; in that sense, her administration might well share some of Obama’s priorities. She clearly values the U.S.-Israel alliance highly, she is committed to Israel’s security, and she has credibly promised to fend off diplomatic efforts that Israelis see as “delegitimizing” the Jewish state whether at the U.N., through sanctions, boycotts or punitive disinvestment. At the same time, she has confirmed that the peace process and a two-state solution will be central to her Israel policies. And she promises to safeguard, not tear up, the nuclear deal with Iran. Safeguarding means holding Iran to its terms and being prepared, as Obama promised in spring 2012, to use military force if needed to prevent Iran from obtaining a nuclear weapon. Many Israelis derided Obama’s commitment—wrongly, in our view. But Clinton’s credibility regarding the use of force should not be in doubt. On balance, we think, she would be a better president in the long run for Israel. Here’s why. If Jerusalem hopes for an American president to renege on the nuclear deal, Trump may well be their man. He has certainly bragged about his history of walking away from agreements. What happens then, however, is a question for which Trump has no convincing answer. Some of his advisers point to Richard Nixon’s “madman” theory of how to frighten rivals with the unpredictability of American leadership. But Nixon, whatever his other faults, was a shrewd geo-strategist (and he had Henry Kissinger by his side). Trump, judging by his erratic and impulsive behavior on just about any given day of this campaign, seems far too close to the madman template for anyone’s comfort—least of all a small Middle Eastern state that depends on a steadiness of commitment from its American protector. Steadiness is one of the last words that come to mind when thinking about Trump’s various statements about Israel and the Palestinians. He could embrace something resembling neutrality and demand a return on U.S. assistance—signature Trump foreign policy themes—or, alternatively, as he put it, he could be "the most pro-Israel president ever.” This uncertainty about his instincts does not bode well for alliance management. Indeed, his innate isolationism and nativist demagoguery portend two kinds of trouble for U.S. relations with Israel. First, Trump would enter office as the only genuinely isolationist president since the 19th century—an unsettling prospect for Israel, which depends heavily on U.S. internationalism (and an experience that Israel, which is only 68 years old, has never had). Although not, as a rule, philosophically inclined, Trump has expressed a coherent view of international relations as fiercely transactional and zero sum. This view extends to alliances, as he made clear in a New York Times interview in which he explicitly disavowed America’s Article 5 guarantee to defend NATO allies including Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania. “If we cannot be properly reimbursed for the tremendous cost of our military protecting other countries, and in many cases the countries I’m talking about are extremely rich … Then yes, I would be absolutely prepared to tell those countries, 'Congratulations, you will be defending yourself.”’ In the world according to Trump, alliances such as NATO are inherently bad arrangements for the United States because the country is defending European allies who have little capacity to reciprocate, and who are unwilling to adequately pay for their protection. Likewise, maintaining a nuclear umbrella over South Korea and Japan seems to be a foolish and dangerous entanglement when those countries could just as well develop and deploy nuclear weapons themselves. And, of course, ”isolationism” is a mild term for what Trump conceives as the proper relationship between the U.S. and its southern neighbor. Perhaps Trump will make an exception to his expectation of a “return on investment” for commitment to allies, and he will stand by Israel no matter what it can or cannot do for the U.S. in return. If so, however, it would be out of character. Second, Trump’s invective against Muslims and other immigrant communities might appear in sync with Israeli hard-liners—the GOP nominee has indeed pointed to Israel’s security barrier and security profiling of Muslims as models for his own Great Wall on the Mexican border and promised ban on Muslims entering the country. But if Israel’s government really prefers Trump on this basis, this will drive another wedge between Israel and American Jews. Most American Jews are politically liberal, and they are particularly allergic to fear-mongering rhetoric against minorities. The experience of millennia has taught them that security for diaspora communities depends on a general climate of liberal tolerance. When demagogues single out minorities, Jews have to ask themselves—are we next? So, to take a small but telling example, when Trump has said that “my Jews”—presumably his employees—used to say “Merry Christmas,” and implies that his presidency will usher in a new era in which “Happy Holidays” will be a euphemism of the past, American Jews are not amused. The fact is, the U.S.-Israel alliance needs to be nurtured for the long haul, which means facing up to its real problems and reinforcing its moral foundations. It is wrong to think that the problems between Obama and Netanyahu have been determined by the personalities of the two leaders. Generational transformation on both sides has deepened strategic differences over the best way to manage a fragile regional balance of power, Palestinian political aspirations, and the increasingly anarchic conditions in the region. Israel is becoming more religious and less democratic. The United States is becoming more diverse—this, after all, is what Trump’s followers are angry about—and, arguably, more liberal. Surveys of young Israeli Jews show a sharp decline in support of Israel’s identity as a democratic state, from 26.1 percent in 1998 to 14.3 percent today. The growing religious nationalist population is becoming increasingly powerful in Israeli politics and society, including the Israel Defense Force. In 1990, 2.5 percent of officer candidates self-identified as religious, compared with 26 percent in 2008. Young Americans, in contrast, are more liberal than their parents on matters related to Israel-Palestine. A recent Pew Survey indicated that 57 percent of self-styled “liberal Democrats” sympathized with Palestinians more than Israel—at a time when younger Democrats are more and more likely to call themselves liberal. Politics in both countries appear to be tracking these trends. Last May, Netanyahu fired Defense Minister Moshe Yaalon for defending a senior officer’s right to criticize the government. Rather than seek to shore up his coalition by replacing him with a center-left figure, Netanyahu opted for the far-right wing Avigdor Lieberman as defense minister, creating what Israeli columnist Nahum Barnea has called “the most radical government … in Israeli history.” Meanwhile, as Guiliani has contended, it may well be right that the Democratic Party’s leftward movement could bring additional tensions to relations with Israel. Bernie Sanders supporters on the Democratic Platform Committee failed in the effort to include language more harshly critical of the Israel occupation of the West Bank. There is little doubt, however, that this represented the views of many of his younger supporters. *** What can be done to revive the U.S.-Israel relationship, under either a President Clinton or President Trump? In our recent book on U.S.-Israel relations, we suggest that one approach would be to negotiate a formal alliance enshrined in a treaty that would specify mutual responsibilities. The U.S. would undertake a legally binding commitment to defend Israel from attack, particularly by Iran. Although the White House has already declared this commitment publicly, a solemn treaty obligation would inject it with greater credibility in Iranian as well as Israeli eyes. To underscore the depth of obligation, the U.S. could deploy a tripwire force—as it long did in the Asia and Europe—to ensure that Israel’s adversaries understood that an attack on Israel would be tantamount to one on Americans that would bring the United States into any military conflict. In return, Israel would agree to a final status accord with the Palestinians along the territorial lines that the U.S. has long endorsed: the 1967 borders with mutually agreed swaps. The U.S., working closely with Israel and Jordan, would not only help secure the parties’ safety, but work with European donors to put the new Palestinian state on a firm footing to reduce the possibility of revanchist violence. Under this arrangement, the U.S. would contemplate a military assistance package that came closer to Israel’s vision for the one that has just been signed, while Israel’s withdrawal from the West Bank would ensure robust trade ties with Europe well into the future. Many on both sides will say that this program entails too many risks for too uncertain a gain. Israelis for whom past is prologue will argue that the practical benefits of a treaty is available at no cost. It certainly doesn’t fit with Donald Trump’s purely transactional view of international relations. But in an increasingly violent Middle East, it behooves both countries to reconsecrate a relationship based on a shared moral and strategic vision. As a matter of moral temperament and strategic vision, Hillary Clinton would appear far more likely to make this happen.
Donald Trump on Wednesday suggested that Oklahoma police officer Betty Shelby may have choked when she shot dead Terence Crutcher on the side of a highway last week in Tulsa. Speaking at a church in Cleveland Heights, Ohio, the Republican presidential nominee said, "This young officer, I don't know what she was thinking. I don't know what she was thinking, but I'm very, very troubled by that. I'm very, very troubled by that. And we have to be very — we have to be very careful." Story Continued Below He added, "Now, did she get scared? Was she choking? What happened? But maybe people like that, people that choke, people that do that, maybe they can't be doing what they're doing, okay? They can't be doing what they're doing." On Crutcher, he said, "I watched the shooting in particular in Tulsa. And that man was hands up. That man went to the car, hands up, put his hand on the car. I mean, to me, it looked like he did everything you're supposed to do, and he looked like a really good man." Trump called, via Twitter, for an "immediate end" to the unrest in Charlotte, North Carolina, that broke out after a police shooting of a black man on Tuesday, the latest in a string of such fatal shootings that also included last week's shooting of Crutcher. "Hopefully the violence & unrest in Charlotte will come to an immediate end. To those injured, get well soon. We need unity & leadership," Trump tweeted on Wednesday morning, also writing, "The situations in Tulsa and Charlotte are tragic. We must come together to make America safe again." Violent protests have rocked Charlotte in the past 24 hours, as demonstrators demand answers as to why Keith Lamont Scott was shot dead by police Tuesday night in a parking lot of an apartment complex. Police said Scott was holding a gun, while his family said he was sitting in his car reading a book. That shooting follows the fatal incident in Tulsa, in which Crutcher was shot dead by Shelby on the side of a highway, after she claimed he was behaving strangely and feared he was reaching for a weapon. Trump, who has positioned himself as the "law and order candidate," has been criticized in the past for what some see as opportunistic reactions to tragic events. Last month, he sparked outrage when he tweeted in response to a Chicago shooting which killed Nykea Aldridge, Dwyane Wade's cousin. He was accused of being insensitive, and using the incident to further his political agenda, tweeting, "Dwayne [sic] Wade's cousin was just shot and killed walking her baby in Chicago. Just what I have been saying. African-Americans will VOTE TRUMP!" The Republican presidential nominee has, in recent weeks, been trying to appeal to black voters. Many denounced his comments Tuesday in Kenansville, North Carolina, when he said that black communities in the United States are "in the worst shape ever." He raised similar controversy last month in another appeal to black voters when he said "what the hell do you have to lose?" by trying something new like Trump. Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton, who on Tuesday called Crutcher's shooting "intolerable," also weighed in on Wednesday morning, tweeting, "Keith Lamont Scott. Terence Crutcher. Too many others. This has got to end. -H."
New York Rep. Peter King rejected former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton’s focus on the need for law enforcement to do a better job of building trust with American Muslims. Instead, the 11-term congressman called for more surveillance within the community. “I disagree with her when she puts the emphasis on building trust with the Muslim community, they have no reason not to trust the police,” King said on MSNBC shortly after Clinton answered questions from the press on the weekend’s bombing in Manhattan. Story Continued Below King is not new to this topic. His insistence to hold hearings on homegrown radicalization within Islam drew comparisons to Sen. Joseph McCarthy’s infamous communist witch hunt. (King has said he considers such attacks on him a "badge of honor.") As she has before, Clinton called for an intelligence surge to thwart ISIL’s efforts to inspire terror, but cautioned against a broader offensive against a faith. But the only way to gather such intelligence, King said, is to step up surveillance. “So listen, it's not going to be the handshake of a friendship that's going to bring Muslim Americans outside,” King said. “To get more intelligence, you have to do that by surveillance, by undercovers. That’s what has been done with every other ethnic group in this country when there is crime, whether it's the Westies and the Irish, whether it’s the Italians and the mafia, that's how you do it. We shouldn't be pandering to political correctness."
Washington (CNN)The first presidential debate broke viewing records Monday, but a number of key Senate Republicans getting grilled over Donald Trump's Miss Universe comments say they either weren't watching or don't have an opinion on one of the night's signature moments. "I didn't get to see it. I was traveling back from Utah. Stupid plane wouldn't let us tie into CNN. So I felt bad about that. I'm going to talk to them," Utah Sen. Orrin Hatch said. "I didn't see it guys, I was on an airplane," Sen. Marco Rubio of Florida, one of Trump's former GOP primary rivals, told reporters. Sen. Ted Cruz, who only fully embraced Trump last Friday, didn't want to talk to reporters. "We put out a statement last night," he told CNN, as he ran into the Senate chamber. Those who claimed to missed the debate had it the easiest. As they have all year long, GOP lawmakers have been in a bind as they were forced to confront the latest controversial statement from Trump. Tuesday, the questions were about the debate and his comments about former Miss Universe Alicia Machado. Hillary Clinton placed his comments blasting former Machado for putting on too much weight front and center Monday night, and Trump fueled the fire Tuesday morning on Fox News. "And one of the worst things he said was about a woman in a beauty contest -- he loves beauty contests, supporting them and hanging around them -- and he called this woman 'Miss Piggy,' then he called her 'Miss Housekeeping' because she was Latina," Clinton said Monday night. "Donald, she has a name. Her name is Alicia Machado. And she has become a US citizen and you can bet she is going to vote this November." But GOP lawmakers who praised Trump's debate performance ducked questions about Machado. Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell was asked about the Machado and Trump's debate performance, he limited his answer to just: "On the debate, I thought he did just fine." House Speaker Paul Ryan, who has openly criticized Trump's remarks he viewed as racist, refused to engage on Machado: "I'm not going to get into the who said what this morning on a talk show because I didn't see it." Dodging questions about Trump has become old hat inside the Capitol, since Trump first broke through the field of Republican candidates, and then fought his way to the nomination. Trump's accusation that the judge overseeing the Trump University lawsuit was impartial because he was "Mexican" (the judge, Gonzalo Curiel, is from Indiana) -- left lawmakers in a similar lurch this past June. The Trump answers have become almost perfunctory, based on Tuesday's informal survey. Indiana Sen. Dan Coats: "No comment." Tennessee Sen. Lamar Alexander: "No comment." Illinois Sen. Mark Kirk, who is in a tough battle to hold his seat, repeatedly said, "Not going to talk about it." Sen. Susan Collins of Maine, was one of the only Republicans to weigh in on Trump's Miss Universe comment: "Well, those are comments I don't agree with." Other lawmakers had effusive praise for Trump when asked broadly about the debate, but little to say on the specifics. West Virginia Sen. Shelley Moore Capito explained that she had been listening to the debate in the car and thought Trump did an excellent job. But when asked about Trump's Miss Universe comments, she said she must have missed that part. Sen. Joni Ernst, who stood on stage with Trump at her "Roast and Ride" event last month, said, "I thought it was good." But when a reporter tried to ask about specifics, she said, "That's about all the comments I have. But thank you." Sen. Tim Scott of South Carolina got a question about Trump's answers on criminal justice reform, and said, "I shouldn't have stopped." Then Scott got a question about Trump taking donations from the private prison industry and he stood there, mouth shut and smiling. But when asked broadly about Trump's performance, he started talking again. "About his performance? I think he had high points and low points, and at the end of the day I'm looking forward to the next debate with more high points," Scott said, as he searched for an elevator. But when he was asked what Trump's low points were, Scott stood silent for a few seconds, appearing to stall for an elevator. CNN's Ted Barrett, Manu Raju and Deirdre Walsh contributed to this report.
Capitol Hill Republicans grumbled Tuesday about Donald Trump’s debate performance, but they also saw a silver lining: He didn’t overtly screw up their own election prospects — at least not yet. They didn’t need a lot from him: just don’t let the floor collapse on the Republican Party with an election-altering gaffe. So even after their nominee all but admitted paying no federal taxes and stood by his attacks on a woman for gaining too much weight, plenty of congressional Republicans were breathing a sigh of relief. And no one was predicting doomsday on Nov. 8. Story Continued Below “He made his points and he didn’t make any major mistakes. … so I think he had a very good night,” said Rep. Tom Cole of Oklahoma. “We’re to the point now that our presidential nominee is helping us, not hurting us, and that was an unknown several months ago. He’s performing above expectations and we’re benefiting from it in the House and will probably benefit from it in the Senate as well.” That’s a remarkable change in tone for the party that fretted for months about a down-ballot backlash against their nominee. Republicans worried Trump’s controversial comments would cripple their incumbents and wipe out their Senate and possibly even House majorities. But Trump’s improved performance this month has buoyed congressional Republicans, to the point that those fears have morphed into hopes of minimal House losses and keeping the Senate. And while his performance Monday was far from flawless — he was too easily goaded by Hillary Clinton instead of hammering at her vulnerabilities, several Republicans said — it could have been a lot worse. “I think it’s basically a wash,” said Sen. Roger Wicker of Mississippi, who heads the Senate Republican campaign arm. “I think he did just fine.” House Speaker Paul Ryan, who has been highly critical of Trump’s controversial comments in the past, also gave the nominee’s performance a robust endorsement. “I saw Donald Trump give a spirited voice to those of us who don’t like the status quo, and I see emerging in front of us the potential for what a unified Republican government can get you, which can be the solutions,” the Wisconsin Republican said at a news conference. “I think he passed a number of thresholds … and showed that for 90 minutes he could go toe-to-toe with Hillary Clinton.” Other Republicans were less enthused. Republican Study Committee Chairman Bill Flores of Texas said Trump “made some good points, but he wasn’t as consistent as he could be.” Another Texan, House Rules Chairman Pete Sessions, said Trump’s “abilities are greater” than he showed. And moderate Rep. Charlie Dent, a frequent Trump critic, said the nominee did not meet his goal of demonstrating that he could be presidential and substantive on the issues. “I think the reaction from a lot of people is: ‘In a nation of over 300 million people, this is the best we can do?’” the Pennsylvania Republican said. “I thought I was watching a dumpster fire.” Rep. Patrick Meehan, also of Pennsylvania, said Trump “had an idea where he wanted to go,” but didn’t quite get there: “He started out strong but needed to be able to stay disciplined, and I think the next debate you’ll probably see him more capable of doing that.” Even Rep. Lee Zeldin (R-N.Y.), a Trump supporter, wouldn’t say Trump won. “From the lens of Trump supporters, they would believe he did well, and from the lens of a Clinton view, they would say she clearly won,” Zeldin said. “As for undecided voters, I don’t know. … Each side scored some points. Both sides as they watch the video afterwards may say, ‘Maybe I should have answered this question a little differently.’” Some Republicans, including Senate Majority Whip John Cornyn (R-Texas), didn’t want to talk about the debate at all. Others claimed they didn’t watch it and therefore couldn’t weigh in. Those who did, however, said one of Trump’s weaker moments came when Clinton attacked him for calling a former beauty pageant contestant “Miss Piggy” when she later gained weight. Trump doubled down on those comments in an interview on Fox News. Asked about Trump’s pageant comments, Zeldin, without calling out Trump specifically, said his best advice “for anyone running for office is to focus on your policy, your vision.” Ryan wouldn’t comment on the pageant remarks. Democrats on the Hill, meanwhile, said Trump’s performance showed why he shouldn’t be president. House Minority Leader Steny Hoyer of Maryland said his answers proved it’d be “dangerous” for him to be “leader of the free world.” House Democratic Caucus Chairman Xavier Becerra of California dodged a question about whether Trump’s behavior — interrupting and talking over Clinton multiple times — was sexist, but did say it was clear the GOP nominee became “unhinged” over the course of the 90-minute faceoff. “And I think that’s the last thing we want for a president who will have his or her finger over the nuclear button, someone who becomes unhinged so easily,” Becerra told reporters. “I think Donald Trump essentially showed who he is.” Overall, though, several Republicans didn’t feel Trump’s missteps were a big deal. “I think there were some missed opportunities, but let’s face it: For all the complaining about the Clinton camp, the bar was set low and all he had to do was prove he had a good temperament,” said Rep. Scott Perry of Pennsylvania. “I think he met that test, so I don’t now what all the complaining is about. … I’m not worried.” Republicans also noted that Trump showed again that he’s his own breed. During the debate, he railed against trade and backed Democrats’ pitch to revoke gun rights from people on the “no-fly” list, for example. This, some felt, created a buffer to separate the party from the wild, and at times unruly, candidate. Heather Caygle and Seung Min Kim contributed to this report.
11/19/16, 3:14 PM CET BY Chris Spillane So is anti-establishment message of Nigel Farage, the Labour leader said. 11/19/16, 1:55 PM CET BY Sarah Wheaton Alumni of the Obama White House spent days mourning Trump’s win. Now they’re ready to fight. 11/19/16, 11:37 AM CET BY Chris Spillane Dick Schoof: ‘Chance of attack in the Netherlands is real.’ 11/19/16, 10:38 AM CET BY Chris Spillane Government could focus on starting the process of leaving the bloc sooner. 11/19/16, 10:13 AM CET BY Benjamin Oreskes Diplomats say the president-elect already has a playbook to undermine the global body. 11/19/16, 10:01 AM CET BY Michael Crowley and Nahal Toosi Flynn, Bannon represent ‘Islamophobic’ thinking of the type rejected by Bush and Obama, critics say. 11/19/16, 5:25 AM CET BY Michael Kruse The blue-collar workers who put Donald Trump in the White House are ready for him to deliver. How much time will they give him? 11/19/16, 5:20 AM CET BY Ryan Heath, Tara Palmeri, Harry Cooper and Quentin Ariès  11/18/16, 9:09 PM CET BY Harry Cooper A Polish political party’s links to a pan-European group raise questions about funding. 11/18/16, 6:31 PM CET BY Tom McTague Signs that Britain’s political class is coming to terms with June’s EU referendum. 11/18/16, 6:26 PM CET BY Hortense Goulard Conservative MEP denounced Juncker’s efforts to drum up support for Schulz as ‘outrageous.’ 11/18/16, 5:31 PM CET BY Ivo Oliveira Drawing the top stories around the globe. 11/18/16, 4:55 PM CET BY Cynthia Kroet Italians are likely to reject prime minister’s reform package in next month’s vote. 11/18/16, 4:48 PM CET BY Elana Schor, Kyle Cheney and Louis Nelson The president-elect starts building out his administration with loyalists. 11/18/16, 4:01 PM CET BY Nicholas Vinocur Left-wingers hope that by backing Alain Juppé, they will see off two political enemies. 11/18/16, 3:15 PM CET BY Cynthia Kroet Jens Stoltenberg did not mention the total number or reasons for the requests. 11/18/16, 3:02 PM CET BY Florian Eder and Janosch Delcker Wird Martin Schulz die SPD in den Bundestagswahlkampf führen? Oder schafft er es, doch noch einmal EU-Parlamentspräsident zu werden? Er muss sich bald entscheiden. 11/18/16, 2:34 PM CET BY Anthony Skinner Syrian refugees are pawns in Turkish president’s pursuit of power. 11/18/16, 2:33 PM CET BY Charlie Cooper Shadow Brexit secretary ‘seriously pissed off’ at colleague’s comments. 11/18/16, 2:33 PM CET BY Cynthia Kroet German chancellor is ‘championing the interests of Europe,’ Witold Waszczykowski said. 11/18/16, 12:58 PM CET BY Cynthia Kroet Nikola Gruevski stepped down in January over a wire tapping scandal. 11/18/16, 12:48 PM CET BY Barbara Surk Jens Stoltenberg said he had a ‘good talk’ with the president-elect. 11/18/16, 12:35 PM CET BY Esther King Majority of those who failed to gain international asylum come from the Balkan states. 11/18/16, 11:48 AM CET BY Esther King Immigration is what keeps the country running, says pro-EU Lord. 11/18/16, 10:57 AM CET BY Esther King Conditions at offshore detention center for refugees are ‘cruel, inhuman and degrading,’ said François Crépeau. 11/18/16, 9:36 AM CET BY Esther King Foreign Minister Linas Linkevičius warned that Vladimir Putin could use transition period in Baltics, Syria. 11/18/16, 8:55 AM CET BY MADELINE CONWAY Former ambassador to the UN says there are ways of supporting the opposition that does not involve the use of American military force. 11/18/16, 8:39 AM CET BY Cristiano Lima Her presence is likely to raise fresh concerns about potential conflicts of interest. 11/18/16, 8:35 AM CET BY Bryan Bender The retired lieutenant general’s hardline views on Islam — as well as laudatory statements about Russia — have made him a lightning rod, as did his strident attacks on Hillary Clinton during the campaign. 11/18/16, 5:33 AM CET BY Nicholas Vinocur The center-right’s first ever presidential primary looked all over. Now it’s wide open. 11/18/16, 5:25 AM CET BY Tim King The Günther Oettinger controversies are tainting this European Commission by intimate association. 11/18/16, 12:17 AM CET BY Nahal Toosi Much of Europe is alarmed over what Trump’s presidency could augur. 11/17/16, 11:52 PM CET BY Shane Goldmacher and Andrew Restuccia ‘We feel way ahead of schedule and never in a rush to do the wrong thing,’ said campaign manager Kellyanne Conway. 11/17/16, 9:42 PM CET BY Jacopo Barigazzi Maltese interior minister not impressed with Bratislava’s migration plan. 11/17/16, 9:33 PM CET BY Edward-Isaac Dovere In Berlin, the president warned his successor that his divisive campaign style won’t wear well in the Oval Office. 11/17/16, 8:24 PM CET BY Janosch Delcker US President hopes Trump won’t ‘simply take a Realpolitik approach.’ 11/17/16, 8:21 PM CET BY Hortense Goulard European Parliament president will only accept foreign minister role if he is also the SPD candidate for the top job. 11/17/16, 8:18 PM CET BY Konstantin Richter Germans, of all people, are now called on to be bulwarks of democracy. 11/17/16, 8:06 PM CET BY Paul Dallison and Esther King Euroskeptic party stands accused of breaking rules on spending EU funds. 11/17/16, 7:16 PM CET BY Brent Griffiths  11/17/16, 6:31 PM CET BY Maïa de La Baume Brussels faults Ankara for ‘neglecting and undermining’ democracy and the rule of law. 11/17/16, 6:27 PM CET BY Louis Nelson  11/17/16, 5:47 PM CET BY Cynthia Kroet Jean-Marie Le Pen should receive €15,000 because he was prevented from carrying out his duties. 11/17/16, 4:57 PM CET BY Carter Stoddard Net debt has ballooned to £338 million, and currency fluctuations are partly to blame. 11/17/16, 4:34 PM CET BY Laurens Cerulus In finally passing her surveillance bill, Britain’s PM just made Brexit even more complicated. 11/17/16, 4:13 PM CET BY Hortense Goulard French prime minister called for more European integration amid rising nationalism. 11/17/16, 3:23 PM CET BY Cynthia Kroet Former European Council president joins forces with Flemish singer. 11/17/16, 2:53 PM CET BY Paul Dallison Corey Lewandowski said president-elect will work closely with Theresa May, with no need for UKIP leader as a go-between. 11/17/16, 2:37 PM CET BY Cynthia Kroet Freedom Party leader’s comments on Moroccans living in the Netherlands were ‘unnecessarily offensive.’ 11/17/16, 2:11 PM CET BY Esther King Nigel Farage’s party stands accused of breaking rules on spending EU funds. During her election campaign, mayor Virginia Raggi had expressed doubts whether Rome should host the sporting event | Filippo Monteforte/AFP via Getty Images By Hortense Goulard 9/21/16, 12:19 PM CET Updated 9/21/16, 4:52 PM CET Rome’s new mayor Virginia Raggi on Wednesday pulled the plug on the Italian capital’s ambition to become a candidate to host the 2024 Olympics. Raggi, a member of the anti-establishment 5Star Movement and the first female mayor of Rome, argued that hosting the Olympics would leave Rome more indebted than it is now and that the infrastructure built for the Olympics would turn into “cathedrals in the desert” after the event. “It is irresponsible to approve this candidacy,” Raggi told reporters in Rome Wednesday. With Rome out of the contest, three cities, Paris, Los Angeles and Budapest, remain in the race to host the Olympic Games eight years from now. During her election campaign, Raggi had expressed doubts whether Rome, a deeply indebted city which has been struggling with waste management problem for months, should host the sporting event. Also On Politico Hortense Goulard Also On Politico Francesco Guerrera, Jacopo Barigazzi and Silvia Sciorilli Borrelli She had stopped short of saying she would withdraw Rome’s candidacy if elected mayor, raising hopes among supporters of the project, including Prime Minister Matteo Renzi, that she could change her mind The International Olympic Committee will choose the city that will host the 2024 Games in a year’s time. This article has been updated to confirm the bid’s withdrawal.  © 2016 POLITICO SPRL Log in to access content and manage your profile. If you do not have a login you can register here.
Washington (CNN)Ted Cruz endorsed Donald Trump for the presidency Friday afternoon, a stunning turn of events after a contentious primary filled with nasty personal attacks and a dramatic snub at the Republican National Convention. "After many months of careful consideration, of prayer and searching my own conscience, I have decided that on Election Day, I will vote for the Republican nominee, Donald Trump," Cruz wrote in a Facebook post. "A year ago, I pledged to endorse the Republican nominee, and I am honoring that commitment. And if you don't want to see a Hillary Clinton presidency, I encourage you to vote for him." "I am greatly honored by the endorsement of Senator Cruz," Trump said in a statement obtained by CNN. "We have fought the battle and he was a tough and brilliant opponent. I look forward to working with him for many years to come in order to make America great again." The move -- three days before Trump's critical first debate with Clinton -- comes as the Trump and Cruz camps have moved closer in recent weeks. Trump's vice presidential nominee Mike Pence played a key role in bringing Cruz into the fold. Pence and Cruz traded multiple messages, then spoke at length once on the phone and again in person, when Pence visited Capitol Hill a few weeks ago, a source close to Pence said. Ted Cruz fast facts Trump has hired key Cruz allies such as Kellyanne Conway as his campaign manager, and Jason Miller as a spokesman. Wednesday, Trump's campaign expressed support for a Cruz-backed, Internet-related proposal in government funding talks in the Senate. Friday, Trump released a new list of conservative judges likely to appeal to the former Supreme Court clerk -- including perhaps Cruz's closest friend in Congress, Utah Sen. Mike Lee. Cruz cited Trump's pledges on the judiciary in his Facebook post. "We know, without a doubt, that every Clinton appointee would be a left-wing ideologue. Trump, in contrast, has promised to appoint justices 'in the mold of (the late Antonin) Scalia,' Cruz wrote. "For some time, I have been seeking greater specificity on this issue, and today the Trump campaign provided that, releasing a very strong list of potential Supreme Court nominees — including Sen. Mike Lee, who would make an extraordinary justice — and making an explicit commitment to nominate only from that list." A Cruz endorsement could be the last pillar to helping Trump shore up the support of conservatives who have remained reticent about supporting his campaign. Trump has already gotten most Republicans and conservatives on board with his campaign -- largely by reassuring them on the Supreme Court and on issues like the Second Amendment and abortion. But Cruz's principled opposition to offering his support has given some conservatives high-profile cover. Just as Cruz's refusal to endorse Trump at the RNC fueled Democrats' efforts to paint Trump as divisive even within his own party, Cruz's endorsement will help undermine that narrative -- suggesting to conservatives unsure about Trump that perhaps the brash billionaire has changed, and can be trusted to bring conservative change to Washington. 'Lyin' Ted' and 'utterly amoral' The move marks a dramatic turnaround from the personal insults Cruz and Trump traded during the previous year. The two men clashed repeatedly during the primaries, as Trump taunted the senator with the nickname "Lyin' Ted," suggested Cruz wasn't eligible to be president due to his Canadian birthplace, and even speculated that Cruz's father was involved in the JFK assassination. Trump also said Cruz should "be careful" or he would "spill the beans on your wife," and retweeted an unflattering picture of Heidi Cruz. Those tweets have not been deleted from Trump's account. On his last day of the GOP campaign -- the Indiana primary in early May -- Cruz let loose against Trump, calling the businessman a "serial philanderer," "utterly amoral," and "a narcissist at a level I don't think this country's ever seen. At the RNC in Cleveland, Cruz gave a memorable speech espousing conservative values but ended without endorsing Trump, as Trump allies booed from the convention floor. "Don't stay home in November," Cruz said. "Stand and speak and vote your conscience." The next day, he defended the move by citing Trump's attacks against his family. "I'm not in the habit of supporting people who attack my wife and attack my father," Cruz told members of the Texas delegation. "That pledge was not a blanket commitment that if you go and slander and attack Heidi that I'm going to nonetheless come as a servile puppy dog and say, 'Thank you very much for maligning my wife and maligning my father.'" After the convention, Trump said that he would not accept Cruz's endorsement if he offered it. "I don't want his endorsement. If he gives it, I will not accept it, just so you understand. If he gives it I will -- I will not accept. It won't matter. Honestly he should've done it because nobody cares and he would've been in better shape for four years from now," Trump said. Facing Senate primary in 2018? Cruz's move may also be politically expedient. He faces a possible 2018 Senate primary challenge from Texas Rep. Michael McCaul, the chairman of the House Homeland Security Committee, who has increasingly made an issue of Cruz's failure to endorse Trump. Republican National Committee Chairman Reince Priebus has said Republicans who don't back Trump could pay a price down the road. And Trump also floated the idea of setting up a super PAC to oppose Cruz if he decided to run for office again. Clinton's campaign, after Cruz's message posted on Facebook, was happy to note a number of shots Cruz took at Trump during the primary, including when he called on the businessman to release his tax returns. Clinton's official twitter account retweeted a tweet Cruz sent during the primary that said, "I've released 9 years of tax returns. RT if you agree it's time for Donald Trump to release his!" Clinton's campaign has been hounding Trump to release his taxes, arguing that he isn't doing so because they show shady business deals and ties to Russia. Trump has said he would release his taxes after an IRS audit. Clinton's vice presidential nominee Tim Kaine, campaigning in Austin, Texas, Friday, said he couldn't support someone who used the same language Trump did about Cruz's father. "I just can't help but say this," Kaine said. "Donald Trump suggested that Ted Cruz's dad was involved in the JFK assassination. Now we know that that is false, but false isn't, there's not the right word to describe what that is. It is so outrageously false. And as far as I know Donald Trump has not retracted it. As far as I know he has not apologized for it. And so if somebody said that about my dad they would never have me as a supporter for anything." Radio host Steve Deace tweeted his disappointment, calling the move a mistake and speculating that Cruz backers may not all follow the senator. "I think it's the worst political miscalculation of my lifetime. I hope I am wrong. The people will decide that," Deace tweeted. CNN's Jeremy Diamond, Tom LoBianco, Dan Merica, Betsy Klein, and Dan Berman contributed to this report.
Even though Donald Trump finally acknowledged last week that President Barack Obama was born in the United States, one of the Republican nominee's most prominent allies in law enforcement is not dropping the case. “I don’t care where he’s from,” Joe Arpaio, sheriff of Maricopa County, Arizona, told the Surprise Tea Party Patriots group on Tuesday, according to The Arizona Republic. “We are looking at a forged document. Period.” Story Continued Below Arpaio also appeared to dismiss the notion that Trump's disavowal of his past birtherism played any role in his determination to keep investigating Obama's birth certificate, an inquiry that began in August 2011, four months after the White House released the document. “I know all the politicians say, ‘Sheriff, don’t talk about it,’” Arpaio said, according to the report. “But how can I back down when we started it? I’m not going to just forget it.” The Surprise Tea Party Patriots asked Arpaio to look into Obama's birthplace in August 2011. “I had nothing to do with Trump on the birth certificate,” Arpaio said. “We did it on our own, because of you guys.” Arpaio also added, "I’m not going to give up, and we’re looking into it ... I don’t know how it’s going to turn out.”
Donald Trump is the antithesis of the United States, according to U2 frontman Bono, who called the Republican presidential nominee “potentially the worst idea that ever happened to America.” “Look, America is like the best idea the world ever came up with,” Bono, whose real name is Paul David Hewson, told “CBS This Morning” in an interview broadcast Tuesday. “But Donald Trump is potentially the worst idea that ever happened to America. Potentially.” Story Continued Below Bono pointed to nations like Ireland and Great Britain as great countries but suggested that America is different because it’s an idea, one that Trump is “trying to hijack.” “That idea is bound up in justice and equality for all — equality and justice for all, you know,” he continued. “I think he’s hijacked the party. I think he’s trying to hijack the idea of America. And I think it’s bigger than all of us. I think it’s — it’s — this is really dangerous.”
In the chaos and fog of a brutal conflict that has claimed an estimated 400,000 to 500,000 lives, a ragtag group of former bakers, tailors, salespeople, teachers, pharmacists, painters, carpenters and students has emerged as real-life heroes, providing a glimmer of hope in Syria's brutal five-year-old civil war. The Syria Civil Defense group, otherwise known as the White Helmets, get their inspiration from an oft-quoted verse of the Quran: "to save a life is to save all of humanity." So far, the group of about 3,000 White Helmets have performed that feat some 60,000 times, often working in perilous conditions surrounded by violent conflict. On Thursday, the group won the Right Livelihood Award, often described as the "Alternative Nobel." The group has also been nominated for the Nobel Peace prize, with the support of over 133 organizations worldwide so far.   Their job may be the most dangerous in the world. Comprised of unpaid volunteers using whatever supplies they can get their hands on, the White Helmets often place their own lives at risk, venturing into active battle zones to assist the sick and wounded. "We go to save as many people as we can," says White Helmet Khaled Farah. If one person was alive, that's enough for us to take the risk." So far, some 132 White Helmet volunteers have been killed in the line of duty, the majority from so-called "double-tap" strikes, where warplanes will drop a second bomb in the same spot of an initial strike as people rush in to aid the wounded and remove the dead. "I help civilians every day, knowing that this will give my daughter and my country a better future," says another White Helmet, known simply as Fatima. Their motto is "Humanity, Solidarity, Impartiality,” and the group says it services some seven million people in vulnerable areas of the country, some of which have been racked by unremitting violence. When not conducting rescue missions, the volunteers teach children and adults on safety measures to take during aerial attacks, help provide first aid and medical services, assist in the the evacuation of civilian populations from active conflict zones and help re-establish critical infrastructure like water and electricity. On Friday, The Associated Press reported that at least two civil defense centers were targeted in a renewed bombing campaign just days after a ceasefire backed by the U.S. and Russia unraveled. More than 13 million people require humanitarian assistance of some kind across Syria. Some 6 million people have been forced from their homes in the country — nearly 1 million of them in the past six months alone. Of particular concern are the nearly 600,000 Syrians the United Nations estimates are living in besieged areas, cut off from regular access to basic necessities and living with the daily threat of deadly violence.
Washington (CNN)Texas Sen. Ted Cruz concluded months of animosity between him and Donald Trump on Friday by saying he will vote for the GOP nominee. But between the party-line camaraderie that Friday brought and the "bromance" from the initial stretch of the election, the two bitterly battled it out for the nomination. Here are some of the more notable -- and inflammatory -- salvos the two exchanged while on the campaign trail. 'Lyin' Ted' The attack Trump most frequently deployed against Cruz was the nickname the real estate mogul turned politician used to describe his competition: "Lyin' Ted." Trump routinely dropped that moniker on Cruz. Candidates' spouses take the heat In an election season defined by vicious and often personal attacks, not even the candidates' wives were safe, evidenced by Trump's tweet about Cruz's wife, Heidi Cruz. The March spat came after a Facebook advertisement targeted to Mormons showed an old photo of Trump's wife, Melania, posing nude. The ad, however, was produced by an anti-Trump super PAC, which had no known connection to the Cruz campaign. Trump, however, didn't see a difference. "Lyin' Ted Cruz just used a picture of Melania from a G.Q. shoot in his ad. Be careful, Lyin' Ted, or I will spill the beans on your wife!" Trump tweeted in March. As for Heidi's "beans," Trump never spilled them, much less described what he was referring to. 'A sniveling coward' Cruz's irate response was predictable -- even if his choice of words was not. "Donald, you're a sniveling coward and leave Heidi the hell alone," Cruz told reporters in Wisconsin, pointing his finger at the cameras for emphasis. Trump links Cruz's father to Lee Harvey Oswald Heidi was not the only Cruz family member to be called out by Trump. "(Ted Cruz's) father, you know, was with Lee Harvey Oswald prior to Oswald's, you know, being shot. I mean the whole thing is ridiculous," Trump said in an interview on "Fox and Friends" the day of the Indiana primary in May. "I mean what was he doing with Lee Harvey Oswald, shortly before the death? Before the shooting? It's horrible." No other news outlets corroborated the claim that Rafael Cruz knew of the John F. Kennedy assassin. 'A pathological liar' During a May press conference, Cruz's attacks against Trump hit a new level when he called Trump a "pathological liar," "utterly amoral," "a narcissist at a level I don't this country's ever seen" and "a serial philanderer." The strong rhetoric came after the accusations Trump made about Cruz's father and shortly before the crucial Indiana primary contest -- which Cruz lost, ending his candidacy. Cruz's lack of endorsement at the RNC Cruz showed the hard feelings hadn't subsided two months later at the Republican National Convention, when he blatantly undercut Trump with a lack of endorsement during his turn at the lectern. Cruz personally told Trump he would not be offering him an endorsement during his speech, instead encouraging voters to "vote your conscience" -- earning boos from an audience hoping for party unity. Trump didn't want Cruz's endorsement, anyway Asked about the snub, Trump said he didn't want it, anyway. "If he gives it, I will not accept it," Trump said at a news conference at the end of the convention. A new Canadian prime minister? In January, Trump tweeted a fallback plan for Cruz in case his presidential dreams fell short, suggesting Cruz could be the Canadian prime minister, a jab at questions over Cruz's eligibility to be president due to his Canadian birthplace. 'Pathetic' Kasich and Cruz band together When Cruz and Ohio Gov. John Kasich -- a pair Trump once called "the leftovers" as they were his last challengers in the primary fight -- made an attempt to divide the map to stop Trump, the mogul didn't mince words about his view of the maneuver. "Actually I was happy, because it shows how weak they are, it shows how pathetic they are," Trump said. Trump accuses Cruz of stealing the Iowa caucuses After Cruz came out victorious during the Iowa caucuses, Trump accused Cruz of committing fraud and stealing the win. "Based on the fraud committed by Senator Ted Cruz during the Iowa Caucus, either a new election should take place or Cruz results nullified," Trump tweeted in February. "Ted Cruz didn't win Iowa, he stole it. That is why all of the polls were so wrong and why he got far more votes than anticipated. Bad!" Trump also tweeted. The accusations came after Cruz sent out deceitful mailers that shared voter's caucus attendance records with their neighbors and warned them of "VOTER VIOLATION." 
Colleges and universities that don't spend their endowments to directly benefit students should lose the tax breaks on those endowments, Donald Trump said Thursday night. Echoing House Republicans who have questioned why wealthy universities with fat endowments keep raising tuition prices, Trump said during a rally in Chester Township, Pa., that it's time for colleges to spend their endowments to help students — rather than on "other things that don’t matter.” Story Continued Below Trump said too many colleges use the money they have to pay for administrators, equity fund managers and to put donors' names on buildings. "What a lot of people don’t know is that universities get massive tax breaks for their massive endowments," Trump said. "These huge, multi-billion-dollar endowments are tax-free, but too many of these universities don’t use the money to help with the tuition and student debt.” Trump said he would work with Congress to push reforms to help students and families, so that colleges make "good faith" efforts to curtail student debt. The GOP presidential nominee said paying for college is one of the top issues he hears about from voters. Going to college, Trump said, “should be easier to access, pay for and finish, and a lot of people want to do that.” "We have to deal with these universities," Trump told the crowd. "We have to break the cycle."
Alicia Machado, the former Miss Universe winner who Donald Trump once called “Miss Piggy,” was “the worst we ever had,” the Manhattan billionaire said Tuesday morning, because “she gained a massive amount of weight.” Hillary Clinton called attention to Machado’s case towards the end of Monday night’s presidential debate, recalling that Trump had not only called her “Miss Piggy” but also “Miss Housekeeping,” a reference to her Hispanic heritage. Addressing Trump’s name-calling directly, Clinton said “Donald, she has a name. Her name is Alicia Machado. And she has become a U.S. citizen and you can bet she is going to vote this November." Story Continued Below Trump said that while nothing Clinton did throughout the debate to that point had managed to get under his skin, the former secretary of state’s decision to bring up Machado did frustrate him. “That person was a Miss Universe person, and she was the worst we ever had. The worst, the absolute worst. She was impossible, and she was a Miss Universe contestant and ultimately a winner who they had a tremendously difficult time with as Miss Universe,” Trump explained during a Tuesday morning appearance on Fox News’s “Fox and Friends.” “She was the winner, and, you know, she gained a massive amount of weight, and it was a real problem. We had a real problem. Not only that, her attitude, and we had a real problem with her, so Hillary went back into the years and she found this girl. This was many years ago, and found the girl and talked about her like she was Mother Teresa and it wasn't quite that way, but that's okay. Hillary has to do what she has to do.” Clinton’s discussion of the former Miss Universe winner came amid a larger attack against Trump’s history of disrespectful and derogatory remarks about women. Of her GOP opponent, Clinton said “This is a man who has calling women pigs, slobs and dogs and someone who has said pregnancy is an inconvenience to employers, who has said that women don't deserve equal pay unless they do as good a job as men.” Trump said he had considered replying by raising former President Bill Clinton’s history of infidelity as a response but opted against it because the couple’s daughter, Chelsea Clinton, was in the room. The Manhattan billionaire said he might opt not to hold back such an attack at the next debate. “Well, I may hit her harder certain ways,” he said. “I really eased up because I didn't want to hurt anybody's feelings. So, I may hit her harder in certain ways.”
A new Hillary Clinton ad uses Donald Trump’s past words about women against him, asking voters if the Manhattan billionaire is “the president we want for our daughters?” “I’d look her right in that ugly face of hers,” Trump says in the ad as video of young girls looking in the mirror plays over his voice. Cutting together previous comments from the reality TV star, the 30-second advertisement quotes Trump describing one woman as a “a fat slob” and eating “like a pig.” Story Continued Below Trump has struggled throughout his campaign to connect with women across the country thanks, at least in part, to his comments he has made about them before entering the political world. His attempts at appealing to female voters, including a proposal for six weeks of family leave for women, have been met with mixed reviews. A McClatchy-Marist poll released Friday shows Clinton with a 24-point lead over Trump among likely female voters, 58 percent to 34 percent. “A person who’s flat-chested is very hard for them to be a 10,” Trump says in the ad, which goes on to include a quote from a 2013 interview with Howard Stern in which the GOP nominee discussed celebrity Kim Kardashian. “Does she have a good body? No. Does she have a fat ass? Absolutely,” Trump says. The ad finishes by quoting Trump from another appearance on Stern’s radio show in 1993. Stern, who does not appear on camera, asks Trump “so you treat women with respect?” “No, I can’t say that either,” Trump replies.
As the first presidential debate was drawing to a close, Hillary Clinton took one last chance to hammer Donald Trump, hitting at his remarks on women. “This is a man who has called women pigs, slobs and dogs,” Clinton said fervently from the debate stage tonight. “And someone who has said pregnancy is an inconvenience to employers, who has said women don't deserve equal pay unless they do as good a job as men.” The Democratic presidential nominee brought up former Miss Universe Alicia Machado, who has said that Trump regularly bullied her when he took over the pageant in 1996, allegedly calling the Venezuelan beauty contestant “Miss Piggy” and “Miss Housekeeping.”   “And one of the worst things he said was about a woman in a beauty contest. He loves beauty contests, supporting them and hanging around them,” Clinton said. “And he called this woman ‘Miss Piggy.’ Then he called her ‘Miss Housekeeping,’ because she was Latina. Donald, she has a name. Her name is Alicia Machado.” Machado has since become an American citizen and has vowed to vote for Clinton, according to her Instagram.     The presidential hopefuls clashed over Trump’s remarks on women when "NBC Nightly News" anchor and debate moderator Lester Holt asked the Republican nominee to clarify controversial comments he made earlier that Clinton doesn’t have “a presidential look.” Trump said that by “look,” he meant “stamina.” “She doesn't have the look, she doesn’t have the stamina,” Trump said from the stage at Hofstra University in Hempstead, New York. "To be president of this country, you need tremendous stamina." Clinton soon chimed in, “One thing Lester, he tried to switch from looks to stamina.” While Trump denied some of Clinton’s allegations about his comments on women, he defended his harsh words for actor Rosie O’Donnell at tonight’s debate. “Rosie O'Donnell, I said very tough things to her, and I think everybody would agree she deserves it, and nobody feels sorry for her,” Trump said.    Back in August 2015 during the first GOP primary debate, Fox News host and debate moderator Megyn Kelly confronted Trump about using words like “fat pigs,” “dogs,” “slobs” and “disgusting animals” to describe some women. Trump interjected and said, “Only Rosie O’Donnell.” ABC News' Nicole Phillip, Maggie McNish and Sunny Choo contributed to this report.
The House Oversight and Government Reform Committee voted 19-15 today to hold Hillary Clinton's former IT staffer in contempt of Congress. For the second time in two weeks, Bryan Pagliano, former senior adviser for information resource management at the State Department, failed to show up to a hearing to testify on the preservation of State Department records. Pagliano was the IT staffer who set up Clinton's private email server during her time as secretary of state. On Sept. 13, Pagliano did not show up to testify before the committee despite being subpoenaed. After his chair was vacant again at today's hearing, Rep. Jason Chaffetz, R-Utah and chairman of the committee, held a vote to hold Pagliano in contempt of Congress for his refusal to comply with a subpoena issued by the committee.     The vote passed 19 to 15, split along party lines. The resolution will now travel to the House floor. Chaffetz argued that Pagliano is a key witness in the investigation into Clinton's use of a private email server to conduct government business. The chairman asserted that Pagliano had no reason not to appear before the committee because he would not be subject to criminal liability due to immunity granted by the Department of Justice. But Rep. Elijah Cummings, D-Maryland, vigorously defended Pagliano’s decision not to show up, saying that the committee had harassed him by sending U.S. marshals to his workplace with the subpoena. “I simply cannot vote for a resolution that is potentially so unethical,” Cummings said. Cummings has continuously charged that the hearings related to Clinton's email server are political in nature.  Rep. Stephen Lynch, D-Massachusetts, feared that the committee was trying to embarrass Pagliano. "The chairman is saying that his rule is that the witness has to come before the Committee and be subjected to what the witnesses were subjected to last week," Lynch said, later adding, "We’re continuing to try to embarrass this particular witness.” Pagliano’s lawyer, Mark MacDougall, has said that if his client were brought before the committee, he would plead the Fifth Amendment. Pagliano previously pleaded the Fifth Amendment in September 2015 when he was called before the congressional committee investigating the attack in Benghazi, Libya, that resulted in the deaths of Ambassador Chris Stevens and three other Americans. Contempt of Congress is defined in statute 2 U.S.C.A. § 192 and is punishable by a maximum $1,000 fine and up to 12 months of imprisonment. In 2014, the House voted to find former Internal Revenue Service official Lois Lerner in contempt of Congress and adopted a resolution calling on Attorney General Eric Holder to appoint a special counsel to investigate the IRS targeting scandal. But federal prosecutors never prosecuted Lerner, instead determining she did nothing wrong by refusing to testify before the House Oversight and Government Reform Committee.
Washington (CNN)The State Department welcomed Sudan's efforts to counter ISIS and other terrorist groups Tuesday despite the fact that Sudan has been designated a state sponsor of terrorism for more than 20 years. "The United States welcomes Sudan's recent efforts to increase counterterrorism cooperation with the United States," State Department spokesman John Kirby said in a statement. "Sudan has taken important steps to counter ISIL and other terrorist groups and has sought to prevent their movement into and through Sudan. Sudan's continued cooperation will bolster international efforts to combat terrorism in the broader region," Kirby added, using the government's preferred acronym for ISIS. Kirby went on to say that the governments of the US and Sudan would cooperate "on counterterrorism to enhance the security of both our countries," adding that such cooperation would be "subject to and consistent with‎ US law." The State Department labeled Sudan a state sponsor of terrorism since 1993. "Sudan was designated as a state sponsor of terrorism in 1993 due to concerns about support to international terrorist groups to include the Abu Nidal Organization, Palestine Islamic Jihad, Hamas, and Hezbollah," according to the department's 2015 report on terrorism, though the report notes that Sudan's support to those groups "appeared to have declined" in 2015. The country also was home to Osama bin Laden and his followers from 1991 until 1996, with the department's terrorism report saying bin Laden was "provided safe haven in Sudan for five years until he was expelled by the Sudanese government in 1996." While there, bin Laden is believed to have helped orchestrate several terror attacks. He was eventually expelled by the Sudanese government for his involvement with al Qaeda and subsequently relocated to Afghanistan. Sudan is one of only three countries to be designated a state sponsor of terrorism, with the other two being Syria and Iran. When asked about the apparent contradiction, Kirby issued a statement to CNN, saying, "We engage bilaterally in a number of areas and cooperation in these areas will help us normalize ties." But, he added, "Complete normalization of relations would require significant progress in a range of other areas, including an end to the fighting in Darfur and the Two Areas." The latter designation refers to the South Kordofan and Blue Nile states of Sudan which, along with Darfur, have been the site of violent armed conflict between the government in Khartoum and opposition groups over the past several years. The International Criminal Court issued warrants for the arrest of Sudan's long-serving President Omar al Bashir in 2009 and 2010 for "crimes against humanity" and "war crimes" pertaining to his actions during the conflict in Darfur. "As we've consistently said, we would initiate the process of rescinding Sudan's designation as a state sponsor of terrorism only if the government of Sudan met all the criteria," Kirby said. According to Kirby, these steps included the "certification that the government of Sudan has not provided support to international terrorism in the preceding six-month period and that the government has provided assurances that it will not support acts of international terrorism in the future," noting that the "process has not been initiated." "We have been quite clear with the Sudanese on the steps that need to be taken," he added. CNN's Laura Koran contributed to this story
Tonight's presidential debate between Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump is must-see TV, and many celebrities will be watching from home, as well as from the front row. Billionaire entrepreneur and "Shark Tank" co-star Mark Cuban has confirmed that he will be taking a front-row seat at the debate at Hofstra University on Long Island in New York to cheer on Team Hillary.  Just got a front row seat to watch @HillaryClinton overwhelm @realDonaldTrump at the "Humbling at Hofstra" on Monday. It Is On !  "Obviously, I'm a not a Trump fan. I am a Clinton fan," Cuban told ABC News today at the red carpet season premiere of "Shark Tank." "I think she'd make a great president. "I don't think he's got the skill set," he said about Trump. "Let's put it this way, if he came on 'Shark Tank,' I wouldn't make the investment. I just don't see him as being capable in the least bit." Trump quickly responded to the news by tweeting that he was considering inviting Gennifer Flowers, the variety show performer who famously had an affair with Bill Clinton before he became president.  If dopey Mark Cuban of failed Benefactor fame wants to sit in the front row, perhaps I will put Gennifer Flowers right alongside of him!  Although Trump's campaign manager told ABC News' George Stephanopoulos that Trump did not actually invite Flowers, it seems she was willing to accept the invitation.  Hi Donald. You know I'm in your corner and will definitely be at the debate!...??      Meanwhile, other celebrities are gearing up to watch the first debate between the two candidates. Here's what they are saying on social media:  Ready for #mudslingmonday #YOUGOTTHISHRC pic.twitter.com/0lbXPnUKDD   May angels stand guard at the debate tonight. Sending love, blessing, protection, hope...   My goal in life is to refrain from tweeting during debate. as the kiddies say #lifegoals   I feel like something BIG is going to happen tomorrow. pic.twitter.com/oIy0nCxirb   1. Will U be watching the debate tomorrow? 2. Will you be watching with an open mind or is your mind made up? 3. What snack will U B having?   Why would they schedule a debate on a Monday Night Football Night?? Guess it makes sense to somebody.   For the debates on Monday, I'm thinking of serving skewers. With Cheetos and skittles for munchies, of course.   To level the field at the debates tonight, Hillary Clinton will be administered anesthesia, and all questions will be read to her in German.   Can not wait to watch the Trump - Clinton debate,this Monday..I'm betting that the shorter of the two blonds will prevail..   Only 50 more days til we find out who's our next President! Last time I was nauseous 50 days straight, at least I got a baby out of it! 
HEMPSTEAD, N.Y.—Hillary Clinton plays chess. Donald Trump plays craps. Chess isn’t for everyone. It takes a long time. It's complicated. The chess team has a tendency to get beat up. Craps is fun. It's thrilling. Maybe you win big. Maybe you lose. But in the moment, what a show. Story Continued Below Clinton’s campaign wanted the debate to make the many millions of people who watched think hard about each candidate as president—no matter what happens, “We win because more people are watching,” deputy communications director Christina Reynolds said two hours before the lights went up on Lester Holt. And they wanted a real-time test of their organization versus Trump’s, both in a war room that drowned reporters in prepared emails and several times got so loud with cheers that aides missed parts of the debate and in a spin room that matched billionaire Mark Cuban, Obama mastermind David Plouffe and Brigadier General John Douglass against Don King, wandering around in his Mt. Rushmore airbrushed denim jacket and American and Israeli flags, and a couple of cable news talking head supporters like A.J. Delgado. She moved in her pawns, her rooks, her bishops. He rolled the dice, shot them across the table. Her gambits worked. “He was rattled that he had trouble competing in the arena,” said Clinton campaign manager Robby Mook. “He became unhinged.” Clinton’s campaign lined up this debate as the most important but just first volley in what will be a sustained attack through the second debate in St. Louis and the third in Las Vegas. And her allies were immediately daring Trump to try squelching on showing up for those, as he’s flirted with. Even Trump acolyte Rudy Giuliani was admitting afterward that it didn’t go well and her team is now hoping that will goad the Republican nominee into another edition of blaming trusting aides over his own instincts, and coming into the next debate with a different demeanor. “It’s hard. We saw with Al Gore, we had three different Al Gores,” Plouffe said afterward. “That didn’t work out so well.” Her team sees a number of winning lines coming out of the debate to carry into the next: Trump was a mess on birtherism (works with African-Americans, and anyone who loves President Barack Obama), his answer on his tax returns could be interpreted as that he didn’t pay taxes at all in any year (works with middle class swing voters and any hesitant Republican-leaning independent wondering what he’s hiding), he talked about his own business interests more than any jobs plan (works again with those middle class voters, particularly the college educated women that have been wavering a whole lot more than Clinton can be comfortable with). But Trump's appeal is to anyone who thinks flailing rage at the system is fine if that cracks a system that isn’t working. Every time he seemed prepared with a line, it was to point out how long Clinton had been around and not solved the problems she was talking about. “Hillary has experience, but it’s bad experience,” Trump said, finally getting across his point after the clock had already run past the 90-minute mark. Clinton tried to keep the focus only on the flailing. Her aides said he made that easier than they’d prepared for Monday night. “He was baited even when you didn’t try to bait,” said Clinton top adviser Jennifer Palmieri, who sat in on many of Clinton’s prep sessions. Trump’s debate prep was enough that he kept himself to calling his opponent “Secretary Clinton” instead of “Hillary,” at least for the first half of the night, but not enough to hold himself back from yelling interruptions at her, or being caught prickly on her raising questions about the money his father gave him to start his business, and apparently unwilling to get a more convincing answer on whatever he wants to call his current position on birtherism. The Clinton campaign and the Obama alums, scarred from the president flubbing it in his first debate in 2012 against Mitt Romney, were horrified about a repeat, and with a weaker candidate. They walked out of Hofstra feeling good. But the most important constituency that Clinton may have hit on Monday night: what Rep. Xavier Becerra, spinning for Clinton here at Hofstra afterward joked are the “perpetual freaker-outers,” or nearing 100 percent of the Democratic electorate who keep poll websites on constant refresh and have been cornering the market on Xanax prescriptions as the national numbers have tilted more and more toward Trump. “I don't think Trump fell on his face, but she pushed back in a really strong and measured way—which I think is important,” said Mitch Stewart, battleground states director for Obama’s reelection campaign, who was watching from home as a supporter of but not affiliated with Clinton. “She also came across as friendly—much more so than Trump. She was likable in this debate and maybe that is the most important thing for her to accomplish.” Plouffe, who spent all his years with Obama laughing off the “bedwetters,” laughed again Monday night when asked if Clinton had gotten them under control. “That’s a hard thing to fix,” he said. “Did she give Dems more reason to go out and knock doors? Did she give some Democrats who didn’t know if they were going to vote in this election, I think she did. But I also think she did quite a bit of good with moderate swing voters.” “She gave Democrats a lot of reason to calm down,” Plouffe said. “But that’s how we are.” “It was an awesome night for Democrats,” said DNC member Robert Zimmerman, as he headed out of the debate space Monday night. “There’ll be no bedwetting for 12 hours.”
New York (CNN)BREAKING NEWS: Barack Obama vetoed Friday a bill that would allow family members of 9/11 victims to sue Saudi Arabia. The White House claimed it could expose US diplomats and servicemen to litigation in other countries. Republican and Democratic leaders in Congress say they'll override Obama's veto next week. Obama has now issued 12 vetoes. If successful, Congress' override will be the first of Obama's presidency. ORIGINAL STORY: A clash between the White House and Congress appears likely at the end of this week as President Barack Obama prepares to reject a measure allowing victims' families and survivors of the September 11 attacks to sue the government of Saudi Arabia. Support for the "Justice Against Sponsors of Terrorism Act" ran high among lawmakers, who overwhelmingly passed the bill after pressure from victims' groups. The bill passed with enough support to indicate lawmakers could override the President's expected veto. But in recent days some of the measure's supporters have expressed misgivings about the legislation, prompting a new effort by the administration to lobby against the bill. The White House hasn't specified when Obama will officially veto the measure, which he's vowed to reject claiming it could open US diplomats and service-members to lawsuits. The 10-day window for the President to submit his rejection closes on Friday, and the White House is hoping to keep its options open by waiting until nearer the deadline. Administration officials had been eying a Friday afternoon veto, which would have come after Congress was expected to adjourn until November's election contests. But prolonged negotiations over a government funding bill and a package to combat Zika virus have delayed the recess, meaning lawmakers are still likely to be in Washington next week to cast an override vote. A person familiar with the administration's thinking said that Friday afternoon still appeared the most likely period for the veto to come down. That would maximize time for White House officials to press members of Congress to reconsider support for the measure. "White House officials and other senior officials on the president's national security team have engaged members of Congress and their staffs in both parties in both houses," White House Press Secretary Josh Earnest told reporters in New York on Tuesday. He wouldn't disclose when Obama planned to veto the bill. "As soon as the President has put pen to paper, we'll be sure and let all of you know," Earnest said. The Republican leaders of the Senate and House have both said in recent says that an override is expected to go through, despite new qualms about the bill. If successful it would be the first veto override of Obama's presidency. "Our assumption is that the veto will be overridden," Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell told reporters on Tuesday. House Speaker Paul Ryan followed suit Wednesday, saying "I do think the votes are there for the override." But the Wisconsin Republican also voiced his own doubts about the legislation, saying the implications for lawsuits against Americans worried him. "I worry about legal matters," Ryan said. "I worry about trial lawyers trying to get rich off of this. And I do worry about the precedence. At the same time, these victims do need to have their day in court." He was one of several prominent lawmakers who have expressed buyers' remorse for the proposed law. A pair of Republican senators, Bob Corker of Tennessee and Lindsey Graham of South Carolina, have pushed for changes to make it more difficult for the families to pursue lawsuits but could also make it harder for the US to be sued for alleged wrongdoing. Opponents of the bill gained support Wednesday from the European Union, which issued its opposition in the form of a "demarche" statement to the US Department of State. "The European Union is of the view that the possible adoption and implementation of the JASTA would be in conflict with fundamental principles of international law and in particular the principle of State sovereign immunity," the EU statement read. "The European Union considers that the adoption of the bill and its subsequent implementation might also have unwanted consequences as other States may seek to adopt similar legislation, leading to a further weakening of the principles of State sovereignty immunity." The document called on Obama to reject the bill. CNN's Ted Barrett contributed to this report from Washington
Hillary Clinton on Tuesday dismissed Donald Trump’s conspiracy theory that his microphone was tampered with ahead of Monday’s presidential debate, framing his excuse as a signal that he had a bad night in what was effectively a rhetorical mic drop. The Republican presidential nominee told “Fox and Friends” in a phone interview Tuesday morning that he was having problems with his microphone Monday night. “I don’t know if you saw that in the room, but my microphone was terrible. I wonder, was it set up that way on purpose?” Trump said. Story Continued Below After a brief gaggle aboard her campaign plane later in White Plains, New York, Clinton turned back toward the crowd of reporters to take one final question after initially saying “thank you” and walking away. While the question itself is unclear, a woman can be heard asking about a microphone, prompting Clinton to take a scathing parting shot at her opponent, as evidenced by the audible reaction (which included a group “oooh”) on the plane. “Anybody who complains about the microphone is not having a good night,” Clinton quipped as she walked away from reporters, this time for good.
Neal West stood outside Bernie Sanders’ event at Kent State University on Saturday and asked people leaving to consider voting for the Green Party’s candidate, Jill Stein, though he knew full well that inside, the senator had repeated his call for his fans to vote for Clinton. West said that he voted for Sanders in the primary and that, in his opinion, Stein was closer to Sanders than Clinton on the issues. As he passed out flyers, he rejected the key argument from Sanders that in a battleground state like Ohio, where polls have the two major candidates neck and neck, he should vote for Clinton to stave off a Trump win. “If the Democratic Party had chosen a candidate that everybody would support, then there wouldn’t be an issue at all with Trump winning,” he said. Asked specifically if he worried about Trump winning, West went on: “That has nothing to do with me.” It remains to be seen whether Bernie Sanders, the choice candidate on many college campuses during the primary season, will be an effective surrogate for Hillary Clinton, who urgently needs the student and millennial vote. While stumping for Clinton at two universities in Ohio over the weekend, Sanders spent minimal time making a case for Clinton, but instead focused his remarks on why voters should reject her opponent. Sanders spoke passionately against Donald Trump. He accused the Republican Party nominee of rejecting science and trying to delegitimize Barack Obama’s presidency. “You want to disagree with Obama? Disagree with Obama. But do not go around putting a lot of money into trying to tell the American people that because we have an African American who happens to be president today that he is not a legitimate president,” the senator said while speaking at Akron University. “That is an awful and divisive and terrible thing to do.” But when talking about his former primary opponent, the Vermont senator primarily compared Clinton to Trump or listed ways in which she agrees with his own signature policy proposals on college affordability and health care. “Hillary Clinton and I believe that the time is now to ask the wealthiest people and the largest corporations to start paying their fair share of taxes,” he said during his swing through the battleground state. However, recent polling suggests that when it comes to winning the youth vote (a key demographic for President Obama) perhaps Clinton’s greatest challenge is not Trump, but other third-party candidates. In the most recent ABC News/Washington Post poll, only 40 percent of adults under 30 years old backed Clinton in the general election -- a stark contrast from the 60 percent that Obama won in 2012. This is largely because one in three adults under 30 say they plan to vote for Gary Johnson or Jill Stein -- or not vote at all. But enthusiasm also matters: even months after the Democratic primary process wrapped up, 60 percent of Democratic adults under 30 say they wish that Bernie Sanders had won the nomination. In fact, only a quarter of them say they wanted Clinton to win the nod. During a listening tour across the state of Ohio, ABC News found that college students were much quicker to bring up the third-party options.     Before hitting the campaign trail again, Sanders specifically urged his supporters not to back third-party candidates. “Now is not the time to be supporting a protest vote,” he said during an interview on MSNBC. “Right now we have to make sure Trump does not become president and Clinton is the person to beat him.” During a campaign stop at Temple University on Tuesday, Clinton appealed to students who may still have reservations about her. “Even if you are totally opposed to Donald Trump you may still have some questions about me. I get that,” she said. “And I want to do my best to answer those questions.” While speaking on campuses, both Clinton and Sanders emphasized getting to the polls. Sanders told students they should not just vote, but volunteer and get involved with politics. “If we have a large voter turnout, for Secretary Clinton and Ted Strickland [the Democratic nominee for Senate in Ohio] here in Ohio and the entire nation will be very gratified for what you do," Sanders said.
Pittsburgh (CNN)Donald Trump called Thursday for a "national anti-crime agenda" to combat violent crime in US cities as he condemned the unrest that unfolded overnight in Charlotte, North Carolina, where protests turned violent. "Our country looks bad to the world, especially when we are supposed to be the world's leader. How can we lead when we can't even control our own cities," Trump said during a speech here to a conference of shale oil and natural gas producers. After police shot a man officials say was armed, two nights of protests followed there, slipping into violence Wednesday night with numerous civilian and police injuries reported, as well as looting and property destruction. Trump, who has focused on restoring "law and order" in his presidential campaign, seized on the unrest in Charlotte to renew his call for tough-on-crime policies to bring down crime rates in major American cities and once again appeal to African-Americans to join his campaign. "The people who will suffer the most as a result of these riots are law-abiding African-American residents who live in these communities where crime is so rampant," Trump said. "There is no compassion in tolerating lawless conduct. Crime and violence is an attack on the poor and will never be accepted in a Trump administration, ever, ever." RELATED: Clinton, Trump navigate politics of police violence Trump also tied the eruption of violent protests on Wednesday night to drugs, saying in Pittsburgh that "drugs are a very, very big factor in what you're watching on television at night" -- though he offered no evidence to back up that claim. Steven Cheung, a Trump campaign spokesman, later said it was "obvious" Trump was "referring to the recent increase in drug related deaths and subsequent news reports, thus making it a hot button issue." Praised stop-and-frisk Trump praised the policing practiced under former New York City Mayor Rudy Giuliani, which included the use of "stop-and-frisk" and a greater crackdown on misdemeanor offenses and has been credited with helping bring down the city's crime rate during the 1990s. "Think of how many families these policies saved from the worst heartache possible," Trump said of Giuliani, who is now a top adviser and surrogate. Speaking to Fox News a day earlier, Trump spoke out in favor of the controversial stop-and-frisk policy Giuliani put in place in New York which was ruled unconstitutional by a federal judge in 2013 for being a "policy of indirect racial profiling." Trump said Thursday morning that he was calling for that policy to be implemented in Chicago, where gun violence has skyrocketed, with more than 3,000 people shot in that city so far this year. RELATED: New York mayor: Donald Trump wrong about 'stop-and-frisk' During that interview, Trump also highlighted what he saw as a "lack of spirit" between communities. "It just seems that there's a lack of spirit between the white and the black. I mean, it's a terrible thing that we're witnessing," he said. Trump offered few details in his Pittsburgh speech of what would be included in his "national anti-crime agenda to make our cities safe again," beyond saying that he will "make reduction of crime a top priority" and appoint "the best" prosecutors and federal investigators to go after criminal gangs and cartels. Trump has previously said that he would look to increase the number of police officers in inner cities to bring down the crime rate and improve training, but has offered little other specifics on this policy front. "Safety is the foundation of the ladder to American success," he said. Asked Wednesday about the police shootings in Charlotte and Tulsa, Oklahoma, that have reignited the debate over race and policing in the country, Trump did not address the Charlotte incident but said he was "very, very troubled" by the shooting of Terence Crutcher, an unarmed black man, in Tulsa on Friday night. Trump suggested the police officer who fatally shot Crutcher "got scared" or "was choking," referring to individuals who fail under pressure. CNN's Ashley Killough contributed to this report.
Monday night’s debate between Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump will be a battle of facts—and, perhaps more likely, half-facts and flat-out lies. Both candidates, after all, have called out for being exceptionally untrustworthy in a profession that’s not known for its uprightness. At the New Yorker, David Remnick has said of Clinton, “[She] has had her bald-faced moments—moments that are too kindly described as ‘lawyerly,’” while Nicholas Kristof recently wrote, “If deception were a sport, Trump would be the Olympic gold medalist.” When number crunchers are on the case, the candidates don’t fare much better: Politico Magazine recently fact-checked a week’s worth of each candidate’s statements, and found that Trump had uttered one untruth every 3.25 minutes and Clinton, every 12 minutes. In fact, just half of Clinton’s factual assertions have been found to be “true” or “mostly true” by the nonpartisan fact-checkers at Politifact, and Trump’s statements only come in at a pitiful 15 percent. Little wonder that polling shows more than half of likely voters don’t think either candidate is honest, the highest level of distrust in recent elections. Story Continued Below This heightened concern about truthfulness has prompted heated conversations about whether debate moderators should be responsible for live fact-checking. (Clinton says yes, Trump no.) But viewers can prepare themselves regardless: Knowing that we’re in for gale-force fabrications on Monday, how can you steel yourself for the lies ahead? Todd Rogers, an associate professor of public policy at the Harvard Kennedy School, has published two major studies about deception and how audiences respond to it. He has identified five tactics that are mainstays in American politics—and why they often work on us. Here’s a guide to those five types of deception and how they’ve been deployed in recent political history. 1. Artful Dodging What it is: Answering a different question than the one that was asked—not quite a lie, but an evasion. When you’ve seen it: Nearly all political debates feature at least one dodge, also known as a “pivot.” In one Republican primary debate, Trump was asked, “Do you still believe President Bush should have been impeached?”—to which his response started, “First of all, I have to say, as a businessman I get along with everybody. I have business all over the world.” (The rest of his response didn’t answer the question either.) In one of Clinton’s primary debates, she avoided a direct answer about the content of her Goldman Sachs speeches even when pressed. Why it works: Rogers has found that viewers’ limited attention is tied up in deciding whether they like a candidate, not whether the candidate is actually responding to the question. Since many dodges go undetected, candidates don’t often lose points for them. In fact, in the same study, speakers who eloquently answered a similar question were rated as highly as those who inartfully answered the actualquestion. 2. Paltering What it is: Actively using truthful statements to lead a listener to a false conclusion. When you’ve seen it: The best-known political example is probably Bill Clinton’s line during an interview about the Monica Lewinsky scandal: “There is no sexual relationship with that woman,” a sly but truthful use of the present tense to obscure past misdeeds. (Five days later, he upgraded to full-blown lie with “I did not have sexual relations with that woman.”) Trump has also used this tactic when asked about the bankruptcy of Trump Entertainment Resorts: “Seven years ago, I left Atlantic City before it totally cratered, and I made a lot of money in Atlantic City.” The facts are true, but the statement misleadingly recasts a business failure in a positive light. Why it works: Paltering is hard to pick up on, since you’re technically hearing the truth. And Rogers’ research shows that even when outside observers know it’s happening, they consider it more benign than outright lies of commission (see below). 3. Explicit Avoidance What it is: Flat-out refusing to engage with a sticky subject. When you’ve seen it: Politicians use this tactic when they refuse to release their tax returns, like Trump, or medical records, like Hillary Clinton. More often, you see it when politicians or their spokespeople employ the classic “no comment,” or a similar sentiment, as when Bernie Sanders responded to a question about the failures of Venezuela’s socialist model with: “Of course I have an opinion, but as I said, I’m focused on my campaign.” Clinton has done him one better, refusing for much of the campaign to face the press at all (and earning considerable criticism for it). Why it works: Actually, it doesn’t. Rogers’ colleagues have demonstrated that listeners trust and prefer people who reveal to people who hide, even when the information is damaging. 4. Lying by Commission What it is: Saying something you know to be untrue in order to mislead your audience. When you’ve seen it: Politicians most often employ straight-up lies when denying involvement in a scandal. See: Anthony Weiner’s initial denial that he’d sent anyone a close-up photo of his underwear,saying, “This was a prank, a hoax.” Or the response by Congressman Mark Foley’s camp to allegations that he’d sent inappropriate messages to congressional pages: “[This is part of an] an ugly smear campaign.” In this election cycle, Trump has famously clung to the false assertion that he always opposed the Iraq War. Why it works: This tactic can backfire if detected—both Weiner and Foley resigned under pressure, after all. But plenty of political mistruths have remarkable staying power even after being debunked, like claims, long disseminated by Trump, that Barack Obama is a Muslim or was born in Kenya. 5. Lying by Omission What it is: Failing to disclose a piece of relevant information or context, which renders a statement untrue. When you’ve seen it: In promoting the Affordable Care Act, Barack Obama and his team made a number of statements like, “If you like your health care plan, you can keep your health care plan.” This wasn’t strictly true—you could only keep your plan if it hadn’t changed since the ACA was passed. More recently, Trump has trumpeted the virtues of American manufacturing while failing to mention that several Trump products are made overseas. And Clinton’s handling of her private email server could be viewed as one extended lie of omission, since she and her team have provided incomplete information and records on multiple occasions. Why it works: If the public believes something untrue but desirable about a candidate, failure to correct the misperception works in the candidate’s favor. And research has suggested that people prefer tellinglies of omission to lies of commission. Not only is the former therefore more common—it’s also harder to hold people accountable for something they didn’t say than something they did. Still, lies of omission can work against candidates if audiences suspect they’re not being told the whole story. Of course, lies of omission are designed not to de detected—just like other forms of deception. But by studying up on Rogers’ taxonomy of deceit, perhaps debate viewers will better be able to pick up on any misleading tactics the candidates choose to deploy.
Washington (CNN)A congressman who represents North Carolina apologized Thursday for saying there are riots in Charlotte because the protesters "hate white people." "The grievance in their mind is that the animus, the anger -- they hate white people, because white people are successful and they're not," Rep. Robert Pittenger, a Republican, said on the BBC's "Newsnight." "I mean, yes, it is, it is a welfare state. We have spent trillions of dollars on welfare, where we put people in bondage so that they cannot be all that they're capable of being." Pittenger, who has represented North Carolina's ninth congressional district since 2013, emphasized that people come to the United States for opportunities, not government handouts. Obama: Violent protests won't solve policing issues "America is a country of opportunity and freedom and liberty," he said. "It didn't become that way because of a great government who provided everything for everyone, no." Pittenger told CNN's Don Lemon on "CNN Tonight" Thursday that he was repeating comments he'd heard from protesters. "Frankly, I was quoting what they were saying last night on what I observed on your network. And their hatred for white people," Pittenger said. "And that saddens me greatly." "You believe the protesters hate white people?" Lemon asked. "No, no, sir. It's the comment that they made. I think you can go back and look at the tapes. The comments that they made on air," Pittenger responded. "You mean the protesters made on air?" Lemon asked. "Yes sir. I was only trying to convey what they were saying and yet, it didn't come out right, and I apologize. I have many, many good friends in the African-American community," he said. Pittenger's office also released a statement apologizing for comments, saying he didn't mean to offend anyone. "What is taking place in my hometown right now breaks my heart. My anguish led me to respond to a reporter's question in a way that I regret," he said in the statement. "The answer doesn't reflect who I am. I was quoting statements made by angry protesters last night on national TV. My intent was to discuss the lack of economic mobility for African-Americans because of failed policies. I apologize to those I offended and hope we can bring peace and calm to Charlotte." On Tuesday in Charlotte, Keith Lamont Scott, an African-American, was shot by a police officer after refusing repeated demands to put down what authorities said was a gun. Riots and protests in the city began that night and continued on Wednesday and Thursday nights. President Barack Obama weighed in on the unrest Thursday, saying that the anger should be directed toward pushing needed reforms. 
Donald Trump ended one of the sharpest exchanges in last night's debate against Hillary Clinton with a pointed question: "Why did she delete 33,000 emails?" Clinton is doing her best to move beyond the controversy over her use of a private email server as secretary of state, saying only last night that she "made a mistake" and declining to address why those emails were deleted. She didn't answer Trump's questions. However, there is an answer. The bottom line: Clinton believed the deleted emails were not work-related.     In late 2014, the State Department asked Clinton and other former secretaries of state to hand over any work-related emails they may have. By then, Clinton had already "deleted some [emails] over time as an ordinary user would," FBI Director James Comey told lawmakers at a July congressional hearing. And she tasked her legal team to determine which of the roughly 60,000 emails still on her server were work-related. "Clinton told the FBI that she directed her legal team to provide any work-related or arguably work-related emails to State; however she did not participate in the development of the specific process to be used or in discussions of the locations of where her emails might exist," the FBI concluded in its investigative summary of the case. Comey testified that the FBI "didn't find any evidence of evil intent and intent to obstruct justice." To determine which emails were work-related, a member of Clinton’s legal team did four things: she automatically deemed any email sent from or to a .gov and .mil address as related to work; she searched the tens of thousands of emails for names of senior State Department officials, lawmakers, foreign leaders and other government officials; she conducted a keyword search for work-related terms; and she looked at the sender, recipient and "subject" of every email for other potentially work-related emails, but she did not read the contents of those emails. In December 2014, Clinton’s legal team provided about 30,000 emails -- totaling 55,000 pages -- to the State Department. "[Clinton] then was asked by her lawyers at the end, 'Do you want us to keep the personal emails?' And she said, 'I have no use for them anymore.' It's then that they issued the direction that the technical people delete them," Comey told lawmakers. In total, more than 30,000 emails were deleted "because they were personal and private about matters that I believed were within the scope of my personal privacy," Clinton told reporters in March of 2015, as the controversy around her private emails was growing. "They had nothing to do with work," Clinton added. "I didn't see any reason to keep them ... no one wants their personal emails made public, and I think most people understand that and respect that privacy." Clinton said her team "went through a thorough process" to identify work-related emails, and she said he had "absolute confidence that everything that could be in any way connected to work is now in the possession of the State Department." However, after a year-long investigation, the FBI recovered more than 17,000 emails that had been deleted or otherwise not turned over to the State Department, and many of them were work-related, the FBI has said. Republican critics have accused Clinton of using a private server and ultimately deleting emails to skirt federal records laws aimed at promoting transparency, and earlier this month the chairman of the House Oversight and Government Reform Committee, Jason Chaffetz, R-Utah, said, "The sequence of events leading up to the destruction of Secretary Clinton’s emails ... raises questions about whether Secretary Clinton, acting through her attorneys, instructed [aides and others] to destroy records relevant to" a Congressional investigation of the deadly Benghazi attack. At the July hearing before Chaffetz's committee, Rep. Jim Jordan, R-Ohio, asked Comey, "Did Secretary Clinton know her legal team deleted those emails that they kept from [Congress]?" "I don't believe so," Comey responded. During Monday night's debate, Trump promised to release his tax returns "when she releases her 33,000 emails that have been deleted," adding that he would "go against" the advice of his lawyers "if she releases her emails." Moderator Lester Holt then asked Trump if that meant releasing his tax returns was negotiable. Trump responded: "It's not negotiable. No, let her release her emails. Why did she delete 33,000 emails?"
Washington (CNN)A brewing civil war within the GOP has House Republicans picking sides, with plenty of members backing up party Chairman Reince Priebus in threatening consequences for those who don't get behind nominee Donald Trump. "Any person in this party that does not support Trump at this point is increasing the chances of Hillary Clinton becoming president and destroying the Constitution," Arizona Rep. Trent Franks told CNN Wednesday. "Therefore they are betraying this party. They are betraying the Constitution." Franks had endorsed Texas Sen. Ted Cruz in the primary. The rancor comes after Priebus, the chairman of the Republican National Committee, said Sunday on CBS' "Face the Nation" that if Trump opponents don't "get on board," it's not "going to be that easy for them" to run for office again. The remark appeared to be directed at former presidential candidates like Cruz, Ohio Gov. John Kasich, and former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush, who all have refused to endorse Trump after signing a pledge to do so during the primary campaign. Priebus' comments prompted pushback, including from top Kasich strategist John Weaver, who retorted that Kasich "will not be bullied by a Kenosha political operative that is unable to stand up for core principles or beliefs." The GOP's next civil war is brewing But House Republicans had Priebus' back. While none discussed explicit penalties for future candidates based on their opposition to Trump, they warned that there would be political consequences. "Having on your resume that you were all in against the nominee -- (with a) record number of votes won fair and square -- having on your record that you were against the nominee is not a positive for future political aspirations," said Nevada Rep. Mark Amodei. Several prominent Republicans in addition to the former candidates have publicly said they won't back Trump. On Tuesday, sources said that former President George H.W. Bush had told Kathleen Hartington Kennedy Townsend that he would be voting for Clinton. Sources: Bush 41 says he'll vote for Clinton Clinton has also been endorsed by Republicans including HP CEO and former California gubernatorial candidate Meg Whitman; a top adviser to Arizona Sen. John McCain, Mark Salter; and former George W. Bush administration Commerce Secretary Carlos Gutierrez. Former GOP nominee Mitt Romney has also spoken forcefully against Trump, though he has not endorsed Clinton. And current sitting lawmakers -- including Illinois Sen. Mark Kirk, South Carolina Sen. Lindsey Graham and Florida Rep. Carlos Curbelo -- have said they will not vote for the brash real estate mogul. Kirk and Curbelo are both facing reelection. On Wednesday, Curbelo brushed off the idea that he is hurting his party. "Every American has to make the best choice for their country," Curbelo told CNN. "Jack Kemp said you serve your party best by serving your country first, that's what I do here every day." But Curbelo's colleagues maintained he will have to face the voters' reaction to his opposition to the party's standard-bearer. "There's already some unrest among Republicans that there are some who have chosen not to get behind their nominee, the person they picked," said Pennsylvania Rep. Lou Barletta. "I can sense that as we travel around, and I think that will be lasting." "I do anticipate there will be some type of reaction to that," said Tennessee Rep. Marsha Blackburn, referring to Priebus' threat. Trump has been endorsed by the Republican leaders in the House and Senate, but the relationship has been strained. Though they support voting for Trump, both Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell and House Speaker Paul Ryan have continued to on occasion criticize him publicly. The House's No. 2 Republican didn't fully back Priebus' comments on Tuesday, saying threats were not good motivation to come together. "There's a better way to unite people. I'm not a big believer that punishment unites people," House Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy told reporters. "If Hillary (Clinton) can't unite Republicans, I don't think anything can." 
It was just over a year ago, at a nationally televised debate, when Donald Trump chided Jeb Bush for speaking another language on the campaign trail. “This is a country,” Trump said standing at the lectern next to Bush, “where we speak English, not Spanish.” The crowd at the Ronald Reagan presidential library applauded. Ever since, Trump has stayed true to his word. Story Continued Below With 46 days until the November elections, and as early voting begins in a handful of states, Trump is on the precipice of becoming the only major-party presidential candidate this century not to reach out to millions of American voters whose dominant, first or just preferred language is Spanish. Trump has not only failed to buy any Spanish-language television or radio ads, he so far has avoided even offering a translation of his website into Spanish, breaking with two decades of bipartisan tradition. “He’s not willing to give into anything that shows that he wants to cater to us,” said Juan Hernandez, a Hispanic Republican and former adviser to President George W. Bush. “And he believes that he doesn’t have to. He believes he can still squeeze out a few more white, over 50 [year-old] votes.” While the majority of Latino voters are English-speaking, Trump’s refusal to campaign in Spanish is a powerful symbol of how little heed Trump has paid to America’s shifting demographics. Latinos now make up about 10 percent of the national vote, with electorally potent concentrations in crucial battlegrounds such as Florida, Colorado, Nevada and even North Carolina. Adolfo Franco, a veteran Republican strategist who served as a top Hispanic surrogate for Mitt Romney and John McCain, said he had “a more cynical view” of Trump’s studied avoidance of campaigning in Spanish. “I think they’ve made a calculation that going on Spanish TV in a more concentrated fashion and also placing ads in Spanish would upset his base,” Franco said. Trump’s bid for the White House has been powered by working-class white voters and summed up by his slogan — Make America Great Again — that appeals to a bygone era of prosperity whose disappearance is blamed on immigration and globalization. Trump called illegal Mexican immigrants rapists and drug-dealers in his announcement speech, and chants of “Build that wall!” are among the loudest at his rallies. That has left a growing number of prominent Latino Republicans on the sidelines in 2016, backing Hillary Clinton or even Libertarian Gary Johnson, whom Hernandez has endorsed. Multiple members of Trump’s National Hispanic Advisory Council resigned after his heated anti-immigrant rhetoric following his trip to Mexico. And one of the co-chairs of Romney’s Hispanic outreach operation, former Bush Commerce Secretary Carlos Gutierrez, has starred in a Spanish-language ad this cycle — for Clinton. “Votar por Trump? No puedo,” Gutierrez says. (Translation: “Vote for Trump? I can’t.”) Romney, McCain and Bush all operated Spanish-language versions of their websites. Romney dispatched his Spanish-speaking son, Craig, as an ambassador in TV ads and on the trail (“Somos una nación de inmigrantes,” the younger Romney said in one ad). McCain and Bush, who both hailed from border states, ran Spanish-languages ads. Bush himself narrated some, memorably beginning them, “Soy George W. Bush” with his distinctive Texas accent. Four years ago, a total of $23 million was spent on Spanish-language ads in the 2012 presidential race by Obama, Romney and their backers; so far in 2016, Trump has spent zero. Trump’s campaign declined to comment for this story. The Trump campaign’s most notable dabbling in Spanish consisted of a single word — and it was misused. At the Republican convention in Cleveland, officials handed out signs that read “Hispanics Para Trump,” which both didn’t translate Hispanics and used the incorrect Spanish word for “for” (para instead of por). In recent weeks, Clinton has begun airing hundreds of thousands of dollars in Spanish-language ads in Nevada and Florida. A trio of supportive super PACs, meanwhile, have announced a $3 million Spanish-language buy, so far in those same two states, as well as Colorado. In addition, Clinton’s running mate, Tim Kaine, spoke in Spanish at both his vice-presidential announcement and convention speeches. Her website prominently features a half-dozen buttons atop the homepage; one of them “En español” is the portal to her Spanish-language site. “We have some voters that really want to communicate in Spanish,” said Lorella Praeli, the Clinton campaign’s Latino outreach director, describing a three-pronged approach to wooing Hispanic voters — in English, Spanish and a blend of both languages Of Trump’s approach to Latinos, Praeli said, “He has insulted us and he has tried to demonize our community from the beginning.” In a sign of Trump’s toxicity among Hispanic voters, he’s already being attacked in Spanish by a fellow Republican. Sen. Mark Kirk of Illinois unveiled an ad last week touting that, “Yo no apoyo a Trump,” which translates as “I don’t support Trump.” Behind the scenes, Trump’s campaign has done some quiet outreach to Latino Republicans — and been repeatedly rebuffed. Several top Hispanic Republicans, including Hernandez and Franco, told POLITICO they were recruited to join Trump Tower as surrogates or advisers. They refused. Franco said he turned them down because of Trump’s “gross generalizations, xenophobia and a number of comments that have absolutely crossed the line.” “I didn’t even answer,” Hernandez scoffed. Trump’s Hispanic outreach has been run mostly by Helen Aguirre Ferré of the Republican National Committee, who is respected by her peers, many of whom were surprised to see her take the job. She replaced Ruth Guerra, who reportedly resigned over objections to working on behalf of Trump. (Unlike Trump, the RNC has produced some materials in Spanish.) But few other prominent Hispanic Republicans have come on board. That has hurt the Trump campaign’s presence on Spanish-language television programs, where the surrogate program has been weak, said Alfonso Aguilar, who mobilized Hispanic supporters for Trump in July before rescinding his endorsement in protest over Trump’s immigration speech after his Mexico visit. Aguilar said he told the campaign, “You’re leaving a vacuum for the opposition to define the narrative in Spanish-language media and that’s exactly what’s happening.” When he was a surrogate, Aguilar said, there were no talking points or fact sheets, as there had been in the Romney, McCain and Bush campaigns. “You can run a campaign that’s different,” Aguilar said. “But you still need a professional operation.” Lionel Sosa, who cut ads targeting Hispanic voters for Ronald Reagan, including in Spanish, said he was among those contacted by Trump’s team this year. He said he told them he would only help the campaign if Trump apologized for his past offensive remarks. “I just can’t stomach Donald Trump,” Sosa said. Instead, he’s backing Johnson. Sosa predicted Trump would win no more than 22 percent of the Latino vote — worse than Romney’s much-maligned 27 percent and far short of Bush’s high-water mark of 44 percent in 2004. (A Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll released on Thursday put Trump at 17 percent among likely Hispanic voters.) The path to the White House via an overwhelmingly white coalition is a narrow one. Romney won the highest share of the white vote in three decades, 59 percent, and still lost in 2012. And whites are expected to comprise a smaller share of the electorate in 2016 than 2012, due to the faster demographic growth among minorities nationwide. Trump’s team recognizes the difficult math they face, given their candidate’s rhetoric and narrow coalition. It’s one of the reasons the Republican nominee has begun publicly appealing to black voters, appearing at African-American churches and talking about the plight of black America at many of his rallies. The Latino community has been mentioned far less often by Trump. “In a way, he’s being smart,” said Alex Nogales, president of the National Hispanic Media Coalition and a Trump critic. “Why waste his money on a community that’s not going to vote for him?”
(CNN)Interviewed Monday on Fox News Channel's "Fox and Friends," Donald Trump, the Republican presidential nominee, declared that Americans have traveled overseas, fought for ISIS and returned with impunity.  "We have people going over, fighting for ISIS and coming back, and we know they are fighting for ISIS, and we take them," he said. "Once you leave this country, you fight for ISIS, you never come back."  Is that really true that they come back and let loose? In a word - no.  New America, a Washington-based think tank, has used public records and news accounts to track Americans who have aided ISIS. According to its analysis, 117 people in the US have attempted to join ISIS or other terrorist groups in Syria, have made it there to fight, or have helped other join these organizations. According to New America's report, 74 of those were arrested before reaching Syria. Forty-three managed to reach that country and join the fight. Of those, 17 were killed and 8 were arrested when they returned home.  "Any American who has traveled to fight with a designated foreign terrorist organization and returned here would be subject to prosecution," said Justice Department spokesman, Marc Ramondi.  One person, Moner Abusalha of Florida, did train with the al-Qaeda affiliated group, the al-Nusra Front, and did return undetected to the US. But rather than stage any attacks on US soil, Abusalha returned to Syria after unsuccessfully trying to recruit more fighters here. He was later killed.  There is no evidence for Trump's claim that US officials have allowed Americans who fought with terrorist groups in Syria to escape punishment when they returned home.  
Hillary Clinton used the first presidential debate of the general-election season to launch a full frontal attack on Donald Trump, baiting him into fights over his personal finances, taxes, sexism, race relations, business dealings and personal honesty. If Clinton came looking for a fight, she found it. Her aggressive tone drew Trump in. He attacked Clinton right back, showing flashes of anger that channeled public frustration and also the coarser side of his public persona. It made for some lively exchanges, including several that brought an edge to Trump’s tone. “She doesn’t have the look,” Trump said toward the end of the debate. “She doesn’t have the stamina.” Trump appeared rattled at times, particularly as the debate wore on. Yet his main attacks on Clinton were rooted in policy grounds, as he sought to give voice to public anger not just at Clinton but at the broader political class. “You’ve been doing this for 30 years — why are you just thinking about these solutions now?” Trump said in a section of the debate about ways to create jobs. “I have thought about this quite a bit,” Clinton countered. “Yeah, for 30 years,” Trump responded. Trump stretched facts and attacked Clinton’s temperament. He — for the most part — kept his cool.       Throughout the debate, Clinton called Trump “Donald.” He almost always referred to her as “Secretary Clinton” and made sure that was all right with her. “I want you to be very happy. It’s very important to me,” Trump said, challenging the fact-checkers once again. Trump was brought onto his shakiest ground of the night when moderator Lester Holt brought up President Barack Obama’s birthplace — specifically why it took Trump until just weeks ago to declare the matter settled. Trump flatly said, “I say nothing” to those who wonder why he pushed the matter as long as he did. And he falsely accused Clinton of starting the birther question in 2007, claiming credit for putting the issue to rest. “Just like she can’t bring back jobs, she can’t produce” Obama’s birth certificate, Trump said. Clinton pounced on an issue with resonance among black voters and other parts of the Obama coalition. “It can’t be dismissed that easily. He has really started his political activity based on this racist lie that our first black president was not an American citizen,” she said. “The birther lie was a very hurtful one.” Apparently worried that Trump would be on his best behavior, Clinton started her barrage early. She suggested that Trump’s success is inherited, and that he’s hiding his tax returns to avoid embarrassment. “Maybe he’s not as rich as he says he is,” she said. “Maybe he’s not as charitable as he claims to be.” Trump didn’t even bother to deny Clinton’s suggestion that he hasn’t paid income taxes “for a lot of years,” turning even that into an argument against the status quo. “It would be squandered too, believe me,” Trump said. Clinton also found a groove in attacking Trump on Iraq. Trump again insisted that he was against the Iraq War before it started, a statement for which there is no public record in support of his claim. For his part, Trump took Clinton on consistently, attacking her on jobs, trade and national security, using her as a stand-in for politicians in general. “I have a feeling that by the end of this evening, I’m going to be blamed for everything that ever happened,” Clinton said at one point. Trump: “Why not?” Clinton: “Just join the debate by saying more crazy things.” Clinton had one of her better moments in declaring her fitness for office, keying off of Trump’s criticism of her for retreating from the campaign trail. “Donald just criticized me for preparing for this debate. And yes, I did,” she said. “And you know what else I prepared for? I prepared to be president. And I think that’s a good thing.” Later in the debate, Trump allowed that Clinton has experience, “but it’s bad experience,” he said. “This country can't afford to have another four years of that kind of experience,” Trump said. After the first extraordinary encounter between two extraordinarily unpopular nominees, the plays are clear. Clinton is putting her experience up against the anger Trump is channeling, anger that has two distinct sides to it. They proved they can get under each other’s skin. But neither candidate proved that he or she has a winning message, not on the night of the first debate.
In front of the largest televised debate audience ever, Donald Trump blew it. Swing-state Republicans expressed frustration at his Monday night performance, characterizing it as a series of missed opportunities to move the dial in the places that will matter most to his electoral fortunes in November. Story Continued Below Name-checking battleground states like Michigan and Ohio was a wise move, state and local GOP leaders said. And Trump’s message on trade resonates in industrial areas across the Rust Belt, from Pennsylvania to Wisconsin. But above all else, Republican officials and operatives lamented his lack of preparation and failure to reach persuadable voters, especially women and GOP-leaners who are not yet sold on him. Instead of prosecuting the case against Hillary Clinton — which would have helped accelerate the consolidation of the GOP base in states like Pennsylvania where once-reticent Republicans are beginning to fall in line behind the nominee — Trump got bogged down defending controversial decisions he’s made, from championing birtherism to making insensitive comments about women. “I think Trump should have been better prepared,” said Alan Novak, a former Pennsylvania Republican Party chairman. “Her preparation, strategically, helped her control the flow of that debate. It was like a basketball game when the pace is dictated by one team. She clearly did that. His focus was on himself, explaining too much about him. The opportunity was missed to go after vulnerable points on her.” “He started out having a little bit of a better [performance] than what I was anticipating, on trade issues I believe he had her back on her heels in the very first part,” said a veteran North Carolina Republican strategist, working on several races in the state. “There were a lot of opportunities, when they got into discussing cybersecurity, to inject emails, the whole narrative of her carelessness, national security matters and all that. It was a missed opportunity by Trump that comes from a lack of being prepared.” In interviews with more than a dozen battleground state Republican leaders, there was widespread agreement that Trump’s core supporters would continue to stand by him, and that the election would remain close in their states — they characterized the debate as a failure to accomplish what he needed to, rather than a costly debacle. “Trump had the opportunity to raise questions about her emails, to raise questions about the Clinton Foundation, to raise questions about Benghazi, to raise questions about a host of other things, and he simply failed to do it,” said Charlie Gerow, a GOP strategist based in Pennsylvania. While Trump surrogates criticized moderator Lester Holt after the debate, “The burden was on him to do that,” said Gerow of Trump. The GOP nominee started the debate off strong, many Republicans agreed, initially pushing a message of change and a successful attack on trade policy. But he was repeatedly drawn into protracted fights that didn’t advance his interests, and his lack of policy command was apparent. Trump’s approach to national security and foreign policy was a particular sticking point with Bill Urbanski, a former GOP chair of northeastern Pennsylvania’s Luzerne County, who said he was bothered by Trump’s seemingly contradictory response to a question about whether the U.S. should embrace a no-first-use nuclear weapons policy. “Trump was just nowhere near actually being responsive to the question that was posed,” he said. “I guess it could mean two things: one could be…trying to dodge the question because he was trying to make a particular point, but the way I read that was, he didn’t have an answer to that question.” The end result: Republican-leaners like Urbanski still see no reason to rally to him, raising questions about whether Trump will be able to hit the level of party support achieved by Mitt Romney in Pennsylvania in 2012. “Man, it continues to trouble me,” said Urbanski, who said he would like to back Trump and can’t stomach voting for Clinton. “This guy is not qualified for this job. He presents himself that way every time I see him. I can’t get over that hurdle.” Added Gerow, “My sense is, no minds were changed last night among those who had cemented their views…but among the 8, 10, 12, 15 percent who are still genuinely persuadable, I think last night slowed down, if not halted, Trump’s momentum. That’s, I think, the problem. He’s got to try to regain momentum. He has to get back on offense.” While there are still two debates to go, there won’t be many better chances to win over undecided voters, convince fence-sitting Republicans or energize the base. In Ohio’s Warren County, party regulars were primed for the first showdown between Clinton and Trump, hoping to see him stick it to Clinton at a local GOP watch party. “We had folks from the statewide and national party, we had local party folks and then we had Trump campaigners, and we had citizens at large,” said Jeff Monroe, the Warren County GOP chairman. “They were totally into it and all jazzed up, more so than I anticipated. The energy level in the room was significantly better than I anticipated.” But when asked for Trump’s strongest moments in the debate, Monroe explained his impression this way. “It’s more along the lines that there wasn’t anything catastrophic that would change the outcome,” he said. “I think that what we saw was that he was doing his very best to distinguish himself from both political sets. He was taking that approach,” Monroe said. “I think that’s going to play well with a lot of the folks that are supporting him. Regardless of whether or not, as the pundits have pointed out, there was some slippage later on, he distinguished himself.” Florida’s Republican National Committeeman, Peter Feaman, similarly said he couldn’t think of a “high or low point” for Trump in the debate. But he said Trump did accomplish one important task: He proved he could appear presidential, addressing a weakness that has dogged him among some Republicans in the swing state with the largest haul of electoral votes. “It was pretty plain. I don’t think it contained what a lot of the viewers were hoping to see, which were fireworks. That wasn’t the goal at this point,” he said. Trump certainly didn’t deliver anything to persuade Sandra Kase, who serves on the Kingston municipal council in Luzerne County. A lifelong Republican who says she cannot vote for Clinton, Kase said Trump allowed the Democratic nominee to bait him, raising questions about his judgment and his ability to control his temper with world leaders. Equally worrisome, the GOP nominee failed to make strides toward winning over women like Kase in a state where Clinton holds a 14-point edge of Trump among likely women voters, according to a new CNN/ORC poll. “Just his attitude toward women, sexism, everything that comes out of his mouth turns me off. I’m sorry, I can’t say a good thing about him,” she said. “Just the whole atmosphere of the debate, his whole attitude, his reaction — I don’t think he has the temperament. As soon as someone goads him into something, he blasts out what we wants to say and feels that’s OK, and it’s not.”
Lester Holt, "NBC Nightly News" anchor and moderator of the first presidential debate scheduled for next Monday announced the topics that will serve as a jumping off point for his questions. The topics include "America's Direction," "Achieving Prosperity" and "Securing America." The announcement came with a caveat that the topics could change due to news developments. The debate, which will be held at Hofstra University on Long Island, New York, will feature six 15-minute segments over a 90 minute period with no commercial breaks. Two of the 15-minute segments will focus on each of the announced topics.
Former New Hampshire Gov. John Sununu endorsed Donald Trump on Tuesday, hours after the Republican presidential nominee faced off against Hillary Clinton at their first presidential debate. In a statement released by Trump’s campaign, Sununu hailed the real estate mogul as the only candidate “who can bring bold change to Washington” and called for Americans to coalesce around his campaign. Story Continued Below “Donald Trump is the only candidate in this race who can bring bold change to Washington D.C.,” he said. “I support the Trump-Pence ticket for their pro-growth agenda and commitment to protecting American interests. Republicans, Independents and smart Democrats need to come together to elect Donald Trump and Mike Pence.”
Nine years ago, a driver lost control of his pickup truck and crashed into the Confederate monument on the front lawn of the Franklin County Courthouse, decapitating the marble soldier. Some locals who found the monument offensive said they were glad to see it go, but there was never much doubt that once the money was raised, the soldier would be back. The rededication ceremony in 2010 drew a crowd of about 500 people—women wore hoop skirts and men donned the gray uniforms of Confederate soldiers. “We’re very proud of it,” says Linda Stanley, managing director of the Franklin County Historical Society in Rocky Mount, Virginia, 25 miles southeast of Roanoke. “This whole county’s very, very patriotic.” Story Continued Below This was the way skirmishes over Confederate history have often gone—history is replaced, not rewritten. That is, until last year, when white supremacist Dylann Roof gunned down nine people at an African-American church in Charleston, South Carolina. The massacre set off a national debate about Confederate symbols in public places, leading to an intense and ultimately successful campaign to permanently remove the Confederate flag from the South Carolina capitol grounds, where it had flown for decades. But for every nationally publicized debate like the one over South Carolina’s flag, there are dozens of smaller battles in places like Franklin County. And this is especially true in Virginia, which, as the former home to the capital of the Confederacy, has more Confederate monuments—223—than any other state. Virginia, increasingly diverse and progressive, embodies the friction between the economic aspirations of the “New South” and the still powerful nostalgia of the Old Dominion, and it’s a drama that is playing out in town squares across the state. Though a Quinnipiac University poll last summer found Virginians evenly divided on the governor’s decision to remove the Confederate flag from state license plates, pride in local monuments remains strong. When city leaders in Danville, on Virginia’s southern border, voted to remove a Confederate flag from the grounds of the Sutherlin Mansion—known as the Last Capitol of the Confederacy—Confederate preservationists struck back. They filed a lawsuit seeking to have the flag reinstated, arguing that it was part of a war memorial, and that Virginia law protected all war memorials in the state. Last fall, a circuit court judge ruled against them. That ruling—along with the increasingly frequent threats to monuments around the state—prompted the Republican delegate from Franklin County to demand in January a blanket protection for what has been a feature of Southern urban landscapes for more than a century. Charles Poindexter introduced a bill in the General Assembly to prevent the removal of all war monuments, regardless of when they were built. “If you eliminate these monuments and memorials, you’re taking away the opportunity to learn the history of the country—to learn the good, the bad and ugly,” Poindexter says. Many of his colleagues in the Virginia Legislature agreed with him. But in March, Democratic Governor Terry McAuliffe vetoed the bill, saying cities and towns should decide what to do with their Confederate monuments, based on their individual histories. Some historians and civic leaders think the debate over Confederate symbols in public spaces, which began in the 1960s, will take decades to play out. “Every little statue’s a part of a much larger discussion and movement,” says Edward Ayers, former president of the University of Richmond and noted Civil War historian. “African-Americans now have a political voice, and this is one of the things that they’re using it for.” *** Mark Whitaker remembers walking by the 30-foot-tall Confederate monument in Portsmouth, Virginia, when he was a kid. Shopping at a store across the street, he resented looking at the obelisk guarded by stone soldiers; his parents had told him what it represented. “My ancestors could not say a thing in the face of that indignity,” Whitaker says. Now, as an African-American City Council member in a city that is 53 percent black, he wants to remove the monument from the center of Olde Towne, and perhaps put it in a cemetery. “These monuments are really a rally and a celebration [of] the rise of an institution that oppressed black people,” he says. Many of the Confederate monuments were built from the 1880s through the 1920s, an era when Civil War veterans were dying and their descendants were eager to honor them. It was also the era immediately following Reconstruction, when federal troops abandoned the South and whites aimed to reassert power through Jim Crow laws, lynchings and groups such as the Ku Klux Klan. Granite and marble monuments proclaimed that power, often in the center of town. But even in a majority-black city on the eastern shore of the state, Whitaker has battled to get Portsmouth’s monument removed. Last summer, attorney Fred Taylor, who also represented Confederate preservationists in the Danville case, warned the city that state law prohibited it from moving the monument. “We believe the monument protection act covers the monument in Danville, covers the monument in Portsmouth,” Taylor says. He argues that the original Virginia statute protecting war monuments dates back to 1902, so “there has been protection all along.” When the circuit court judge ruled against him in Danville, Taylor appealed the case to the Virginia Supreme Court. So far, the court has not agreed to hear the case. Back in Portsmouth, the debate continues. Some residents don’t want the city to spend upward of $100,000 to move the monument—a position Whitaker finds ridiculous. “Why now, when we talk about moving a symbol of racism, we’re concerned about cost?” He says the Portsmouth City Council had been waiting to hear the outcome of the Danville court case but could resume its discussion of the monument after the November elections. “We’re on solid legal grounds to remove it,” he says. “We just need four votes.” *** Other Virginia cities have struck a middle ground, forming committees to figure out what to do with their Confederate monuments. In May, Charlottesville convened a Blue Ribbon Commission on Race, Memorials, and Public Spaces. Although the move was sparked by a controversial statue of Robert E. Lee in a public park, Mayor Mike Signer was determined to broaden the conversation, with an eye toward changing the city’s entire historic landscape. He asked the commission to look at several landmarks, from an African-American cemetery that had fallen into disrepair to the statue of a Confederate boy in front of the courthouse. Members of the panel have discussed rehabbing and creating new historic interpretations for these sites, building new monuments to African-American leaders and linking all the sites so that visitors can see how they are connected. There might even be a virtual, mobile educational component to help people navigate the sites. The goal, Signer says, is to change the narrative of Charlottesville “by telling the full story of race through our public spaces.” The commission is slated to give its recommendations to the City Council in December. In the wealthy, heavily Democratic city of Alexandria, a similar advisory group decided not to remove the Appomattox statue in the middle of Old Town, which depicts a defeated Confederate soldier with his eyes downcast. The United Daughters of the Confederacy owns the monument, and moving it would require approval from the Virginia General Assembly. Also, as the advisory group noted, Appomattox is one of the rare Confederate statues that marks a historic site—the place where the 17th Virginia Regiment gathered to withdraw from Union occupation of the city in 1861. The group recommended labeling the statue with more historical context instead of taking it down. Richmond, the former capital of the Confederacy, has an entire street lined with monuments to Confederate leaders. It’s also a majority-black city. In June 2015, someone scrawled “Black Lives Matter” on the statue of former Confederate President Jefferson Davis. Yet Mayor Dwight Jones has not called for the monuments’ removal. Instead, he suggested adding more statues of prominent black leaders—such as the bronze of tennis legend Arthur Ashe, who was born in Richmond, that the city erected in 1995. “Rather than tearing down, we should be building up in ways that establish a proper sense of balance and fairness by recognizing heroes from all eras to tell a richer and more accurate story of Virginia’s history,” Jones said in a statement last summer. Delegate Poindexter tends to agree with Jones, although he’s fuzzy on the specifics. Asked whether he would be in favor of adding more historical context to existing Confederate monuments, he says, “It’s far better than tearing down the current ones.” In his eyes, the era in which the Confederate monuments were erected is “irrelevant.” “They need to be respected,” he says. “They didn’t know what we know today. That’s why these monuments are important.” Ayers says many people who push to preserve Confederate monuments share this attitude. “The white South has always been on the defensive ever since it tried to leave the United States,” he says. “They’ve taken what ground they can get, and what they can get is personal memory and memorialization. It’s an amalgam of power and weakness.” “They’re meant to do work,” Ayers says. “The work that they were meant to do, in some ways they’re still doing: Saying that this is a place where local white people call the shots.” *** In Franklin County, the power struggle is deeply personal. Stanley says the area sent about 3,000 Confederate soldiers to what she calls “The War Between the States.” Veterans who returned home became mayors and town clerks and delegates. Beginning in 1902, the local chapter of the United Daughters of the Confederacy started raising money for a memorial to honor the sons, fathers and husbands who never made it home. They dedicated the monument in front of the courthouse in 1910. One of the people who agreed to donate money to the project was Booker T. Washington, the famed African-American educator who was born into slavery on a farm in Franklin County in 1856. In 1905, he wrote a letter offering to contribute funds for the Confederate memorial, in honor of the family that owned him. As far as Stanley knows, Washington did contribute some amount, “we just don’t have a copy of the actual check.” Poindexter says Franklin County “lost hundreds of its best men” in the Civil War, and for decades afterward, Reconstruction was “a horrible process” that had a big impact on the region. Today, Franklin County is home to about 56,200 people, 90 percent of whom are white. They elected Poindexter, a conservative Christian with an “A” rating from the National Rifle Association, to the General Assembly for the first time in 2007. In 2014, the county had a median household income of $44,827, far below the state’s median of $64,792. Its residents voted Republican in the past three presidential races, and many supported Poindexter’s efforts to save war monuments. “We didn’t want anybody pulling any monuments down,” Stanley says. Soon after the county replaced the Confederate memorial in front of the courthouse, the local chapter of the NAACP suggested that a statue of Booker T. Washington be erected beside it. Other community leaders wanted to put up a pedestal honoring African-Americans who contributed to the county’s Civil War effort. The county board of supervisors tabled their request, saying the community needed more time to discuss it. Civil War memorials are not generally a big tourist draw in the Roanoke region, says Landon Howard, president of Visit Virginia’s Blue Ridge. “To be candid, we really do not get hardly any American Civil War visitation here.” Yet locals have their own loyalties. Every year, the Franklin County Historical Society celebrates Veterans Memorial Day, honoring all local casualties of military conflicts. According to the society’s website, “Special emphasis is placed on veterans of the War Between the States as this war touched literally every household in the county.” Confederate General Jubal Early was born in Franklin County, and he’s known as one of the rebels who never surrendered. “He became the primary spokesman for the Lost Cause and became the overwhelming authority on published Confederate history,” says the website of the Jubal A. Early Homeplace. Speaking by phone from his farm in Franklin County, Poindexter isn’t ready to surrender, either. He doesn’t know whether he’ll propose his monument protection bill again next year, but he hasn’t ruled it out. “If you start tearing down monuments ... where do you stop?” he says. “You can’t change what was, but you can learn from it and not make that mistake again.”
Washington (CNN)Two Republican senators are expressing concern to the head of the Department of Homeland Security over what they said was a "rush" to process new citizens ahead of the presidential election. In the letter to Jeh Johnson, Sens. Chuck Grassley of Iowa and Ron Johnson of Wisconsin specifically suggest that new voters could provide Democrats with an advantage. They refer to an internal agency email from US Citizenship and Immigration Services about processing applications "due to the election year." The memo encourages DHS staff to work overtime to process applications and notes several Saturdays that offices will be open to help process applications. The senators say a similar effort in 1996 to increase citizenship applications "endangered national security and public safety" because not all the cases were processed following the correct protocol, such as fingerprint checks. The Department of Homeland Security said it aims to ensure naturalization applications are processed on time. "USCIS's goal is to process applications for naturalization within five to seven months, regardless of external events such as elections. USCIS uses statistical forecasting models to plan for the potential increased volume of work. USCIS anticipated that there would be a spike in applications this year, as we usually see in an election year, but the increase ... has exceeded expectations," Homeland Security said in a statement. The prospect of more immigrants becoming citizens likely stands to benefit Democrats. The implications are controversial because Democrats have made a push to get new immigrants to register to vote, aiming to build up an anti-Trump demographic particularly among Latinos. Latinos line up to get naturalized and stop Trump US Citizenship and Immigration Services show a 14.5% jump in naturalization applications in June-December of 2015 compared with the same six months in the previous year. Federal data does not break down those applications by race, but grass-roots organizations, like the Florida Immigrant Coalition, say their naturalization drives across their swing state are filled primarily by Latinos, who overwhelmingly vote Democrat. Trump calls for 'national anti-crime agenda' after Charlotte unrest Democrats have been accused by Republicans during the 2016 season of trying to increase turnout by adding voters. Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump last month slammed an effort by Democratic Virginia Gov. Terry McAuliffe to restore voting rights to some convicted felons who have completed their sentences. 
North Carolina Gov. Pat McCrory said Friday that he had "very positive" conversations the previous day with both Donald Trump and President Barack Obama. The Republican governor, appearing on "Fox & Friends," said he "explained the situation to both Mr. Trump and the president and explained the dynamics that are occurring." Story Continued Below "I told them both that we have some anarchists who do not have legitimate reason to protest," McCrory said. "We have other protests that are doing an incredible job of expressing their viewpoint, which needs to be heard." In addition, McCrory said he spoke to Obama and Trump "about the courage of our police officers and our National Guard." After speaking with McCrory on Thursday, Trump tweeted his appreciation for the governor in the wake of multiple nights of protests following the police killing of an African-American man in Charlotte. "He is doing a tremendous job under tough circumstances," Trump wrote. Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton called both Charlotte Mayor Jennifer Roberts and Rep. Alma Adams (D-N.C.) on Thursday evening to discuss the recent events and to offer any assistance. McCrory declared a state of emergency on Wednesday night, and the city instituted a midnight curfew on Thursday.
Washington (CNN)Russia doesn't have the ability to tamper with American election results, but has been warned by President Barack Obama on down about even trying, Secretary of State John Kerry said. The nation's top diplomat, in an interview with CNN's Elise Labott, said, "We have made it crystal clear to Russia to what the consequences might be. The President, myself, we've had conversations, we know what's happening, we are being vigilant." Concerns about hacking into US election systems have heightened in the wake of digital break-ins to Democratic campaign organizations, which federal authorities have linked to Russian intelligence services. "I do not believe Russia will have the ability to effect this election and we are going to be absolutely vigilant about it," Kerry said. "The President has made that clear and Russia is warned." Kerry, the 2004 Democratic presidential nominee, also recalled the exhilaration and exhaustion of a national campaign's final stretch. "Right now you're getting into October. October is the month when your juices, your blood really begins to flow. You're down to 30 days," said the former Massachusetts senator. "You've been at this for two years plus whatever it is. Uh, it's exhausting but you can see the end, the stakes really descend on you. You really have a sense of just how much is up for grabs here in terms of the future of our nation. And I think that energizes, that clarifies the focus, it provides an intensity and a passion. And I'm confident that over the next month we will see a sharpening, if you will, of the differences of the arguments between the candidates." But Kerry declined to weigh in on specifics of the tight race between Hillary Clinton, his predecessor at Foggy Bottom, and Republican nominee Donald Trump. In the interview Kerry was also sharply critical of Russia for failing to enforce a ceasefire agreement in Syria, calling on Russia to "stop the grandstanding, stop the showboating and get the humanitarian assistance going." Kerry's comments come as convoys carrying humanitarian aid are blocked from reaching some of Syria's hardest-hit areas. "It is now Sunday morning. This started Monday night of last week -- this past week. And the humanitarian assistance is supposed to be flowing," Kerry said. He pinned the blame on Syrian President Bashar al-Assad, who is at war with insurgents. The United States and Russia are split on who they back in the Syrian civil war, but are attempting to work together to combat terror groups in the country. Kerry complained that Assad's government is blocking the aid and has continued the violence, and said Russia must pressure Assad. "The regime, once again, is blocking it. So Russia's client, Russia's supported friend, is the single biggest blockade to the ability to move forward here," Kerry said. "So let me just say this clearly: Russia signed up to a cessation of hostilities. Assad said he would live by it. Then he needs to stop and let the joint implementation center get set up so Russia and the United States can coordinate in order to avoid the kind of terrible thing that happened yesterday that we all acknowledge and regret," Kerry said. His comments come the day after the US-led coalition fighting ISIS admitted it struck Syrian forces rather than a terror target. Kerry also issued a broader call for Russia to pressure Assad. "The biggest judgment they need to make is to stop Assad from bombing people indiscriminately, which he continues to do," the secretary of state said. "And if you are serious about having a ceasefire, and they say they are, then they should keep Assad from flying right now and prove their sincerity about a ceasefire," he said. "But to allow Assad -- who is a spoiler; he doesn't want a ceasefire -- to allow him to continue to go after opposition, pretending that they are Nusra, is in and of itself a huge challenge to this effort." Kerry said "there are no good options" to stop the crisis in Syria, and that the options that do exist are "ugly." "One option is trying to move toward a ceasefire and trying to get to the table to have a negotiation. But the other option moves to more arms in the area, more fighting, more destruction, more migrants, more refugees. More children, women, schools, hospitals hit. Literally, possibly the destruction of Syria as an entire nation and state. And it is getting close to that even now," Kerry said. "So the options are not pretty. But you've got to put to test the seriousness of purpose of a nation." He acknowledged that Defense Secretary Ash Carter and others at the Pentagon have expressed reservations about a ceasefire agreement and in trusting Russia to help enforce it. "Nothing in this agreement is based on trust," he said. "It is based on very specific steps that each side has to take. And that includes pulling back from this key access road in the north near Aleppo. It includes restraining both sides, Assad, and for us, the opposition, from engaging. And then it includes the delivery of humanitarian assistance, and delivering a real cessation of hostilities." Kerry also weighed in on the explosion Saturday night in New York City, saying "the security in the city of New York will be unparalleled as it always is" in the wake of the incident. "I'm not concerned about that. But I think we need to be concerned for every American and for the folks in New York on a day-to-day basis. Understand what's going on. The teams are doing that and as I said, they could not be more qualified or capable," he said. 
The men and women on 2016’s Politico 50 list are some of the brightest, most provocative minds in American life. So what do they think about the pressing questions facing this country in 2016 and beyond? Where do they stand on Hillary Clinton vs. Donald Trump? Where would Barack Obama rank on an all-time list of presidents? What single word best describes the respective states of our two political parties? Of all the challenges facing America right now, which one is the biggest? And what issue is most likely to surprise us in 2017? We asked The Politico 50, and although they have very different ideas and backgrounds—from entertainers to academics to lawyers to professional agitators—there are areas where they agree. Ninety-eight percent, for instance, said that Russia is an international menace. Seventy-three percent said that, on balance, international trade deals help America. Fifty-three percent said that Bernie Sanders’ candidacy ultimately helped the Democratic Party. And The Politico 50, on average, are quite worried about the prospect of a Trump presidency. But there are many points of dispute across a broad swath of issues and interests, whether it’s the sleeper issue driving the election, Trump’s greatest strength as a candidate or Obama’s biggest piece of unfinished business in the White House. Here, their answers to our annual Politico 50 survey. (5W Infographics; illustrations by John Jay Cabuay)    Our guide to the thinkers, doers and visionaries transforming American politics.
Washington (CNN)New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo said Tuesday that Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump is wrong to suggest that the New York bombing suspect shouldn't receive medical care. "I understand the anger that Donald Trump is speaking to (but) this is America and this is our system and you are innocent until proven guilty and you have a right to counsel and that is the Constitution of the United States of America," he said on CNN's "New Day." "And that's what makes us who we are. That's what makes us special. And if you give that up, Alisyn, then you have defeated yourself," Cuomo, a Democrat who has endorsed Hillary Clinton for president this cycle, told CNN's Alisyn Camerota. "That is the code of democracy and freedom. That is what they resent about us. So don't lose your soul in the process. Because that is the soul of America." Trump complained Monday about Ahmad Khan Rahami being offered medical treatment and legal assistance following his shootout with police. Rahami, the suspect in Saturday's bombings in New York and New Jersey, was captured Monday. Following a frantic manhunt and shootout, Rahami was shot multiple times before being taken to a hospital for surgery. "He will be taken care of by some of the best doctors in the world. He will be given a fully modern and updated hospital room. And he will probably even have room service, knowing the way our country is. And on top of all of that, he will be represented by an outstanding lawyer," Trump said at a Florida rally. But Cuomo said Tuesday that leaving a wounded Rahami "on the streets" would have been un-American. "That's not who we are. That's not who we want to be. And that's not how we defeat the terrorists. We defeat the terrorists by staying true to who we are," he said. Cuomo also responded on CNN's "The Situation Room" to Trump's claim Monday that Rahami would have access to "amazing hospitalization" and be "taken care of by some of the best doctors in the world." "Welcome to America," he told CNN's Wolf Blitzer. "Right? We have a system of jurisprudence. You are innocent until proven guilty. You have a right to counsel ... that is our system. And it's what makes this country special. It's what make this country great." Cuomo praised law enforcement Tuesday for successfully capturing Rahami quickly. "It was really a remarkable situation when you think about it," he said on "New Day." "I think it's a statement of the time. We have gotten so sophisticated in law enforcement, especially in New York." On Monday, Cuomo disputed Trump's assertion that police aren't doing their job because they are afraid of being accused of racial profiling. "Our local police -- they know who a lot of these people are. They are afraid to do anything about it because they don't want to be accused of profiling," Trump said Fox News. Cuomo responded: "I don't know how you could have been more aggressive than we were here." Trump defends racial profiling in wake of bombs "I said as soon it as it happened that justice would be swift," he told Blitzer. "I don't know how you can criticize that police activity. Look at the product, look at the result, look at how aggressive it was." 
Washington (CNN)Donald Trump is watching videos of Hillary Clinton's past debate performances -- including both her highlights and lowlights -- ahead of their first debate Monday. A source familiar with his preparations described Trump's preparation, which has been described as far more minimal than Clinton's, who is currently off the campaign trail to practice before the highly anticipated, nationally broadcast event. Trump has huddled with his closest advisers in his prep session, including Republican National Committee Chairman Reince Priebus, who sat in on last weekend's meeting, the source said. Priebus will join Trump again this weekend. Clinton is similarly watching tape of Trump's Republican primary debates, according to several people familiar with her debate preparation. She took notes on what agitated him, particularly in his exchanges with rival Ted Cruz, and studied his style. To knock Trump off his game, people advising Clinton have been looking for a one-line retort that will be a memorable moment from the contest. But Democrats worry the first debate will give Trump a chance to show a more moderate, controlled side, while millions of people watch, possibly for the first time. This, according to people who have recently talked with the former secretary of state, is not lost on Clinton. Earlier this week, a top Trump aide mocked Clinton's extensive preparations for Monday's debate in an internal campaign memo. "These are hallmarks of a career politician who has spent too much time seeking and clinging to power," Trump spokesman Jason Miller said in the memo. "He's not rehearsing canned 30-second soundbites or spending hours in the film room like an NFL player. He will be prepared, but most importantly, he will be himself," Miller added. In contrast to those lowered expectations set by Trump's staff, the GOP nominee may have raised the bar for himself by poking fun at Clinton's debate preparations at a rally in Pennsylvania Thursday night, suggesting she is still recovering from her recent bout with pneumonia. "Well they say she's been practicing for the debate. Some people think she's sleeping," Trump quipped at the event. CNN's Dan Merica and Jeff Zeleny contributed to this report.
House Speaker Paul Ryan is facing a major obstacle in his months-long quest to pass criminal justice reform: unenthused House Republicans still skittish about looking soft on crime. The Wisconsin Republican for weeks has repeated his personal desire to move a bipartisan package that would include allowing well-behaved nonviolent prisoners to be eligible for early release and easing some drug-related sentencing requirements. Story Continued Below It would mark a major accomplishment for the speaker, and a chance for Republicans to show racial minorities they care about issues of social justice — plus a salient, positive message countering Donald Trump’s racially charged bid for the White House. But the odds are decidedly long. With Trump advocating for controversial policies like systematic “stop and frisk,” and the protests in Charlotte, North Carolina, against police-involved shootings causing racial tensions to flare, Ryan’s conference is not eager to vote on the matter. An internal GOP leadership “survey” last week taking House Republicans’ temperature on the issue showed that most members were lukewarm at best. That means that if Ryan wants to make a push for criminal justice reform after the election, he will have his work cut out. “It’s not an easy thing to make these reforms, and the [Judiciary] committee has taken some time doing it; now they’re taking time educating members on it,” Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy (R-Calif.) said Monday of a package of bills drafted by the Judiciary Committee. “It is a priority for the speaker. There are concerns … so we’re getting all the questions answered.” The Judiciary panel last year passed 11 bills to reform federal sentencing laws and improve the prison re-entry system. While the package would not eliminate mandatory minimum sentences, it would significantly reduce sentences for nonviolent drug offenders. It would also create a program to reduce recidivism rates. The politics of criminal justice reform have soured for conservative supporters. Trump has warned repeatedly of dangerous, crime-ridden cities. And the FBI on Monday released new statistics showing that murders increased 11 percent and violent crimes rose 4 percent in the U.S. last year. Though the rates are still low by recent historical standards, it's enough to make law-and-order Republican lawmakers nervous. While proponents argue that reform would go a long way toward easing racial tensions, opponents vow they’ll never vote against the recommendations of law enforcement during a time of unrest. (Some Republican lawmakers worry that law enforcement could come out against the pitch, though many national police groups haven’t taken a position.) Even if Ryan managed to get a bill through the House, the Senate and its 60-vote threshold could stop it in its tracks. Hawkish Republicans, including Sens. Tom Cotton of Arkansas and Jeff Sessions of Alabama, have been sounding the alarm against criminal justice reform. Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.) has shied from the matter because it divides his conference. Democrats by and large support the reform proposals. Sources familiar with Ryan’s thinking say he’s not ready to relent just yet because of the charged political environment. While he wasn’t able to pass the Judiciary package in September as he originally hoped, Ryan is now eyeing the lame-duck session, by which time tensions might have eased. “I’m trying to get criminal justice reform done this session of Congress,” Ryan said last week during a speech at the Economic Club of New York. “That train is on the tracks, and I’m hoping we can get that done sooner rather than later.” The speaker has made second chances and redemption a central theme of his “Better Way” policy agenda, and he views criminal justice reform as key to helping people trying to turn their lives around. During the New York speech, he talked about visiting impoverished communities and being inspired by a onetime drug dealer who became a counselor to addicts, and a gang leader who went on to become an entrepreneur. “I went in expecting to see the worst of America and I came out realizing I had just seen the best of America,” he said. Ryan will have the backing of some big-name conservative allies. The Koch brothers and the conservative group Americans for Tax Reform are major advocates of criminal justice reform. But the skepticism or resistance among Republicans is real. “It doesn’t sell back home right now,” said Rep. Bill Flores of Texas, chairman of the Republican Study Committee. “When you say, ‘Hey, I’m voting for criminal justice reform,’ they’ll say, ‘What? You’re letting prisoners out of prison early?’” While he personally believes the Justice Committee has crafted some smart proposals, Flores said it doesn’t help that it’s a key priority of President Barack Obama. The situation in Charlotte and elsewhere has also complicated the equation. “I think that what could be a good bill could be perceived differently because of current events,” he said. Rep. Peter King of New York said he’s struggling to make up his mind on the pending reform measures. “I have friends on both sides of the issue, but I don’t know,” he said. “You’re talking about undoing 20 to 30 years of legislation. What are the unintended consequences?” Rep. Jim Jordan of Ohio, who leads the conservative House Freedom Caucus, said criminal justice reform “has real merit” but that there are “also some concerns.” “If you’re actually going to let people out of prison early, we better make sure they’re not violent people,” he said Sunday on C-SPAN’s “Newsmakers” show. “So let’s do it, but let’s do it right.” House leaders hosted a series of member and staff meetings during the August recess to familiarize Republicans with the Judiciary bills. GOP leadership sources say these sorts of sessions can move the needle, and they’re hoping that, over time, the conference will come around. Ryan, however, is racing against the clock. House Republicans will have to fund the government for all of 2017 during the lame-duck session, a contentious issue for the unruly GOP conference. It’s unclear whether Ryan will have the political capital and the bandwidth to do both.
In a letter shared with ABC News, six senators have slammed Wells Fargo bank for its use of forced arbitration clauses in its customer account agreements, which the senators say enabled the company to keep its accounts scandal out of the public eye and the courts for years, and asked embattled CEO John Stumpf to provide information so that they can “better understand the situation at Wells Fargo” and "prevent similar fraudulent practices in the future." Arbitration, mandated in some if not all basic agreements that customers sign when they open accounts at the bank, "helps hide fraudulent schemes such as the sham accounts at Wells Fargo from the justice system, from the news media, and from the public eye," the senators wrote. The senators also write, “These clauses eliminate consumers’ ability to bring a claim in open court or to band together in a class action, before any dispute has arisen. Forced arbitration clauses deny access to the courts even when consumers are seeking to enforce their rights under fundamental state and federal laws”. "Arbitration proceedings are kept secret, so that other customers are deprived of the knowledge that their experiences might be part of a more widespread problem," according to the six senators. The letter was written by Patrick Leahy (D-VT), Sherrod Brown (D-OH), Dick Durbin (D-IL), Al Franken (D-MN), Richard Blumenthal (D-CT) and Elizabeth Warren (D-MA).     "It is particularly unacceptable that forced arbitration clauses in contracts for real customer accounts were used to deny customers access to the court system to challenge Wells Fargo’s creation of sham accounts," the group wrote. "We have serious concerns that your forced arbitration policies thrust consumers into a system with little transparency or oversight." The letter is the latest in a series of headaches for the company, which faces allegations from regulators that employees opened or applied for accounts without customers' knowledge or permission. On Thursday, a group of senators, some of whom also signed today’s letter, asked the Department of Labor to open an investigation into Wells Fargo's employment practices, and on Tuesday, Stumpf appeared before the Senate Banking Committee, facing blistering questions over the accounts scandal. Separately on Thursday, Stumpf resigned from his position on the Federal Advisory Council, the San Francisco Federal Reserve Bank told ABC News. The council generally meets with the Federal Reserve four times a year to advise it on banking and economic issues. In a consent decree between the bank and the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, the bank has not admitted to or denied any wrongdoing. Arbitration clauses are common in many contracts that consumers sign regularly, attorney David I. Greenberger, an employment law expert at the Bailey Duquette firm in New York City, told ABC News. In many cases, they can benefit consumers by allowing parties to settle disputes more quickly and cheaply than if they go through a sometimes long and drawn-out court battle. Increasingly, however, concerns have grown that they can be used to keep details out of the public eye, since arbitration proceedings are typically not made public. "The original purpose, from my view ... was that it would allow for a faster, more efficient and more expedient process for the parties to resolve their dispute,” Greenberger said. "It has changed over time and I think you can now, in some forms, question whether it’s faster...or [more] expedient," Greenberger told ABC News. "It’s become a way in which disputes can be kept private and kept from being aggregated in the class context." A Wells Fargo spokeswoman told ABC News: "We are reviewing the letter and will respond to the senators who requested this information but have no further comment at this time."
Lawmakers rolled into the Capitol earlier this month bracing for one last round of fireworks before sprinting out of town until after the election. But as Congress prepares to wrap up as early as this week leaving the Capitol dark until November, lawmakers are exiting more with a whimper than a bang. Story Continued Below The reason? Everybody’s got Election Day on the brain. “I’m glad there wasn’t [drama],” Sen. John Thune (R-S.D.) said in an interview. “I think right now everybody is focused on Nov. 8 and any consequential legislative action probably doesn’t take place until after that.” That warning of a government shutdown Harry Reid delivered heading into the session? Not happening. “I think the Senate probably [finishes] by the middle of the week and us maybe by the end, maybe spill over into the week after,” said a relaxed Rep. Tom Cole (R-Okla.), a senior member on the House Appropriations Committee, when asked to predict how they wrap up. The Senate has teed up a key procedural vote Monday on a stopgap bill to fund government agencies until mid-December, after staffers worked over the weekend to put the finishing touches on a proposal that would satisfy both sides. Most of the wrangling — over Planned Parenthood language related to Zika funding, disaster relief for flooded Louisiana and internet domain oversight — has unfolded behind the scenes. The Senate has taken the lead, a move some considered necessary after House conservatives threatened to withhold support for a bill that didn’t go into next year. “I’d rather it start [the process in the House], but I think the speaker had enough of a challenge to go from six months to three months and considers that, I think, his contribution to the cause,” said House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi (D-Calif.). “When you’re writing a bill in one house, then that house dominates the framework.” The funding détente is considered a loss for House GOP hard-liners, who were initially pushing for a bill that funded government agencies into early next year, which would have forced a new Congress to relitigate the issue with a new president. But even House conservatives seem resigned to a continuing resolution (CR) that ends in December, even if they don’t like it. “For people who think that a short-term CR is better than a long-term CR, it just doesn’t make much sense to me,” said Rep. Bill Flores (R-Texas), chairman of the conservative Republican Study Committee. But, “because Senate Republicans have caved, really the only likely path forward is a short-term CR,” he added. One unrelated issue could still produce some 11th-hour drama. Rep. Tim Huelskamp (R-Kansas) has threatened to force a vote to impeach the IRS commissioner this week, even after House Freedom Caucus Chairman Jim Jordan (R-Ohio) and House Judiciary Chairman Bob Goodlatte (R-Va.) reached a last-minute deal to postpone the vote until after the election. Under the terms of the handshake agreement, IRS Commissioner John Koskinen will testify before the Judiciary Committee Wednesday under oath, giving Jordan and other Freedom Caucus members the hearing they’d been demanding for months. Still, Koskinen’s lawyers sent a letter to Goodlatte Friday warning that the hearing wasn’t an official impeachment proceeding and shouldn’t be treated as such. “Testimony under oath from a single witness — before he has even been allowed to see any evidence against him and with no right to present corroborating evidence to address false or mistaken allegations — is no substitute,” Koskinen’s lawyers wrote. It remains to be seen what Huelskamp will do. His spokesman Jon Meadows did not return multiple requests from POLITICO seeking clarification on the congressman’s plans. The House Freedom Caucus hasn’t voted to officially support the deal to push a floor vote on Koskinen until after the election, but insiders expect the group’s members to get behind it. That has Republicans on the other side of the Capitol breathing a sigh of relief. “I know there are a lot of people who feel passionately over [in the House] about that vote but I’m not sure, at this point, what that accomplishes,” Thune said. “I just think that was some drama that probably wasn’t necessary right now.”
Washington (CNN)Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump will take the stage Monday night for the first presidential debate, due to be broadcast live most everywhere. It's one of the most anticipated political events of the year, and if you plan on watching it, here's what you need to know. 5 things to watch at Monday night's Clinton-Trump debate The Commission on Presidential Debates, a bipartisan organization that manages the events, will host the first of three general election presidential debates at Hofstra University in New York on Monday, September 26. CNN will air the event in its entirety on its networks as well as through a live stream on CNN.com. CNN Politics will host a live blog offering instant analysis and reaction as the debate unfolds at the top of the screen. Pence set to attend first presidential debate The debate is due to begin at 9:00 p.m. ET and is scheduled to last 90 minutes, without commercials. If you haven't gotten your fill from that, there will be a vice presidential debate on October 4 and two more presidential debates on October 9 and October 19, with the former hosted by CNN's Anderson Cooper. The commission said this first debate will have six time segments for about 15 minutes each. NBC's Lester Holt will act as moderator and open the segments with a question, then Clinton and Trump will have two minutes each to respond. After their initial answers, they can respond to each other for the remainder of the segment. Hillary Clinton prepares for unpredictable Donald Trump at debate Holt announced the topics he would draw from a week ahead of the debate. They are: "America's direction," "achieving prosperity" and "securing America" -- three ambiguous terms pointing to a focus on the economy and security. 
The race for the White House is essentially tied heading into tonight’s presidential debate, yet another national poll released on Monday shows. According to the latest Quinnipiac national poll, Hillary Clinton leads Donald Trump 44 percent to 43 percent among likely voters in a four-way race, with 8 percent supporting Libertarian nominee Gary Johnson and 1 percent backing the Green Party candidate Jill Stein. Story Continued Below In a two-way race, Clinton leads Trump by a similar margin, 47 percent to 46 percent. The poll shows little change since Quinnipiac’s September survey, when Clinton led Trump 41-39 percent in a four-way race. While Clinton leads among women 47 percent to 42 percent, Trump holds a similar advantage among men, 44 percent to 40 percent. Independents also favor Trump, as well as white voters, though non-white voters overwhelmingly prefer Clinton. Eight-four percent of respondents plan to tune into Monday’s primetime debate, which 41 percent of likely voters expect Clinton to win (32 percent said Trump will win the debate). The Quinnipiac poll mirrors recent national and swing state surveys that have shown a tightening race, including a national Bloomberg poll in which Trump narrowly leads by 2 percentage points and CNN/ORC surveys of Pennsylvania and Colorado that show a virtual tie. Polling averages still show a slight Clinton lead: RealClearPolitics has her 2.1 points ahead, while HuffPollster has her leading Trump by 4 points. FiveThirtyEight has Clinton up by 1.1 points. According to POLITICO’s average of battleground state polls, Clinton’s lead is 2.8 points in the 11 states most likely to decide the Electoral College vote. For Monday’s poll, Quinnipiac surveyed 1,115 likely voters by landline and telephone from Sept. 22-25, with a margin of error of plus or minus 2.9 percentage points.
MIAMI — Donald Trump’s aides are discussing the possibility of asking him to write his biggest check yet to his own campaign to fund an ad blitz, and the billionaire candidate is open to the possibility, according to three people close to the nominee. While Trump’s campaign has experienced a surge in small-dollar fundraising this month that could make an infusion of personal cash unnecessary, major Republican donors are nervous after a rocky first debate against Hillary Clinton and could ramp up pressure on their nominee to invest in the air war. Story Continued Below Trump’s campaign last week said that it was planning a $140-million television and digital advertising push between this week and Election Day, in an effort to cut into the massive advertising advantage enjoyed by Clinton. But entering this month, the campaign did not have the money in the bank to pay for the effort, which would represent by far its most ambitious advertising push of the 2016 election. Trump’s most recent Federal Election Commission filing shows that his campaign had only $50 million in the bank at the end of August. Since then, his small-dollar online fundraising has been especially brisk, raising the prospect that Trump might not need to fund the ad buys from his own pocket — or might only need to cover part of it, according to the three people close to the candidate. They suggested that Trump is amenable to either possibility — even if it means writing his biggest check of the campaign to date. Trump relied heavily on his own fortune through the bitter GOP primary, during which he loaned his campaign $43.5 million of his own money. A central tenet of his candidacy was that his ability to self-finance his White House bid made him independent from major donors to whom he suggested his rivals were beholden. Since then, though, Trump has scaled back his self-financing, giving his campaign only about $2 million a month, which he has cast as putting up his own money to match contributions from small donors. Republican insiders in interviews have expressed doubt about Trump’s willingness to inject larger sums of his own cash into the race. His campaign issued another monthly $2-million challenge to small donors on Tuesday, promising in an email that their contributions “will be instantly matched for double the impact in our race to defeat Hillary Clinton.” Indeed, in combination with the Republican National Committee, the campaign has invested heavily in a small-dollar online fundraising operation, which has produced big numbers, and has helped narrow Clinton’s gaping fundraising lead. The Trump campaign declined to comment on its September fundraising or how much of his own money Trump was prepared to spend. One of the people close to Trump said the real estate developer and reality TV star is “prepared to do whatever it takes personally to win. But the cash has been pouring in and we have a lot more cash than people think. Now, there’s actually cash there to pay for the $140 million.” The person rejected a suggestion that the $140-million advertising plan was not realistic, but rather was intended to assuage worried donors and to worry Clinton’s forces. “That was not a head fake,” said the person. Still, Trump’s team has only slowly begun investing in some of the trappings of traditional presidential campaigns, and he continues to brag about how little he’s spent relative to Clinton. The Democrat, Trump alleged during Monday’s debate has “spent hundreds of millions of dollars on negative ads on me, many of which are absolutely untrue.” Yet, he said, “the only gratifying thing is I saw the polls come in today, and with all of that money … I'm either winning or tied. And I’ve spent practically nothing.” In fact, Trump’s campaign had spent $119 million overall through the end of August, but its advertising budget has been a fraction of that of Clinton’s campaign. Through the end of last week, Clinton’s campaign had spent more than five times the $22 million that Trump has spent on TV and radio ads for the general election, according to Kantar Media. And the gap appears to be widening, even as Trump’s fundraising has taken off. In the 10 days leading up to the debate, Clinton’s campaign aired 12,812 ads on local television in the 61 top markets, compared to 1,378 for Trump, according to the tracking company Media Monitors. Trump's planned $140-million ad buy will focus on 13 states, including battlegrounds like Florida, North Carolina, Ohio and Pennsylvania, but also Maine, New Mexico and Wisconsin, according to an Associated Press report. Jessica Ditto, a Trump campaign spokeswoman, told POLITICO that last week it began reserving $100 million in television advertising and $40 million in digital ads, with the first $15-million-worth placed Friday. “The broadcast/cable ratio will continue to fluctuate in line with targeting needs,” Ditto said. Ad buying data provided to POLITICO does not reflect the full weight of the buy yet. It indicates that Trump’s campaign has purchased roughly $9.8 million in advertising between Tuesday and Election Day, compared to $41 million over that same period for Clinton’s campaign.
Washington (CNN)The Arizona Republic, the state's largest newspaper, has never endorsed a Democrat for president -- until now. In an op-ed published to its website Tuesday, the editorial board backed Hillary Clinton over Donald Trump for president. "The 2016 Republican candidate is not conservative and he is not qualified," the editorial board wrote. In the op-ed, the newspaper's editorial board breaks down why they believe that Clinton is more qualified than Trump -- specifically that the Democratic nominee has better temperament and experience, has a record of public service, and has withstood "decades of scrutiny." The Arizona Republic joins other major papers with conservative editorial boards in endorsing Clinton or declining to endorse Trump. The Cincinnati Enquirer and Dallas Morning News are two other notable examples, with the Enquirer endorsing a Democrat for the first time in 100 years. The New Hampshire Union Leader, for the first time in 100 years, did not back Republican nominee Trump, opting instead to endorse Libertarian nominee Gary Johnson. The Arizona Republic endorsement said that Clinton, unlike Trump, for all of her mistakes and flaws, and has more experience with foreign policy than Trump does. And specifically for Arizona -- a state with a significant Latino population -- the newspaper said Trump wouldn't be able to "broker solutions" like Clinton. The paper cites a recent poll that shows Arizonians oppose both a border wall and deportations as solutions for illegal immigration. The newspaper editorial board also cited what it called Trump's frequent disrespect toward other people as reasons to oppose him. Including his mocking of a reporter's physical disability, his public feud with a Gold Star family, and his proposal to ban Muslim immigrants from entering the United States. The newspaper said that Trump is a candidate who can't control his words, unlike Clinton. And it writes that Clinton "can reach out to those who feel left behind. She can make it clear that America sees them and will address their concerns." 
United Nations (CNN)President Barack Obama took to the most prominent international stage Tuesday to deliver a stark warning to American voters of the dire global consequences they face should they embrace isolationism and ultra-nationalism in November. Never mentioning Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump by name, the President's final address to the United Nations General Assembly was at heart an impassioned rebuke of the GOP candidate's policies on trade, immigration and multiculturalism -- and a defense of liberalism and tolerance -- delivered 49 days before votes are cast for his replacement. He painted a dark picture of the future awaiting Americans, and the world, if the forces of "aggressive nationalism" or "crude populism" win out. And he specifically inveighed against building a wall -- a centerpiece of Trump's proposal on border security. "A nation ringed by walls would only imprison itself," Obama declared to the assembled representatives of the UN's member states. Gone were Obama's idealistic appeals to bring about a world free of nuclear weapons and an agenda focused on peace, as were his previous UN addresses. The "hope and change" of his argument as a presidential candidate himself was also replaced by exhortations against a future filled with chaos. "Time and again human beings have believed they finally arrived at a period of enlightenment, only to repeat cycles of conflict and suffering. Perhaps that's our fate," Obama suggested. "We have to remember the choices of individual human beings led to repeated world war," Obama said. "Each of us as leaders, each nation can choose to reject those who appeal to our worst impulses and embrace those who appeal to our best. For we have shown that we can choose a better history." He pointed to growing divisions and discontent at home that challenge those decisions, and noted that the shortcomings of globalization had created "an uncertainty and unease and strife" that required acknowledgement, but not turning inward. "I believe that at this moment we all face a choice," Obama said. "We can choose to press forward with a better model of cooperation and integration or we can retreat into a world sharply divided and ultimately in conflict along age-old lines of nation and tribe and race and religion. I want to suggest to you today that we must go forward and not back." It was Obama's eighth and final address to the UN body, which enthusiastically welcomed him in 2009 after he moved to reverse the unilateral approach of his predecessor George W. Bush. In his speech that year, Obama vowed to work within international bodies to confront the world's crises while pushing an agenda combating climate change and nuclear non-proliferation. But in the intervening years, the harsh realities of diplomacy settled in, both for Obama and the UN. The organization's inability to stem suffering in Syria and Ukraine laid bare the continued struggles to combat breaches of international law, while Obama's own work toward combating violent extremists has failed to stop terrorist groups from committing atrocities. Obama's address Tuesday reflected those realities. He drew titters from the collection of world leaders and diplomats in the high-ceilinged General Assembly hall when he noted that "at times both America's adversaries and some of our allies believe that all problems were either caused by Washington or could be solved by Washington. And perhaps too many in Washington believe that, as well." He made scant mention of individual world flash points, choosing instead to offer a more thematic recap of his foreign agenda. "The world is by many measures less violent and more prosperous than ever before. And yet our societies are filled with uncertainty and unease and strife," Obama said. "Despite enormous progress, as people lose trust in institutions, governing becomes more difficult and tensions between nations become more quick to surface." RELATED: Clinton, Trump meet world leaders for very different reasons Obama continued his tradition at the UN of acknowledging areas where the US has fallen short in its practice of democracy, saying his country and other developed nations must set a better example for emerging democracies. Citing the pervasive role of money in politics, entrenched party allegiances and a patchwork of voting laws, Obama said it was up to long-established nations to show the way forward. "Those of us who believe in democracy, we need to speak out forcefully. Because both the facts and history is on our side," Obama said. "We better strive harder to set a better example at home." Obama used his own efforts to help revive a stalled economy as an example of US leadership during his tenure, saying other countries would be wise to follow his lead of going after corruption and unfair tax policies. He also cited the deal with Iran to curtain its nuclear program, and reopening of ties with Cuba and Myanmar, as examples of a successful global approach. RELATED: Global leaders at UN tackle world's worst to-do list But the array of places where Obama's approach hasn't yielded the outcomes he projected during his first appearance here in 2009 were also unavoidable. That includes his inability to negotiate peace between Israel and the Palestinians -- a major topic in his first four UN addresses that was entirely absent during last year's speech. This year, the President took issue with both sides' actions toward one another. He criticized Israeli settlements, saying the only path to Mideast peace will come when the two sides reconcile deeply held differences. Palestinians must "reject incitement and recognize the legitimacy of Israel," Obama said. But he also said peace won't come until "Israel recognizes it cannot permanently occupy and settle Palestinian land." Obama plans to meet Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu on Wednesday to "discuss the need for genuine advancement of a two-state solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict in the face of deeply troubling trends on the ground," according to White House Press Secretary Josh Earnest. Another persisting crisis -- Russia's continued incursion into Ukraine -- also drew Obama's attention Tuesday. "In a world that left the age of empire behind, we see Russia attempting to recover lost glory through force," Obama said. "If Russia continues to interfere in the affairs of its neighbors, it may be popular at home. It may fuel nationalist fervor for a time. Over time, it's also going to diminish its stature and make its borders less secure." Indeed, many of his harshest warnings were aimed at global government practices that damage democracy and liberalism and called for the rejection of strongmen, authoritarian and tribalism. "There appears to be growing contest between authoritarianism and liberalism right now," he told the assembled leaders. "And I want everybody to understand, I am not neutral in that contest." 
Washington (CNN)Prosecutors in the office of US Attorney Preet Bharara have issued a subpoena for Anthony Weiner's cell phone and other records, according to law enforcement officials. The FBI and the New York Police Department have opened preliminary investigations of allegations that the former New York Democratic congressman exchanged sexually explicit text messages with a purportedly underage girl. Spokespersons for the US Attorney's Office in Manhattan and the FBI declined to comment. The allegations first surfaced in the Daily Mail. The online sexting relationship allegedly went on for months between Weiner and a girl claiming to be just 15. The Daily Mail reported she said he sent her numerous photos, one of him in a pool and at least one bare-chested. The outlet reported that the girl said she reached out to Weiner in January on Twitter. In a statement to CNN, Weiner neither confirmed or denied sending the texts. "I have repeatedly demonstrated terrible judgment about the people I have communicated with online and the things I have sent. I am filled with regret and heartbroken for those I have hurt," he said. Weiner continued: "While I have provided the Daily Mail with information showing that I have likely been the subject of a hoax, I have no one to blame but me for putting myself in this position. I am sorry." CNN has not been able to confirm this was a hoax. In a statement, a spokeswoman for Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump noted that Weiner donated $550 to Hillary Clinton's presidential campaign last year. "The announcement by the FBI and New York Police Department that they are investigating close Clinton ally Anthony Weiner's inappropriate relationship with an underaged female is extremely disturbing," Jessica Ditto said. "The Clinton campaign should immediately return all campaign contributions from Weiner. America has had enough of the sleaze that is Clinton, Inc." Huma Abedin, one of Clinton's closest aides, announced last month that she was separating from Weiner after photos emerged of him allegedly sexting with another woman while their son was in bed with him. That woman was described in the New York Post as a 40-something divorced woman from the West. Weiner left Congress in June 2011 when sexually-charged, sometimes explicit, texts with women other than his wife first emerged. His social media habits continued after leaving Congress and contributed to his poor showing in the 2013 New York City mayoral race, a contest in which he had once been a leading contender. CNN's Sonia Moghe contributed to this report.
Jack Welch may have to think twice about backing Ted Cruz again, but there’s no doubt in his mind which presidential candidate he’s voting for in November: Donald Trump. Casting the Republican presidential nominee as the candidate who can strengthen the economy, create jobs, peel back regulations and be tough on terrorism and immigration, the former General Electric CEO on Tuesday outlined why he is backing Trump. Story Continued Below “Basically, I want a strong economy that creates jobs,” Welch told CNBC’s “Squawk Box.” “This is a binary choice. You either take the Republican agenda or you take the Democratic agenda,” he continued. “The Democratic agenda is Obama-plus stated over and over again.” Regulations are also “choking” American businesses, Welch said, adding that President Barack Obama plans to increase regulations in the final months of his presidency. He also conceded that Trump, as president, may have to negotiate with Congress, meaning his proposals could get watered down before they’re enacted. “Well, it will be a negotiation with Congress. But this is his position and I like his position, and he’ll have to negotiate with Congress because Congress might not wanna reform EPA as much as he does and that’ll be a negotiation,” Welch said. “OK, that’s a fact of life. I like him negotiating from these positions a lot more than I like the Democratic candidate negotiating because she’s negotiating from Obama-plus, OK? It truly is. We might not get all this, but I like starting here and fighting like hell for it because I know it’ll grow the economy 4 percent-plus.” Welch last week told Fox News’ Neil Cavuto that he would have second thoughts about backing Cruz again, noting that he didn’t like the fact that the Texas senator hasn’t honored his pledge to support Trump as the nominee. He added that he would be casting his vote for Trump because America can’t afford eight more years of Democrats charting the nation’s economic course.
Hempstead, New York (CNN)Hillary Clinton stepped onto the debate stage Monday night determined to show that only one candidate is ready to be president. Clinton poked, prodded and quoted Trump's own words, goading the famously thin-skinned Republican nominee. Trump took the bait, repeatedly interrupting angrily or dismissively throughout the night. He couldn't resist attacks, even when it was obvious they would backfire -- such as his criticism of Clinton for dropping off the campaign trail ahead of the debate to prepare. CNN's Reality Check Team vets the claims "Yes, I did. And you know what else I prepared for?" Clinton shot back. "I prepared to be president." Here are six takeaways from the first presidential debate: Trump takes the bait Trump is the self-proclaimed counterpuncher, but it was Clinton whose restraint was on display: She waited for Trump to create an opening before she pounced. She let moderator Lester Holt grill Trump about his refusal to release tax returns before delivering her own withering assessment of his insistence that a "routine audit" be completed first. "Maybe he is not as rich as he says he is," Clinton said. "Maybe he is not as charitable as he claims to be... Maybe he doesn't want the American people to know that he has paid nothing in federal taxes." "There is something he is hiding," she said. QUIZ: Are you more like Clinton or Trump? Trump lost his cool -- at a cost. He came close to admitting that he didn't pay federal taxes, saying that "makes me smart" and that the money "would be squandered" anyway. At another point, he insisted his refusal to pay contractors who'd done work for his businesses was smart. "I'm certainly relieved that my late father never did business with you," Clinton said. Trump, meanwhile, paid the price for his decision to wing it. Unlike the GOP primary debates, where Trump would often disappear while other candidates bickered, only to interject with a zinger, he had no other candidates or aggressive moderators to save him -- and it showed. Despite opportunities to do so, he never hit Clinton on the 2012 Benghazi attacks or Clinton Foundation donors' access to the State Department, and he only briefly mentioned her use of a private email server. All three attacks -- elevated by Trump himself at his rallies -- are at the core of the GOP case that Clinton is untrustworthy. Trump's pitch to blue-collar voters Trump's brightest spots came early in the debate, when he invoked Clinton's 2012 praise of the Trans-Pacific Partnership as the "gold standard" of trade deals. (Clinton now opposes the deal.) "You were totally in favor of it," Trump said. "Then you heard what I was saying, how bad it is, and you said, 'I can't win that debate.'" It was part of a theme he worked hard to drive in the debate's early stages: Clinton, he said, has been in Washington for nearly 30 years, and has done little to improve economic conditions for Americans -- a message that could resonate in manufacturing-heavy states like Ohio and Pennsylvania that are crucial to Trump's electoral math. Attacking Clinton's comments on solar energy powering "new economic activity," Trump said: "You've been doing this for 30 years. Why are you just thinking about these solutions right now? For 30 years, you've been doing it, and now you're just starting to think of solutions." After a barrage of Trump attacks, Clinton sarcastically said, "I have a feeling that by, the end of this evening, I'm going to be blamed for everything that's ever happened." Trump shot back: "Why not?" Trump's strained relationship with the truth Trump lied repeatedly Monday night -- including some real whoppers. When Clinton claimed Trump "thinks that climate change is a hoax perpetrated by the Chinese," Trump shot back: "I do not say that. I do not say that." Of course, Trump did say that. On November 6, 2012, Trump tweeted, "The concept of global warming was created by and for the Chinese in order to make U.S. manufacturing non-competitive." It became the most-retweeted item on Twitter during the debate. He called Holt's factual citation of a 2002 interview in which Trump endorsed the war in Iraq "wrong, wrong, wrong," as fact-checkers disagreed. He falsely blamed Clinton for birtherism. He said murder rates in New York City are climbing, when they are on the decline. And he said Clinton had been fighting ISIS "her entire adult life." Clinton was born in 1947; ISIS only formed in the mid-2000s. "I hope the fact-checkers are turning up the volume," Clinton said at one point. Trump questions whether Russia behind hacks Clinton calls Trump's behavior racist Trump said he knew he'd face questions about his five-year history of birtherism. Yet he had no new answers to offer. When Holt asked why Trump decided to finally acknowledge that President Barack Obama was born in the US, Trump said it was because he wanted to change the topic. "I want to get on to defeating ISIS, because I want to get on to creating jobs, because I want to get on to having a strong border, because I want to get on to things that are very important to me and that are very important to the country," he said. While falsely blaming Clinton's 2008 presidential campaign for the questions about Obama's birth, Trump also took credit for bringing up the non-issue in the first place. "I was the one that got him to produce the birth certificate," he said. "And I think I did a good job." Clinton responded by turning the spotlight back on her GOP foe. "Well, just listen to what you heard," Clinton said. She pointed to the 1970s Justice Department lawsuits that Trump faced over accusations of racial discrimination in housing properties he owned. "He has a long record of engaging in racist behavior," Clinton said. "And the birther lie was a very hurtful one." Trump's misplaced aggression Trump has long polled better with men than women -- and that gap could grow after Monday night's debate. He interrupted Clinton dozens of times, and talked over Holt when he tried to interject. He blasted Clinton's "stamina." And when Clinton attacked Trump over his remarks about women, Trump proved her point by digging in against an old foe. "Rosie O'Donnell, I said very tough things to her, and I think everybody would agree that she deserves it and nobody feels sorry for her," Trump said. He zealously defended himself, but didn't attack Clinton with the same gusto. And because of it, Clinton was able to easily move past potential problem areas. Asked about her use of a private email server during her tenure at the State Department, Clinton gave a shorter, simpler answer than she has before. "I'm not going to make any excuses, it was a mistake," she said. Trump shot back that it was "more than a mistake. That was done purposely." But then he dropped the topic. Later, he briefly came back to it, saying he'd release his tax returns "against my lawyers' wishes," under one condition: "I will release them as soon as she releases her 33,000 emails." The crowd cheered, violating Holt's admonition to keep silent. And then, again, Trump moved on -- never mentioning that James Comey, the FBI director, also harshly criticized Clinton's email practices, and never again returning to the topic. They really don't like each other... ...And it shows. With two debates to go, this is going to get nastier. A preview of what's in store came at the end, when Clinton -- attacking Trump's treatment of women -- called him "a man who has called women pigs, slobs and dogs." She said he'd referred to a Latina beauty contestant as "Miss Piggy. Then he called her Miss Housekeeping." An agitated Trump twice asked, "Where did you find this?" The woman, 1996 Miss Universe Alicia Machado of Venezuela, told The New York Times and "Inside Edition" this year that Trump repeatedly mocked her weight. Who is Alicia Machado? Former Miss Universe said Trump called her Miss Piggy Trump went into the spin room after the debate -- a move unheard of at general election debates - and credited himself with not taking a shot at Bill Clinton's extramarital affairs. He told Fox News conservative host and Trump supporter Sean Hannity afterward that it seemed inappropriate with Bill and Chelsea Clinton in the front row -- but implied he might in the future. For Clinton's campaign, the challenge will be turning a debate-night victory into sustained success -- pressing the same themes in the days ahead as she attempts to reverse Trump's climb in national and battleground state polls. Trump will have to wait until Oct. 9 for another shot at Clinton. 
New York (CNN)Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump face off for the first time on the debate stage Monday night, the biggest moment of the already extraordinary 2016 presidential race. With national polls showing a tight race just six weeks out from Election Day, the Hofstra University fight offers one of the last chances for each to speak directly to the tens millions of voters who are expected to tune in. What time is the debate? For Clinton, a veteran debater, one of her biggest challenges will be both to provoke Trump and avoid being provoked by him, while delivering an earnest and candid performance. What should you watch for at the debate? David Chalian breaks it down on "The Daily DC" And for Trump, who had uneven and at times explosive debate performances during the Republican primary, his first one-on-one debate presents a serious test of his ability to stay on script and keep his cool. Here are five things to watch at Monday night's debate: Which Donald Trump will show up? During the long Republican primary, there was no telling which Trump would show up to a debate. Sometimes it was the combative and hostile Trump -- quick to throw punches and go after his opponents with personal attacks. Other times, it was an uncharacteristically subdued Trump, content to disappear from the spotlight for long stretches of time and let his competitors command the stage and attack one another. "We are preparing for different Trumps that might show up," Clinton spokeswoman Jennifer Palmieri told reporters last week. "He may be aggressive or he may lay back and that's hard to game out." Being overtly antagonistic toward Clinton would be a risky move for Trump. If he is unable to keep calm and stay focused, it will only feed the narrative that he lacks the temperament to be president and potentially make him look small next Clinton, who is famous for being measured. Trump also won't have the option of sitting on the sidelines. As one of only two candidates on stage, the Republican nominee must make the most of every minute allotted to him and show a level of agility and rapid-response instincts that was far less critical on a debate stage with numerous candidates. Monday night will pose a critical test for Trump, who has so far shown a relative lack of depth on policy. With approximately half of the debate's 90 minutes dedicated to the GOP nominee, it will be far more difficult than in past debates for Trump to get by with sweeping statements that he is accustomed to making at rallies and in interviews, particularly given that Clinton's strong suit is policy. Can Clinton heed Obama advice to 'be yourself?' No one understands Clinton's debating chops better than President Barack Obama, who faced off against her numerous times in the 2008 election. Obama's advice to Clinton for Monday? "Be yourself and explain what motivates you," the President told ABC's Robin Roberts last week. "I think there's a reason why we haven't had a woman president before, and so she's having to break down some barriers. There's a level of mistrust and a caricature of her that just doesn't jibe with who I know." How Hillary Clinton took debate prep seriously So far in this campaign, Clinton has struggled to do precisely that, and appearing unguarded and likeable -- fairly or not -- has been one of her biggest political challenges. There's no question that policy is Clinton's forte -- aides to the former senator and secretary of state describe her as a wonk who knows policy inside and out. As she marshals her fluency in policy, she will want to avoid coming off as lecturing or smug, the way critics say Al Gore did in his debates with George W. Bush. But appearing next to Trump could help make Clinton more likable by comparison: Polls show that a majority of voters question Trump's temperament and view him as appealing to bigotry. The Clinton campaign says it plans to drive home the point that Trump habitually makes factually inaccurate statements. "Donald Trump has pattern of repeating lies hoping no one will correct him," Palmieri, Clinton's communications director, said on a call with reporters last week. "This warrants particular focus because his level of lying is unprecedented in American politics." Clinton has acknowledged that she doesn't have the natural charisma of Obama or her husband, Bill Clinton, but she has fleshed out her personal story and offered a sharper positive message in recent weeks, and she will likely attempt to continue that effort on Monday. Things could get really personal The 2016 election has already showcased a whole lot of nasty name-calling, but Monday night has the potential to descend into the worst mudfight yet. Even before the debate had begun, the two campaigns were in full trolling mode. The Clinton campaign offered Mark Cuban -- the TV celebrity billionaire who recently endorsed the Democratic nominee -- a front row seat at Hofstra. Cuban has been relentless in attacking Trump-- in July, he said Trump "went off the reservation and went bats -- crazy" -- and he has also called out Trump for not releasing his tax returns. Having Cuban in the front row is the kind of mind game that the Clinton camp hopes will distract and throw Trump off his game. But in Trumpian fashion, the GOP nominee responded over the weekend by threatening to bring Gennifer Flowers as his guest to the debate. Flowers is a former Arkansas state employee who claimed to have had a multi-year sexual relationship with Bill Clinton. The former president has admitted to having a sexual encounter with her. The Trump campaign later said it won't invite Flowers to the debate. Still, Trump's comments may foreshadow his willingness to dredge up some of the most painful incidents from the Clintons' past, including Bill Clinton's various indiscretions. Hillary Clinton, too, could go there if provoked -- Trump has been married three times and has two messy divorces under his belt; has openly boasted in the past about his playboy lifestyle. Moreover his offensive remarks about women and minorities are part of her campaign's argument he is temperamentally unfit to be president. Asked by CNN on her plane earlier this month whether she believes it is fair game to go after Trump's personal life, Clinton didn't rule out the possibility. Trump, meanwhile, said on Fox News last week: "If she treats me with respect, I will treat her with respect." The politics of race There's no shortage of top-tier issues -- terrorism, Syria, ISIS, immigration, the economy among them -- but the first general election match-up comes amid national outrage sparked yet again by police killings of African-American men. The recent deaths of Keith Lamont Scott in North Carolina and Terence Crutcher in Oklahoma have sparked fresh and impassioned calls for justice and protests that have at times turned violent. With the issue of police force -- particularly toward minorities -- dominating headlines, the politics of race is guaranteed to be a discussion topic. Race and racism in 2016 Both Clinton and Trump had planned to visit Charlotte -- where Scott was killed -- around the debate: Clinton on Sunday and Trump on Monday. But both campaigns scrapped those plans after Charlotte mayor Jennifer Roberts told CNN's Erin Burnett that the city was too stretched on resources. For both Clinton and Trump, the challenge will be to offer detailed proposals on how they would address unnecessary police violence and thoughtfully speak to a grieving community. It also gives both a chance to make arguments to key constituencies -- Clinton to African-Americans who voted with Obama, and Trump to GOP base voters with his "law and order" pitch. The debate will likely delve into many other policy issues including healthcare, trade, economy and foreign policy. But many of the core disagreements between Trump and Clinton are rooted in the different ways in which they view race and inclusion. The two nominees have starkly contrasting views on immigration, for example, and how to handle people who enter the country illegally. They also clash on the national security front — particularly on how they want to combat terrorism. Clinton has urged measured responses that ensure that an entire religion is not villanized -- Trump, meanwhile, has suggested using methods of racial profiling and keeping out entire ethnic groups as a safety measure. All eyes on Lester Holt No one who will face more pressure Monday night than Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump -- except Lester Holt. The NBC "Nightly News" anchor and veteran newscaster is about to enter uncharted territory as the moderator of the first Clinton-Trump face-off. Monday will mark Holt's first time presiding over a general election presidential debate; some 70 to 100 million people are expected to tune in; and there is no telling what dynamics will drive ultimately drive the prime-time event. How Lester Holt is getting ready for Monday's debate Both campaigns have preemptively cranked up the heat, suggesting that Holt and the other moderators might be less than fair to their respective candidates. Palmieri told reporters last week that her biggest concern heading into the debate is that Trump and Clinton will be graded on different curves. "You should be held to the same standard on knowledge, what kind of plans you have, your ability to explain your plans," she said. "Our concern is just what kind of standard is he held to." Trump, meanwhile, has suggested that Holt is a Democrat. "Lester is a Democrat. I mean, they are all Democrats. OK? It's a very unfair system," Trump said. (Holt is actually a registered Republican.) What Holt wants to avoid at all costs is the fate that recently befell his NBC colleague Matt Lauer. The "Today" show host moderated the network's "Commander-in-Chief Forum" earlier this moth, and the reviews were disastrous. Lauer was accused of multiple transgressions, including aggressively interrupting Clinton, spending too much time grilling her on the email controversy, asking Trump relatively soft-ball questions and failing to call him out when he falsely stated that he had opposed the Iraq War. With regard to fact-checking, "Lester is not going to be a potted plant," one NBC staffer close to Holt said. 
(CNN)Rapper YG really wants you to know he doesn't like Donald Trump. While other hip-hop artists like Rick Ross, Jeezy and TI have publicly dissed the Republican presidential nominee, none have gotten as much traction as YG, and arguably, none have been as singularly focused. Check out: #GetPolitical — A CNNPolitics originial series In the lead-up to his second studio album, "Still Brazy," the California rapper dropped a single called "FDT," a song whose title is made up of the GOP nominee's initials and an expletive. As the track opens, YG says, "Me and all my peoples, we always thought he was straight, influential motherf---er when it came to the business. But now, since we know how you really feel, this is how we feel. F--- Donald Trump." Then he launches into his anthem, cursing the real estate mogul's name dozens of times. It was something of a new area for the West Coast rapper. The songs off his first album, like "Bicken back being bool" or "Who do you love," were largely apolitical, even if they did veer into socially conscious territory once in a while. By his own admission, YG is "not political." He told CNN in a wide-ranging interview about his music over the summer his concerns over issues like Trump's anti-Mexican rhetoric and his dismissal of police brutality and the Black Lives Matter movement led him to speak out. "He can't be counted on to handle these issues. This issue is important to the black community, period. It's life," YG said. "This s--- is bigger than hip- hop. ... We're supposed to use our platform to speak up and bring our brothers together and put some light on some of this s--- that's not right for our people." YG also called out other rappers for not speaking out against what he considers a "racist" campaign. He said they were putting their personal interests and fear of backlash over their beliefs. "They're scared on what comes with it, what could come with it," YG said, adding, "They're not doing business with Trump. ... They're saying they ain't political. They ain't going to get into all this s---... I'm not political either bro, but guess what? All that s--- matters." YG said that fear of backlash is not unfounded, and added that he has faced repercussions over his song. He told TMZ in April that the US Secret Service reached out to his record label after he dropped "FDT." "If I talk about him on my album, they're gonna try to take it off the shelf," YG told TMZ. Secret Service spokeswoman Nicole Mainor declined to verify or deny those claims, telling CNN, "The Secret Service does not discuss protective investigations." What hip hop lyrics tell us about Donald Trump Potential Secret Service warnings aside, the Compton rapper hasn't let up. In May 2016, he released a video where he read the lyrics to "FDT" from behind a podium, offering the lines as a point-by-point rebuttal to a Trump speech. Just before the Republican National Convention, YG released "FDT Part 2," a remix featuring unlikely YG collaborators Macklemore and G-Eazy. On his verse to close out the song, YG nods to the two white rappers joining him and says of Trump, "your own kind don't even like you." "I'm on tour with two of the biggest white rappers in the game right now," YG said. "(The) fan base a little different than mine. So I'm touching a lot of new people that I ain't never touched before. So it's a good thing. That's what it's about." But YG did not leave it at that either. In mid-August, he announced a nationwide "F--- Donald Trump" tour, giving the song a final whirl before Election Day. Then in mid-September he released a skit teasing his tour, where an actor playing Trump says "what do they got to lose," recalling the Republican nominee's outreach to African Americans. What hip hop lyrics tell us about Hillary Clinton The rapper has not decided whether he will vote in November and said that his opposition to Trump is not a show of support for Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton. "Out of Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton, I would rather Clinton be president but just overall, I would rather Obama have a third term," YG said. 
(CNN)Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko says he and Donald Trump missed a chance to meet this week due to scheduling problems -- a different version of events than put forward by a Democratic senator. Sen. Chris Coons of Delaware said Wednesday that Poroshenko sought a meeting with the GOP nominee during the United Nations General Assembly in New York but was ignored. "Earlier this summer, I led a bipartisan delegation to Eastern Europe. We visited Ukraine in particular, and I know President Poroshenko of Ukraine was seeking a meeting with Donald Trump while he was in New York meeting with the president of Egypt, and was rejected," the Delaware Democrat told CNN "New Day" host Chris Cuomo. But Poroshenko says that's not how it happened. "We don't have any refusal," the Ukrainian president said in an interview on CNN's "Fareed Zakaria GPS," chalking it up to a scheduling conflict during a crammed few days of meeting with 22 heads of state. Poroshenko said he didn't take the lack of a meeting with Trump as a snub, citing bipartisan support in for his country in Congress. Earlier Wednesday a Ukrainian official confirmed to CNN that Poroshenko's office requested a meeting with both Trump and Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton but only received a response from Clinton, who agreed to the meeting. A message left with Trump's campaign Wednesday was not immediately returned. Trump did meet Monday with Egyptian President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi, during which the two discussed "the strategic bilateral relationship between the US and Egypt," according to a Trump campaign statement after the meeting. Clinton's meeting with Poroshenko took place just a few minutes before Trump met with el Sisi a short distance away. Before that meeting the Democratic nominee said she was looking forward to talking about the challenges Ukraine faces, primarily "the very real problems and threats from Russian aggression." Clinton added that she was "anxious to know how we can be supportive of those efforts." Coons -- a vocal supporter of Clinton for president -- was quick to link Trump's decision not to meet with Poroshenko to positive comments Trump has made about Russian President Vladimir Putin and his country, a primary geopolitical antagonist to Ukraine. "Donald Trump's statements about Ukraine and Putin suggest a dangerous lack of familiarity with Putin's actual record of invading a neighboring country and a dangerous lack of respect for or familiarity with our NATO treaty alliances," he said. Coons continued, "In meetings I had with heads of state in recent days here in New York City, they all expressed real concern or questions about Donald Trump's readiness or fitness to serve as president." Trump's rhetoric on Ukraine and Russia throughout the US presidential election has prompted criticism and scrutiny, even from members of his own party. The GOP nominee has praised Putin as "a leader far more than our President has been a leader," and suggested that the United States shouldn't automatically come to the defense of NATO allies in Eastern Europe who are threatened by an increasingly aggressive Russia if those countries don't adequately fund their own militaries. 
Washington (CNN)US and allied warplanes have sunk over 100 ISIS boats, destroying 65 of them in September alone, according to the international military coalition. While Iraq is nearly entirely land-locked, the Tigris and Euphrates rivers that cross that country are navigable, and ISIS has been using watercraft for a variety of purposes, including transporting fighters and conducting improvised explosive attacks.\ The US-led anti-ISIS coalition provided CNN with video of a September 10 airstrike against an ISIS tactical unit aboard a boat near Bayji, Iraq. Barges, skiffs and motorized watercraft have been observed operating along the Tigris and Euphrates rivers for the purpose of ferrying ISIS fighters and equipment across the rivers, Operation Inherent Resolve spokesperson Col. Joseph Scrocca told CNN, adding that it happens often when anti-ISIS Iraqi troops control the area's bridges. Coalition bombs have also targeted bridges used by ISIS, thereby further necessitating the terror group's reliance on boats. "They have also been used by Daesh for waterborne improvised explosive device attacks," the spokesperson added, using another name for the terror group. A US Apache attack helicopter in July destroyed one such waterborne IED, a boat full of explosives. The vessel was attempting to remove a newly built Iraqi bridge spanning the Tigris River, according to the US military. "It destroyed the boat so it didn't go attack the bridge," US Army Col. Christopher Garver, a spokesman for the military coalition against ISIS, told reporters in August. But while the US and its allies have been striking ISIS boats for months, the last few weeks have seen a major uptick in the number that have been sunk, with over 50 destroyed on September 16 and 14. Those strikes occurred near the towns of Qayyara and Sultan Abdallah, which lie along the Tigris River south of the ISIS-held city of Mosul. Experts think that the increase in the rate of strikes is tied to the upcoming effort by the US and Iraq to retake Mosul, which military officials have said could start as early as October. As part of its defensive efforts, "ISIS is going to try and move fighters up and down the river," retired US Navy Cdr. Chris Harmer told CNN. Harmer thinks the US is attempting to scuttle the ISIS vessels in particular so that the group can't position its forces via the water. The Tigris River runs directly through the heart of Mosul, dividing Iraq's second-largest city in two. He also called the boats an "easy target in terms of avoiding civilian casualties" for the US. ISIS, he said, might try to destroy bridges to slow the Iraqi military's assault on Mosul, noting that "a speedboat with 1,000 kilograms of explosives going into a bridge" is a lot harder to defend against than a conventional IED that would have to be set by ISIS operatives on foot. Historically control of the two rivers has been critical to Iraqi military campaigns. During World War I, the British used small armed river boats traveling up the Tigris and Euphrates in its campaign against the Ottoman Turks. Harmer, now the senior naval analyst at the Institute for the Study of War in Washington, said that the Iraqi military had never really mastered riverine warfare -- fighting on the river -- making the coalition's support all the more essential. And despite the large number of boats sunk, Harmer thinks ISIS may have no trouble seizing additional vessels from Iraqi fishermen, farmers and others who have used the river for thousands of years. "There's always been a steady state of traffic flow on the river," Harmer said. 
Donald Trump on Monday morning claimed credit for accurately calling the weekend’s explosion in Manhattan a bombing, even before full details were in, as the Republican presidential nominee attempts to exploit the latest terror threats to boost his campaign. Trump slammed the media for attacking him over his early use of the bomb term and accused them of editing out clips of Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton using a similar term. (CNN came under fire for using a clip of Hillary Clinton that axed her reference to the bombings, the first response from her gaggle with reporters Saturday.) Story Continued Below “If you saw her in the back of the plane — and she used the word ‘bombs’ also, by the way. I heard — I didn’t see it — but I heard I was criticized for calling it correctly,” Trump told “Fox and Friends” in a telephone interview. “But what I said was exactly correct. I should be a newscaster because I called it before the news.” Trump claimed “everybody” has said that he was right but “called it too soon.” “OK, give me a break,” he continued. “But Hillary Clinton used the word ‘bombs’ shortly thereafter and nobody said anything about it. And somebody said some of them edit that word out. They took it out. Hey, folks, it’s a rigged system, and I’ve been saying it for a long time. And the news is as dishonest as anybody there is.” Trump told supporters at a rally in Colorado Springs, Colorado, on Saturday night that “a bomb went off,” a remark that preceded public confirmation from local officials as they responded to an explosion that injured 29 people. “Just before I got off the plane, a bomb went off in New York, and nobody knows exactly what’s going on, but boy, we are living in a time,” he said Saturday. Clinton, however, did the same thing, all the while attacking her opponent for his untimely assessment. Speaking to reporters aboard her campaign plane Saturday evening, Clinton said that she had been briefed “about the bombings in New York and New Jersey and the attack in Minnesota.” Despite using a similar term as Trump, though, the former secretary of state dinged her rival just moments later. “I think it's important to know the facts about any incident like this,” she said. “I think it's always wiser to wait until you have information before making conclusions because we are just in the beginning stages of trying to determine what happened.” The real estate mogul suggested the media were attacking him not because he cited the explosion as a bombing before it was confirmed but because polls are tightening. National polls released last week by Fox News and CBS News/New York Times show a tight race between both candidates in a head-to-head, with Trump leading by 1 percentage point in the Fox News poll but trailing by 2 percentage points in the CBS News/New York Times survey. “The reason is because my poll numbers now are so good that they’re so worried,” he said. Respondents to the Fox News poll narrowly favor Clinton as the candidate they think would perform better on the terrorism and national security front, 47 percent to 46 percent. Terrorism has punctuated the presidential campaign, with domestic and international attacks striking areas including San Bernardino, California; Orlando, Florida; and Paris and Nice, France. The attacks, at times, have yielded very different responses from the candidates trying to convince Americans that they can best handle these threats as commander in chief. Clinton has tried to position herself as the steady hand America needs, while Trump has portrayed himself as a strong leader who will obliterate terror threats. Clinton’s responses to such incidents are usually much more cautious and measured than Trump’s, who is often criticized for his actions in the wake of terror attacks. Case in point: Following the domestic attacks in San Bernardino and Orlando, Trump proposed a temporary ban on Muslims that he has since modulated and triumphantly tweeted that he is appreciative of “the congrats for being right on radical Islamic terrorism.” On Monday, he seemingly recommended profiling, arguing that law enforcement officials “know who a lot of these people are” but “don’t wanna be accused of profiling and they don’t wanna be accused of all sorts of things.” “We don’t wanna do any profiling,” Trump said. “If somebody looks like he’s got a massive bomb on his back, we won’t go up to that person and say, ‘I’m sorry,’ because if he looks like he comes from that part of the world, we’re not allowed to profile. Give me a break.”
(CNN)It is incredibly difficult to overstate Donald Trump's influence on the 2016 presidential race. Unless, of course, you are Donald Trump. The billionaire building mogul and reality TV-star-turned-Republican nominee has a showman's talent for claiming attention -- and credit for just about anything he wants. For decades now, Trump has made an art of celebrating his lead role, real or imagined, in a laundry list of business and entertainment ventures. His entry into the political world has done little to curtail the habit. Here are a handful of Trump's most outlandish claims: That he pioneered the 'airplane rallies' politicians have used for decades For decades, barnstorming candidates have parked planes, headlined rallies, then flown off to their next stop on the hustings. Trump, too, is fond of pulling up a podium in front of his "Trump Force One" 757 jet and speaking to supporters at airfields and in hangars. Clinton did something similar on Monday, holding a brief news conference in front her own plane. A day later, Trump pounced. "Do people notice Hillary is copying my airplane rallies(?)" he asked in a tweet on Tuesday morning. "She puts the plane behind her like I have been doing from the beginning." But was Clinton really "copying" Trump? Mitt Romney, George W. Bush, John Kerry and John McCain (among so many others) might disagree. Even Ronald Reagan used his plane as a prop. In fact, candidates have been using their vehicles of choice (or necessity) as backdrops for campaign rallies for more than 100 years. In 19th and early 20th centuries, though, that usually meant a train and a "whistlestop" rally. That he 'finished' birtherism in 2011 Trump took credit last week for having "finished" the conspiracy theory he nurtured and promoted for so long. After falsely accusing Clinton of having "started the birther controversy," Trump said: "I finished it. I finished it. You know what I mean. President Barack Obama was born in the United States -- period." The basis for the claim? Another dubious assertion, from 2011, when President Barack Obama released his long form birth certificate in an effort to stamp out any remaining sliver of doubt about his birthplace. "I am really honored frankly to have played such a big role in hopefully, hopefully, getting rid of this issue," Trump told reporters then, effectively claiming credit for the President's decision. "We have to look at (the birth certificate), we have to see is it real, is it proper, what's on it, but I hope it checks out beautifully. I am really proud, I am really honored." He would spend the next five years perpetuating the smear. That he brought the Republican convention to Ohio The timeline tells the story. July 8, 2014: The Republican National Committee awards Cleveland the party's 2016 convention. June 16, 2015: Donald Trump enters the Republican presidential primary. June 18, 2016: Trump tells Fox News, "I wanted (the convention) to be in Ohio. I recommended Ohio." "I wanted it to be here," Trump told Fox's Bill O'Reilly in an interview as the convention got underway. "And we had lots of choices. I wanted it to be in Ohio. I recommended Ohio." Factcheck.org looked into the claim and found "no evidence" to support it. That he got Hillary Clinton to say 'radical Islamism' After months of being hammered by a variety of Republicans for being too politically correct, Hillary Clinton in June uttered the words "radical Islamism" in an interview on CNN's "New Day." But the context is relevant: Clinton was responding to a question about the criticism and explaining why she does not use the term regularly or in stump speeches. "Whether you call it radical jihadism, radical Islamism, I think they mean the same thing," she said. "I am happy to say either. But what I won't do, because I think it is dangerous for our efforts to defeat this threat, is to demonize and demagogue and declare war on an entire religion. That plays right into ISIS' hands." Undeterred, Trump tweeted his delight -- and took credit for what he described as Clinton's capitulation. "I have been hitting Obama and Crooked Hillary hard on not using the term Radical Islamic Terror. Hillary just broke-said she would now use!," he wrote. That he was being congratulated for 'being right on Radical Islam' after the Orlando attack Giving new meaning to the term "Congrats Twitter," Trump on the morning after the deadliest mass shooting in U.S. history tweeted his thanks for "being right" about the threat of domestic terror. "Appreciate the congrats for being right on radical Islamic terrorism, I don't want congrats, I want toughness & vigilance," he wrote. "We must be smart!" Trump never specified the source of those congrats and the comment was met with considerable and colorful -- see the responses to the tweet -- online backlash. That he broke 'the glass ceiling' for women On the same night Clinton, who in her 2008 primary concession speech famously lamented that "we weren't able to shatter that highest, hardest glass ceiling," became the first woman in American history to claim the title of presumptive major-party presidential nominee, Trump told Fox News not to discount his own appeal to female voters. After all, he reminded host Bill O'Reilly, "I was the one that really broke the glass ceiling on behalf of women more than anybody in the construction industry." Trump has been credited -- by others -- for his hiring practices, but he's also been criticized for a litany of ugly public statements about women in all fields. That he inspired Budweiser to rebrand its beer as America' On May 10, reports first surfaced that Budweiser would temporarily rename its signature product. Instead of simply Budweiser, the beer will for the next few months be called "America." The next morning, Trump was asked by "Fox and Friends" co-host Steve Doocy if he thought his campaign "had something to do with" the decision. "I think so," Trump replied. "[Budweiser is] so impressed with what our country will become that they decided to do this before the fact." That he forced Ford's years-old decision to shift some truck production to Ohio In October 2015, Trump declared that "even my harshest critics gave me credit" for Ford's decision to "build a massive plant in the United States." He also cited his "constant badgering" as the impetus for the automaker's scrapped plans for a new one in Mexico. One small problem: the claims were false, according to Ford. "We decided to move the F-650 and F-750 medium-duty trucks to Ohio Assembly in 2011, long before any candidates announced their intention to run for U.S. president," Ford said in response. The construction of a $2.5 billion engine and transmission plant in Mexico is slated to go ahead as planned, the company confirmed. That he aided in the release of Americans in a prisoner swap with Iran When the U.S. and Iran agreed to a prisoner swap in January that brought home, among others, Washington Post journalist Jason Rezaian, officials said the agreement came after more than a year of tightly-held negotiations "accelerated" by parallel nuclear talks. Trump had other ideas. "So I've been hitting them hard and I think I might have had something to do with it," he said at the South Carolina Tea Party Convention. "You want to know the truth? It's a part of my staple thing, I mean, I go crazy when I hear about this, you go absolutely wild because how is it possible?" That he caused planned federal raids on undocumented immigrants In response to the Washington Post's December 2015 report that the Obama administration had signed off on a federal effort to track down and deport undocumented families who had entered the country over the past year, Trump pounced. "Wow, because of the pressure put on by me, ICE TO LAUNCH LARGE SCALE DEPORTATION RAIDS," he tweeted. "It's about time!" In another tweet, sent less than 24 hours later on Christmas Day, Trump again credited himself for the decision: "Does everyone see that the Democrats and President Obama are now, because of me, starting to deport people who are here illegally. Politics!" That he had a role in Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy's decision to withdraw his bid for House Speaker In October, House Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy abandoned his bid to move up a slot and replace John Boehner as speaker. The California congressman's campaign had been hampered by conservative holdouts in the GOP's tea party wing and effectively buried by McCarthy himself when had admitted in an interview that a House Benghazi probe was a vehicle for blunting Hillary Clinton's presidential ambitions. Enter Trump, who at a campaign rally in Las Vegas offered a slightly different narrative. "They're giving me a lot of credit for that because I said you really need someone very, very, tough and very smart," he said. "You know, smart goes with tough. I know tough people that aren't smart. That's the worst. We need smart, we need tough, we need the whole package. That he alone drove viewers to the first GOP debate The first Republican primary debate, held on Aug. 6 in Cleveland, drew 24 million viewers, a record-breaking figure that a Fox News spokeswoman said made it the highest rated telecast the network's nearly two-decade history. Trump took notice. At a rally a few weeks later, he touted the total, adding "they normally have like 2 million people" watching. (Note: the first primary debate four years earlier had 3.2 million.) "I won't take credit for it," Trump told supporters in Iowa, "but believe me, 100 percent it's me. A hundred percent. It's true. It's true!" That he denied Jeb Bush the GOP nomination Jeb Bush entered the Republican primary race as the odds-on favorite to follow in his father and brother's footsteps. He exited, on Feb. 20, a defeated man -- or, as Trump explained to the New York Times, a man defeated by Donald Trump. "I think Jeb would have been the nominee had I not gotten in," he said, "but I was able to define Jeb early." Indeed, Bush never seemed to come have an answer for Trump's unrelenting, mocking attacks. That he won the 2012 GOP primary in Nevada for Mitt Romney How exactly did Mitt Romney win the Nevada caucuses back in 2012? Donald Trump has an idea. In the aftermath of the eventual nominee's victory, Trump, who endorsed Romney days earlier, chalked up the result... to Trump. "There was a lot riding on that particular race in Nevada and it was interesting, because the numbers were much, much greater than you thought," Trump said during a chat with "Fox and Friends." "And a lot of people are giving me credit for that. And I will accept that credit. Always accept credit." That he made Lady Gaga a star In his 2011 book, "Time to Get Tough: Make America Great Again!," Trump took a bow for helping to launch the pop star's soaring celebrity. "I really believe I had at least something to do with it," he wrote. "She became a big star and maybe she became a star because I put her on the Miss Universe pageant. It's very possible, who knows what would have happened without it, because she caused a sensation." 
Washington (CNN)Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump exchanged a series of quick jabs during the first presidential debate at Hofstra University Monday night in Hempstead, New York. Here are some of the most memorable lines so far: Prepared? "I think Donald just criticized me for preparing for this debate. And, yes, I did. You know what else I prepared for? I prepared to be president. And I think that's a good thing," Clinton said. Trump on 'birtherism' "I got him to give the birth certificate," he said about President Barack Obama. Trump on his temperament "I think my strongest asset by far is my temperament. I have a winning temperament," Trump said. Trump's remarks about women "This is a man who has calling women pigs, slobs and dogs and someone who has said pregnancy is an inconvenience to employers, who has said that women don't deserve equal pay unless they do as good a job as men," Clinton said. Trump on taxes "That makes me smart," Trump said in response to Clinton saying he might not pay federal income taxes. How rich? "Maybe he's not as rich as he says he is ... There is something he's hiding ... Who does he owe money to?" Clinton speculating on why Trump hasn't released his tax returns. 'Good to be with you' Clinton greets Trump with a smile: "Donald, it's good to be with you." 'Trumped Up, Trickle Down' "I call it 'Trumped Up, Trickle Down' because that's exactly what it would be," Clinton on Trump's economic plan. MacArthur on ISIS plans "I don't think Gen. Douglas MacArthur would like that," Trump responding to Clinton saying she has published her plan to defeat ISIS online. 'Why not?' Clinton: "I had a feeling by the end of this evening that I'd be blamed for everything." Trump: "Why not?" Trump on IRS audits "I'm not even complaining. I don't mind it. It's almost become a way of life," he said on being audited. Clinton on her emails "I made a mistake using private email," Clinton said. "That's for sure," Trump added. 'Own reality' "Well, Donald, I know you live in your own reality," Clinton responding to Trump's trade attack. Trump on police reform "Secretary Clinton doesn't want to use a few words: Law and order," he said. 'Living in hell' "In inner cities, African-Americans, Hispanics, are living in hell because it's so dangerous. You walk down the street, you get shot," Trump on crime. Trump on holding back "I was going to say something extremely rough to Hillary, to her family, and I said to myself, 'I can't do it. I just can't do it.' It's inappropriate. It's not nice,' " Trump told CNN after the debate. QUIZ: Are you more like Clinton or Trump? 
(CNN)The mistaken US-led coalition bombing of a Syrian military position Saturday may have happened because the personnel weren't wearing military uniforms and didn't have standard military weapons, several US military officials told CNN. Officials said they now think the personnel bombed may have been Syrian military prisoners, according to several US defense officials. That's a working theory of how US, British, Danish and Australian aircraft may have incorrectly assessed intelligence and targeted the site that killed more than 60 Syrian personnel near Deir Ezzor in eastern Syria. The UK Ministry of Defence is saying it used drones in the strike. Officials emphasized there are no final conclusions by the US about who was struck. Overhead imagery and interviews with those involved will have to be assessed. But the US is not disputing that Syrian personnel were hit. The US is trying to determine what specifically led to the mistaken strike and how the personnel may have been misidentified. Syria ceasefire under threat after US-led strikes kill regime troops, Russia says Officials told CNN they believe a likely scenario is the personnel hit were prisoners of the regime, perhaps military personnel being detained, although that is not certain. The initial signs indicate they were dressed in civilian clothing. They also may not have had the typical weapons of a Syrian military unit but rather trucks with weapons mounted on top of them. It is also not known if they were deliberately placed there to potentially deceive the coalition. The strike happened about two kilometres outside the airport in Deir Ezzor, where the US did not expect Syrian forces to be located. The US had struck ISIS strongholds in the area of Deir Ezzor dozens of times in recent months, but had not seen Syrian forces at this location. Syria ceasefire: Is Bashar al-Assad preparing to breach it? Gen. Joseph Votel, head of US Central Command, has appointed a one-star general to conduct an investigation, but as of early Monday that name had not been released. The US expressed regret for the incident, but it still sparked a furious diplomatic row at an emergency UN Security Council meeting over the weekend. The US remains insistent that it does not target Syrian forces, only ISIS and al Qaeda, officials said. While the strike has raised tensions with Russia over the effort to make a potential ceasefire work, it also comes as the pace of operations against ISIS strongholds in Iraq's Mosul and Syria's Raqqa is picking up. In northern Syria, US Special Operations Forces remain partnered with Turkish forces and plan to move with them throughout the area, including the town of Al Rai. US officials told CNN that despite video emerging last week that appeared to show Turkish and US forces being asked to leave the town, they have remained in the area. There is also growing intelligence that ISIS is hunkering down for major combat in Mosul as Iraqi forces draw closer. US surveillance has shown a growing number of improvised explosive devices, bombs, tunnels, trenches and firepits have been dug. The US also believes ISIS has put bombs on all the major bridges into the city, one official said. 
H.L. Mencken declared there was only one way to look at a politician — “down.” Likewise, there’s really only one way to look at the first presidential debate on Monday: as the first serious job interview for potential President Donald John Trump — an opaque candidate who has hidden behind a steel curtain of one-liners, faux familiarity and universal celebrity. Story Continued Below Yeah, yeah, yeah, it’s a big night for Hillary Clinton too. She’s got a lot to prove, for real, namely that she’s not the lying, self-dealing crook many Americans think she is — or at least convince the 55 percent of voters who don’t like her that her virtues (temperament and experience) compensate for decades of assorted ick. She needs to prove she can stand up to Trump, answer the usual email/foundation questions, convince whoever’s still sellable on the idea (stop Instagramming a picture of your lunch, millennials, and listen up) that she’s not some scheming granny who will just sell everybody out the second John Roberts drops the swearing-in Bible. But the spotlight belongs on Trump, who is in need of a rigorous job interview. Clinton deserves the same, but she is already the single most scrutinized, parsed, vetted, investigated, attacked and plaudited non-incumbent to ever seek the presidency. She’s been around forever, making enemies since the internet was dial-up, cell phones were the size of skateboards and Trump was engaged to Marla Maples. Everyone makes the orange jokes, but Trump is something of a black box — running on a few big and broad ideas (curbing illegal immigration, ditching bad trade deals, restoring American prosperity to the working class and obliterating political correctness). He’s bad with facts and the truth, and perhaps worse, takes perverse pride in being a D student who doesn’t read books, has the sketchiest sense of history, doesn’t read briefing materials, and, according to aides and ghostwriters, can’t even sit still long enough to be given a thorough verbal briefing. These are not nasty, biased, liberal opinions. They are facts based on reporting and Trump’s own public performances. Here are five questions Trump needs to address on Monday — but taken together, they add up to one big one: Is Donald Trump qualified to be President of the United States? 1. Does he actually know — or care to know — the basic information needed to competently run the country? Only one verdict of presidential fitness counts, of course, and that’s a candidate’s capacity to get to 270 electoral votes. In recent days, Trump — who swooned after Clinton’s superb convention in Philly — has closed to within the margin of error in many (though not all) national polls, and jumped to serious leads in battlegrounds like Ohio and Iowa since Aug. 1. He’s still the most unpopular candidate in recent history (although Clinton is number two with a bullet) and seems to have a ceiling of between 40 and 44 percent nationally. But he can win. Fivethirtyeight.com, the arch-aggregator, gives Trump nearly a 50 percent chance of prevailing. His resurgence proves three political points — two of them we knew, the third is a surprise to everyone except Trump and his team: The country (especially the white working-class parts) is pissed, Clinton is a perennially lousy candidate and — lastly, but not leastly — Trump has proven to be a resilient and flexible candidate with the capacity (developed late in the game) to shift shape and shut up when he needs to. The first debate should be a pivot — from politicking to president-ing. Being a cunning candidate isn’t remotely the same thing as being ready to rule — and we should be moving to the Doris Kearns Goodwin phase of the campaign, where the top priority is fitness to govern in a time of trial. It probably won’t happen, but a boy can dream. This is not to suggest that Trump can’t do the job (Ronald Reagan, another entertainer who forayed into politics, was mostly a success), but he’s been judged as a performer up to this point, and not subjected to the cold fluorescent scrutiny of managerial competence. Trump has repeatedly flubbed tests of his basic understanding of domestic and foreign affairs — apparently he wasn’t aware Russia had annexed Crimea until George Stephanopoulos informed him recently. He obliterated Jeb Bush, that humbled patsy of the GOP establishment, in the debates — but Bush (if anyone had cared to listen) punctured Trump’s bully-boy promise to impose tariffs on Chinese products, correctly pointing out that such a move would certainly spark countermeasures by Beijing that could lead to a global depression. Trump wasn’t aware of that fact, or just didn’t care. The caring part is kind of important, if history is any guide. In April, I sat down with one of his longtime advisers, Roger Stone, who described what it was like to brief an executive whose prime attributes were supreme self-confidence and supreme impatience. “All you can do is present information and let him either assimilate it or not,” said Stone, who has known the GOP nominee for decades. “When you write something for him, keep it short and staccato. He's not going to read a 40-page white paper on the economy; zero chance of that. It's just too boring. Don't blame him; I don't like it either. So keep it simple and direct because that's the way he communicates.” Stone argued that Trump isn’t an ignoramus — just a cut-to-the-chase decision-maker who is a lightning-quick study. But George W. Bush’s advisers, speaking to biographer Peter Baker, said that Bush’s unwillingness to ask probing, informed questions led to some of his disastrous decisions in Iraq. And during the nadir of the 2009 global economic meltdown, President Obama added a daily economic briefing to his daily national security rundown to keep tabs on the rapidly shifting metrics of crisis. Trump’s capacity to intuitively assimilate information might render such processes useless — but there’s not a single presidential historian drawing oxygen who believes a lack of intellectual curiosity is an asset for the job. Many Americans might not give a damn that he knows what HUD’s Section 8 program is — and his failure to answer informational questions that Clinton would parry with ease will endear him to his screw-the-media base. But don’t people have the right to know what he actually knows? Trump has gleefully trashed the rules of presidential campaigns, so why should a moderator treat him with the deference of someone who abides by the norms — by assuming he possesses the basic knowledge traditionally required of a presidential candidate? 2. Does Trump understand and respect the basic principles and traditions of American Constitutional government? Again, this is not a given. Hillary Clinton despises the press, and dodges them as if they were a pack of feral rats, but she has never suggested they be stopped from doing their jobs through the courts. Trump (who banned news outlets, including this one, from his events for most of the campaign) routinely threatens litigation against publications that publish unflattering articles and, in February, went so far as to say: “We're going to open up those libel laws. So when The New York Times writes a hit piece which is a total disgrace … we can sue them and win money instead of having no chance of winning because they're totally protected.” That’s a new one for a presidential nominee. As Corey Brettschneider wrote in POLITICO Magazine last month: “For more than 50 years, the Supreme Court has held that for a public figure to prove libel against a news outlet, they must show that the outlet acted with ‘actual malice’ — that is, with knowledge that it was false or with reckless disregard of whether it was false or not.” During a private meeting with Hill Republicans earlier this year, the populist real estate developer expressed his fondness for “Article 12 of the Constitution.” The framers stopped at seven. “He was just listing out numbers,” said Congressman Blake Farenthold (R-Texas), a Trump backer at the time. “I think he was confusing Articles and Amendments.” OK, let’s write that one off as a gotcha — you can understand Constitutional principles without citing literal chapter and verse. But consider his reaction to the Paris bombings last November when Trump told FOX News he thought the government should shutter some mosques where “some bad things are happening.” The comment was decried by Constitutional scholars of all stripes as a radical measure that would violate the “Free Exercise” clause of the First Amendment, a pillar of protection for faiths of all kinds. 3. Why won’t Trump forthrightly answer the most basic questions about his businesses and debts? Hillary Clinton has, appropriately, has come under intense scrutiny for her six-figure speeches to big Wall Street firms like Goldman Sachs — and has refused to release the transcripts of her prattles to the plutocrats. And serious questions remain about the lack of boundaries between the Clinton Foundation, the State Department, and big-money foreign donors who blurred the line between influence peddling and altruism. But the Clintons have released all of their tax returns (in part because, for many years, they were required to do so as government employees) and Trump is the first major presidential candidate in the modern era to thumb his nose at handing over a single one. Why does it matter? Because a guy whose purchase on the presidency is rooted in his private-sector acumen needs to back up his claims with proof, in the same way that Clinton needs to be held accountable for her purported record of accomplishment in the White House, Senate and State Department. At issue is Trump’s fundamental personal narrative, and his claim that he’s “very, very rich.” He is, but maybe not quite as much as he claims (he says he’s good for $11 billion; Forbes and other outlets say he’s worth less than half that much). More serious is the issue of Trump’s debts: The Clinton campaign, citing press reports that he owes large sums to overseas creditors in China and elsewhere, has attacked him for being in the pocket of foreign financial overlords. If that’s a lie, there’s an easy way to prove it — by releasing the returns. This isn’t a liberal media witch-hunt: Many Republicans, including supporters like House Speaker Paul Ryan, say he needs to cough them up, and fast. 4. What’s the deal with his charitable foundation? Then there’s the matter of Trump’s sloppily run, and less-than-magnanimous foundation. In exposé after exposé, Washington Post reporter David Fahrenthold has reported on a pattern of over-promising donations and the misuse of funds (including a quarter-million payment to cover legal fees for Trump’s businesses and sports memorabilia) that Trump himself has conceded might be illegal. The problem, yet again, is that Trump has refused to release a comprehensive accounting of his giving, and his surrogates have routinely misstated the magnitude of his generosity, according to the reporting of Fahrenthold and others. 5. Why lie? These days, the polygraph is used sparingly as part of the vetting process for employment, mostly for sensitive national security or law enforcement jobs. If presidential candidates were subjected to that level of scrutiny, the only person allowed on the debate stage at Hofstra would be the technician testing the sound system. But if Trump is to be vetted for the presidency, he needs to be asked not only about individual statements he’s made in the past, but his pattern of lying, stretching the truth and bungling facts. Hillary Clinton (“Crooked Hillary” in Trump’s parlance) it bears repeating, is no saint — far from it — and her early answers on the email scandal were misleading, bordering on the untruthful, and flat-out lies in the view of GOP congressional investigators. But it’s a crowning irony of 2016 that the Republican Party, whose base revolted against its leadership for untruthfulness — especially George W. Bush’s claims about Iraq — would nominate the most brazenly truth-challenged candidate in recent history. (A recitation of Trump’s whoppers would take up too much space – read POLITICO’s comprehensive “Donald Trump’s Week of Misrepresentations, Exaggerations and Half-Truths” for a taste.) In an attempt to defend Trump, buddy Newt Gingrich, who lobbied to be Trump’s running mate, tweeted what amounted to an indirect admission that his man has a trouble with all those pesky facts. “Clinton,” the former speaker wrote, “is a fox who knows many things you can fact check. Trump is a hedgehog who knows one big thing…” But getting the facts right — and telling the truth — is a big thing. It’s the only way citizens will ever look up to, and not down on, their leaders.
President Barack Obama violated the longstanding, albeit unofficial, rule against presidential headgear on Monday when he accepted a hat and blanket at the White House Tribal Nations Conference. The president was given the hat and blanket by Native American leaders as he took the stage ahead of remarks at the conference. He wore the blanket around his shoulders as a song was played in his honor, but took the hat off after just a few moments. Story Continued Below “What an amazing honor and what a kind gesture, for the honor song and the blanket and the hat,” Obama said once he took the podium. “I have to say that I am very glad that you also have a blanket for Michelle so she doesn’t steal mine. She would, too. I’m just saying.” “That was very moving, and is a reminder of the great friendships that we’ve developed over the last eight years,” he added. The unofficial rule against presidents wearing unusual hats is widely credited to Democratic presidential nominee Michael Dukakis, whose decision to wear a tank-commander’s helmet during a ride in an M1A1 Abrams Main Battle Tank has been widely ridiculed to this day. Obama himself acknowledged the rule during a 2013 visit from the Naval Academy’s football team, which presented him with one of its helmets. “Here’s the general rule: You don’t put stuff on your head if you’re president,” Obama said, explaining his refusal to put on the helmet that had been fitted for him. “That’s Politics 101. You never look good wearing something on your head.”
Washington (CNN)Most white working-class voters who are evangelical Christians -- like most white evangelicals -- would consider voting for Donald Trump. But it's not because they believe he shares their conservative Christian values. Rather, they agree with him that America is not as great as it once was, according to a new CNN/Kaiser Family Foundation poll. While black evangelicals are solidly against the GOP nominee, among white working-class evangelicals, about three in four -- 76% -- say they'd consider voting for Trump. Partisanship likely plays a big part in this, as half of white working-class evangelical Christians identify as Republicans. The majority -- 6 in 10 -- of voters in this group believe the US' better days are in the past and most are concerned that the country is becoming less Christian. Nearly 90% of working class whites who are evangelical Christians believe Christian values are under attack in America today. While most Christian groups -- 73% of mainline Protestants and 61% of Catholics -- share this view, only 41% of those with no religious preference believe these values are under attack. Trump often says he wants to "make America great again," and working-class whites are a core of his support, but that doesn't mean they don't question the faith of a man who once said he never asks God for forgiveness. "When listening to him, he's not a Christian. He does not have any of the values that we have," said Buddy Mitchell, a 47-year-old from Arvada, Colorado, and owner of a flooring company. "I don't know of any redeeming quality of Donald Trump other than both Democrats and Republicans hate him," said Mitchell, who did not participate in the survey. "That's the only reason I like him: that the establishment doesn't like him." Christian values seen as under attack That dislike for the establishment is a strong point for Trump with this demographic. For many white working-class evangelicals, it's clear who is at fault for many of the country's issues: the federal government. White working-class evangelicals are also more likely than others to blame the federal government for the economic problems facing the working class. "I don't think that either candidate is taking Christian values into consideration," said Sandra Long, an 80-year-old lifelong Democrat. "Neither one of them is acting very Christian-like. Just a lot of things are said and done. It scares me." Long, a Mahanoy City, Pennsylvania, resident, is scared that society is becoming more secular and will be a less accepting place for people with more conservative Christian values. "I feel the country was founded on Christian principles. They came here to get away form being persecuted for their beliefs," she said. "And now, if our ministers don't marry a gay couple or refuse to marry a gay couple, they can be arrested and taken to jail." While same-sex marriage is legal, religious leaders are not required to marry gay couples. Darrell Pool, a 60-year-old from Lamar, Colorado, said he doesn't see his traditional Christian values honored by the leading candidates. "I don't see my values shaping the election. There's just a lot of mayhem," he said. "I think the values that were in the country's founding are leaving. The moral values are leaving daily." Many white working-class evangelicals have no confidence that either of the presidential candidates has the ability to return the country to their perception of its former glory. "I don't know where I am," said Long. "I'm so confused at this point and time. I don't believe either one of them should be in office. I don't believe either one should be running." Some have entertained third-party candidates. "I'm sick to my stomach. I cannot stand Hillary (Clinton) and I can't stand Trump, so for the first time in my life, I'm thinking of voting Libertarian or not voting," Mitchell said. For these voters, the lack of confidence in government is exemplified in the candidacy of Clinton, who has been in government for more than 20 years. "If you or I would have done what she did with those emails, we'd be in jail," Mitchell said. "But because she's the Democratic nominee, they don't hold politicians to the same standards that they hold the people." Many of the standards these voters want to see candidates follow are rooted in the Christian faith. Security also a concern But values aren't the only concerns of these voters. National security is also a major issue to many of these voters, many of whom have personal connections to the military. "All these refugees they want to bring in, that's really got me going," said Pool, who participated in the survey. "They have no idea who they're bringing in and we just keep having more attacks here." "I just think it's ludicrous and all it's for is so one party can have more voters," he said. The relationship between evangelicals and the refugee issue is a complicated one. Some of the biggest critics of Trump's proposed Muslim ban have been evangelicals. Christian organizations have been among the most active in helping resettle refugees, but that doesn't mean some among their flock aren't anxious. The majority -- 75% -- of white working-class evangelicals believe that recent immigrants from predominantly Muslim countries increase the risk of terrorist attacks in the US, a higher percentage than other working-class whites. "I say let's quit bringing these people in, period," Pool said. "I realize America is a melting pot and that's how America started in the first place, but we have a process here. Nobody says you can't come to this country. Come on in. Let's do it the right way." 
President Barack Obama mourned the death of golf legend Arnold Palmer in a statement released Monday, celebrating him as “the American dream come to life.” Palmer, widely regarded as one of golf’s greatest stars, died Sunday in Pittsburgh at the age of 87. He won seven major tournaments over the course of his career, including four Masters Tournaments, and 65 wins on the PGA Tour rank him 5th all-time on that list. He was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom in 2004 by President George W. Bush and the Congressional Gold Medal in 2009. Story Continued Below “With his homemade swing and homespun charm, Arnold Palmer had swagger before we had a name for it,” the president said in a statement released by the White House. “From a humble start working at the local club in his beloved Latrobe, Pennsylvania, to superstardom as the face of golf around the globe, Arnold was the American Dream come to life.” "Along the way he racked up win after win – but it wasn’t his success that made him King. Arnold’s freewheeling, fearless approach to the game inspired a generation of golfers and, for the first time on TV, enthralled an audience across the world. Sure, we liked that he won seven majors, but we loved that he went for it when he probably should have laid up,” Obama, himself an avid golfer, continued. “That spirit extended beyond the links where he gave freely of himself and poured everything he had into everything he did: from building hospitals to personally responding to countless letters from his fans. And he did it all with a grin that hinted maybe he had one more shot up his sleeve."
The New York Times on Monday urged undecided voters to rethink their consideration of Donald Trump for president, warning them of supporting a candidate “far more consumed with himself than with the nation’s well-being.” Days after endorsing Hillary Clinton’s presidential campaign, the newspaper issued a scathing rebuke of the Republican presidential nominee — hours ahead of his first one-on-one debate with Clinton. Story Continued Below In an editorial published Monday, the Times’ editorial board reminds voters that the real estate mogul began his campaign 15 months ago offering “wealth and television celebrity as credentials, then slyly added a list of fearmongering about Mexican ‘rapists’ flooding across the Southern border.” “From that moment of combustion, it became clear that Mr. Trump’s views were matters of dangerous impulse and cynical pandering rather than thoughtful politics,” the board wrote. “Yet he has attracted throngs of Americans who ascribe higher purpose to him than he has demonstrated in a freewheeling campaign marked by bursts of false and outrageous allegations, personal insults, xenophobic nationalism, unapologetic sexism and positions that shift according to his audience and his whims.” Now is the time for undecided voters — as well as those “hoping for some dramatic change in our politics and governance,” the board said — “to take a hard look and see Mr. Trump for who he is. They have an obligation to scrutinize his supposed virtues as a refreshing counterpolitician. Otherwise, they could face the consequences of handing the White House to a man far more consumed with himself than with the nation’s well-being.” From his business “record rife with bankruptcies and sketchy ventures” to his refusal to release his tax returns to his embrace of Russian strongman Vladimir Putin and potential business ties to the Kremlin, the Times outlined “how Mr. Trump is selling himself and why he can’t be believed.” The list includes Trump’s waffling on policy issues, his intimation that he might try to persuade creditors to accept less than the U.S. government owes and a tax-cut plan that would cost trillions of dollars in revenue, among others. The Times mocks what it calls his ludicrous secret plan to destroy the Islamic State, noting that Trump has no national security experience and bobs and weaves on whether he would commit ground troops, and insists his heart lies “with the anti-immigrant, nativist and racist signals that he scurrilously employed to build his base.” “A change agent for the nation and the world?” an italicized subhead reads. “There can be little doubt of that. But voters should be asking themselves if Mr. Trump will deliver the kind of change they want,” the Times cautions. Adding that voters should be wary of Trump’s “silence about areas of national life that are crying out for constructive change,” such as schools, poverty and racial progress, the Times concludes: “Voters attracted by the force of the Trump personality should pause and take note of the precise qualities he exudes as an audaciously different politician: bluster, savage mockery of those who challenge him, degrading comments about women, mendacity, crude generalization about nations and religions. Our presidents are role models for generations of our children. Is this the example we want for them?”
Washington (CNN)He may want to be "Mr. President," but Donald Trump has a back-up title: "Saint Donald." At least according to Bobby Knight. The legendary basketball coach, himself known as "The General," has been using the phrase to describe the GOP candidate in recent days as he campaigns for him. "I actually enjoyed the day with 'Saint Donald,' and I've enjoyed watching him," Knight said on "Fox and Friends" on Friday. "I think the man has a lot of really, really good things to bring to the table." It's an honorific Knight has been quick to use in recent days. He also called Trump "Saint Donald" during a campaign stop in Chester Township, Pennsylvania, on Thursday and in another interview with Fox News on Thursday. Trump-Clinton nasty? Not compared to these campaigns Asked about elevating Trump to sainthood, Knight says that's what he thinks of the real-estate mogul. "Well, in my mind, I do just to kind of let him know that," he said, with host Jenna Lee interjecting that it was a sign of "affection." Leaving Trump Tower on Friday, Knight said it's all light-hearted. "I just kid him about that," Knight told reporters. "I needle him about that. He's got a great sense of humor and I think that's another thing that he has that's gonna be good." Knight said Friday he's watched Trump's style evolve since he first endorsed Trump before the Indiana primary and that he has been strong. "I just watch him, I think, become -- I don't know if the word 'mild' is the word to use or not, or 'milder.' But I just have seen him take a different approach to how things should be and to go about attacking things and what's wrong," Knight said Friday on Fox. "I've really been impressed with the interest that he has in seeing that things are done in the right way." Knight is famous for coaching the Indiana Hoosiers and is one of the winningest college basketball coaches of all time. He endorsed Trump and campaigned with him before the candidate went on to the win the Indiana primary, effectively sealing his nomination. But Knight left coaching on controversial ground, after he as accused of physically and verbally abusing a student. Knight was legendary for his temper as much as his wins. Trump proudly touts the endorsement on the campaign trail, even when he is not appearing with Knight. 
While his former opponent in the Republican presidential primary spends the fall debating Hillary Clinton, former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush will be heading to Harvard as a visiting fellow. At the Harvard Kennedy School of Government’s Program on Education Policy and Governance, Bush will visit the Cambridge, Massachusetts, campus several times this fall to deliver guest lectures on topics related to education and participate in student study groups. Bush is the founder of an education policy think-tank. Story Continued Below This Thursday, he’ll also deliver the school’s annual Edwin L. Godkin Lecture and discuss “the lack of economic and social mobility in the United States and his ideas for addressing those challenges,” according to a press release announcing the appointment Tuesday. The son and brother of former presidents, Bush entered the Republican primary as a favorite of the party establishment’s donor base and an expected front-runner. He failed to gain traction, though, as voters gravitated toward other candidates — including the party’s eventual nominee, Donald Trump — and Bush dropped out of the race in February after a poor showing in the South Carolina primary.
Yahoo announced Thursday that hackers apparently working for a foreign government stole data on at least 500 million of its users two years ago. "A copy of certain user account information was stolen from the company's network in late 2014 by what it believes is a state-sponsored actor," Yahoo said in a news release. Story Continued Below The company said it was "working closely with law enforcement on this matter." "Based on the ongoing investigation, Yahoo believes that information associated with at least 500 million user accounts was stolen and the investigation has found no evidence that the state-sponsored actor is currently in Yahoo's network," the company added. The FBI and the Department of Homeland Security did not immediately respond to emails seeking comment on their involvement in the investigation. Compromised data included passwords and security questions. Yahoo said its investigation suggested the hackers did not obtain unencrypted passwords and payment information. Some of the security questions were encrypted, the company added. The company said it was contacting people whose data may have been compromised and urged users who hadn't changed their passwords since the time of the attack to do so.
Jane Pauley will succeed Charles Osgood as host of the long-running, highly rated show "CBS Sunday Morning," the network announced Sunday morning. Osgood is retiring after 22 years as anchor of the show and 50 with the network overall. The network spent the Sunday morning show paying tribute to Osgood's life and career. Pauley will be only the third anchor of the show. Story Continued Below “Jane Pauley is the ideal host for the most wide-ranging news program on American culture, our beloved CBS Sunday Morning broadcast,” CBS News President David Rhodes said in a statement. “Charles Osgood is a television news legend — and so is Jane Pauley.” Pauley, a former cohost of the "Today" show, joined "CBS Sunday Morning" in 2014 as a contributor and has been a substitute host since. “Charles Osgood set the standard for CBS Sunday Morning,” Pauley said. “And it’s a great honor to be given the chance to further our show’s legacy of excellence. I look forward to bringing loyal viewers the kind of engaging, original reporting that has made the broadcast so irresistible for so long.” Pauley’s first broadcast in her new role will be Oct. 9.
(CNN)For as far as Chris Christie has fallen politically over the last three years, there has always been one saving grace: No evidence existed to directly tie him to the incident that sank his presidential ambitions. Until, at least according to US prosecutors, now. It was an unexpected moment during the Monday opening statement by Vikhas Khanna, an assistant US attorney prosecuting two former Christie administration officials now charged with fraud -- the assertion that Christie was aware of the alleged political retribution being carried out by aides. It was one that directly contradicted years of Christie's statements to the contrary, including one as recently as Sunday. "I have been investigated by three different entities, two of them led by partisan Democrats, who have all found that I had no knowledge of this incident and no involvement in it," the New Jersey governor told Jake Tapper on CNN's "State of the Union." Christie has never been charged and never listed as a co-conspirator by prosecutors. But the revelation put forth by prosecutors underscored once again, for all to see, the scope of the political scandal that played the leading role in destroying his presidential ambitions. And his vice presidential ambitions. And, quite possibly, any cabinet ambitions in a Donald Trump administration. In September 2013, Christie allies shut down lanes of the George Washington Bridge in an alleged effort to exact political retribution on the Democratic mayor of the town of Fort Lee, who had refused to endorse Christie's re-election. Christie's former deputy chief of staff, Bridget Anne Kelly, and former Port Authority deputy executive director Bill Baroni have pleaded not guilty to conspiracy and fraud charges in connection to the lane closures Christie's blanket rejection of any involvement -- and any knowledge -- of what occurred in September 2013 has been consistent and unyielding. Through investigations, both internal and by New Jersey Democrats, and a battering from local officials and the press, the New Jersey governor remained steadfast. "How many more investigations do you want?" a frustrated Christie would ask reporters at one point. Yet, as if to underscore how comfortable he was in his innocence, Christie still decided to launch his presidential bid. It was an effort that sought to recapture the moment -- and momentum -- Christie was party to shortly after his blowout re-election victory in November 2013. But Christie was clearly wounded. He went from leading the party's initial polls to firmly stuck in the middle tier of the pack. And that was before Donald Trump proceeded to run roughshod over the field. For a period, Christie appeared to be getting back on track. His favorability numbers, which tanked in the wake of the bridge scandal, started to turn right-side up in the crucial state of New Hampshire at the end of 2015, aided by a major advertising blitz by the super PAC supporting his candidacy. But it was short-lived. Even as the issue rarely came up during the dozens of town hall he held, Christie couldn't recapture his campaign magic. "I have both won elections that I was supposed to lose and I have lost elections that I was supposed to win," Christie told supporters after his sixth place finish in New Hampshire. "And what that means is you never know, and it's both the magic and mystery of politics that you never quite know when which is going to happen even when you think you do." But Christie and his aides, in candid moments, couldn't help but talk about what may have happened were it not for the George Washington Bridge -- an exercise repeated in July, as Trump went through the process of selecting his running mate. Christie himself, in an interview on MSNBC, acknowledged that the "Bridgegate" scandal contributed to Trump's decision not to select him as his running mate. "I'm sure it was a factor," Christie said. It was a position, aides said, that by the end of the selection process Christie was openly lobbying for -- and one he acknowledged afterward he was disappointed not to receive. "I'm a competitive person," Christie said in a CNN interview in July. "When it was clear that Donald wanted me to compete for this job and to be considered, I wanted to win, of course you do." For now, Trump advisers say, Christie is firmly encamped inside Trump's inner circle. A confidante and sounding board, Christie has a three-pronged role in Trump's operation: surrogate, adviser and the head of Trump's presidential transition team. Trump, in a statement to The New York Times, made no mention of the court case or Christie's potential plight -- instead making clear he had no plans of abandoning the man who provided his first top-tier endorsement in the primary, saying Christie has "been a spectacular advocate ever since." He's also gained repeated plaudits for his transition efforts -- a secretive operation that nonetheless has been lauded by lobbyists, donors and GOP officials who have received briefings on its work. "It's the most in-shape thing the Trump guys have going right now," one lobbyist who attended one of the briefings told CNN. But many of those looped in on the transition operations have long thought one of the recipients of a top job in a Trump administration would be ... Christie. Asked on MSNBC if he wanted a role in a Trump administration last week, Christie responded simply: "It depends on what I'm offered." But the question now becomes what can Christie, long considered in the running to be attorney general, can be offered. As one GOP official supporting Trump pointed out: "Trump respects his loyalty -- and that's why he's fine now. But I have a sneaking suspicion Senate Democrats, who he'd need to get confirmed don't care much about that." 
The Obama administration on Thursday terminated the federal recognition of the nation’s largest accreditor of for-profit colleges — a rare move that could ultimately jeopardize the ability of hundreds of schools to access federal student aid. The decision against the Accrediting Council for Independent Colleges and Schools, which is likely to be appealed, was based on Education Department findings that the organization failed to properly monitor and discipline the colleges it oversees. Story Continued Below ACICS will now have 30 days to file an appeal directly to Education Secretary John B. King Jr., who on Wednesday pledged to resolve such an appeal “quickly.”
Atlanta (CNN)Rev. Raphael Warnock crouched forward in a back pew here at Ebenezer Baptist Church and wondered what could have been. "I'm not afraid of Johnny Isakson," said Warnock of his Republican senator, at times distracted by the decades-old, muffled recordings of Martin Luther King Jr.'s sermons that echoed in this historic sanctuary. "I'm not interested in a symbolic candidacy. I would've run to win." A few hours later, the Democrat who is challenging Isakson instead of him, Jim Barksdale, tried to evince that same optimism speaking to a group of supporters at a Tex-Mex restaurant in Gwinnett County. "This is a winnable election. Don't let anyone tell you anything else," said Barksdale, a 63-year-old soft-spoken investment manager and political newcomer. "I wouldn't be in it if I didn't think it was winnable." Barksdale, however, trails Isakson by 16 points in a Monmouth University poll released Monday, even though Donald Trump is up only 3 points ahead of Hillary Clinton. Georgia is looking increasingly like a missed opportunity for Democrats trying to win back the Senate -- and many fault Barksdale himself. "We were giving a godsend, I believe, with Donald Trump," said Barksdale supporter Leonard Ware as he waited for the candidate to speak in Gwinnett. "If we had a stronger candidate, we could've taken that Senate seat." Georgia poll: Donald Trump, Hillary Clinton in tight race For national Democrats, Barksdale's disappointing bid is part of a broader trend facing the party that came into 2016 with a favorable map of Senate races. In Ohio, Ted Strickland has been hampered by repeated gaffes and fundraising woes that have led national Democrats to essentially abandon a once-top candidate in the homestretch. Democrats have begun to make similar moves in Florida, where Patrick Murphy -- once a young, impressive recruit poised to flip a GOP seat -- has suffered dearly for embellishing his background and given Republican opposition researchers a trove of material. And here in Georgia, a half-dozen prominent Democrats passed on challenging Isakson, a decision that some in the party now rue. Even with the tight presidential race, Barksdale isn't trying to capitalize on any anti-Trump sentiment in Georgia. He didn't mention the GOP presidential candidate when meeting supporters campaigning Friday and barely addressed it until CNN asked him about the top of the ticket in an interview. That's a far cry from the Democratic playbook that has proved to be moderately successful in other Senate races. Democrats have tortured GOP incumbents like Ron Johnson in Wisconsin and Richard Burr in North Carolina for their embrace of the nominee, and the poll numbers show it. Part of his reticence is that Barksdale, a former Bernie Sanders-backer, says he believes there are issues where he agrees with Trump. And he predicted a slew of Barksdale-Trump voters this November. "It's hard to imagine how somebody can pull the lever for Donald Trump on the Republican side -- who is so anti-the-establishment and anti-the-trade-things -- and then pull the lever for Johnny Isakson," Barksdale said. African-American gap Georgia Democrats have long seen their political viability as resting on the state's booming minority population, and Barksdale's campaign agrees. If he can consolidate the black vote and win 85% of the community's 2.1 million voters, Barksdale aides say, he can win. The problem, revealed in a walk along this city's historically African-American Sweet Auburn neighborhood: People don't know who he is. "Black dude?" asked Paul Jones, a registered Democrat sitting on a ledge outside an abandoned park here, asked about the white Barksdale. "Oh, no, I don't know him." Some here do know Isakson, and he is a revered figure in some pockets of Georgia's middle class. At a major Republican call center in Isakson's home base of Cobb County last week, nearly everyone calling on his behalf have some personal relationship with the two-term senator -- whether they teach his granddaughter at Sunday school or write to his personal email every few weeks. And a trio of prominent Democrats, former US Sen. Sam Nunn, former Gov. Roy Barnes, and current US Rep. David Scott have all publicly backed Isakson, snubbing their own nominee. Despite Trump's struggles -- especially among independent women in the suburbs -- Isakson's team is calm and confident, thanks primarily to the caliber of the man they are facing. Their main concern is how much Barksdale himself plans to invest his campaign. He has invested $3 million so far, and he declined repeated questions about how high that total would go. "No question that our Democratic friends are kicking themselves, given how volatile the electorate has become, for not having recruited a candidate with a higher profile with a better set of policies and messages," said Heath Garrett, Isakson's chief strategist said at their campaign office. "The flip is -- they have a candidate that's willing to write a check," added campaign manager Trey Kilpatrick. Man in the hat Aside from not going after Trump, Barksdale has had other missteps that have cost him. The list of grievances among Georgians against Barksdale is long: the time conservative radio ridiculed him for misspelling 'judgment' on his campaign website; his sparse public event and interview schedule, stripping him of needed exposure; and his inability to effectively consolidate the Democratic base. Barksdale is further to the left than the centrist Senate bid waged by Michelle Nunn in 2014, who was thought to be a good ideological fit for Georgia despite being walloped in an open-seat contest. His calling card -- the cotton Bailey flat caps that he wears each day -- has drawn criticism as well from Georgia power brokers. "I get a lot of compliments on it," he said. "Everybody was worried that it wouldn't appeal within the, let's call it, minority communities -- but it really does." The cap has emerged as the signature emblem of Barksdale's laggard campaign, with one soft-focus television ad featuring Georgians securing his cap over their hair ("Could I give you a good look here?" he told one grade-schooler here before revealing his balding head.) His office in littered in cap imagery, with supporters imploring Republicans to "send the hat" -- not Barksdale, or as some call him more forgivingly, "the man in the hat" -- to the Senate. National Republicans don't send trackers to his events and have barely advertised against him as well. Republicans concede that Isakson would have faced a stronger test if Atlanta mayor Kasim Reed, or rising star state Rep. Stacey Abrams, or presidential scion Jason Carter, had not so strongly resisted overtures from party leadership to run a race seen as winnable. "I had conversations with folks who were thoughtful about their request, and I was speedy in my response," said Abrams as she awaited a flight. "I was very unequivocal about the fact that I had no interest in running for the Senate." "I thought seriously about it and I came this close to running," said Warnock, who said he wanted to remain at his church. "This was not my time." Several Democrats pointed to trends that explained Democrats' candidate problems nationally -- poor showings in 2014 sapped ambition from some red-state hopefuls, while others made their decisions well before Trump's struggles. Democrats did not land their first-choice recruit in North Carolina, and others have not lived up to the hype that came with their entrances into the race. "When you look at states like North Carolina, Missouri and Indiana -- which were places that no one thought were going to be competitive this time last year -- I think it speaks to the quality of the candidates that came forward," said DSCC spokesman Lauren Passalacqua, who would only characterize Georgia as "another area that we think is competitive in a year when Republican have struggled." Isakson, for his part, takes some credit for the Democrats' A-team declining to challenge him. "I've made a lot of friends. And I try to represent all the people when I'm in office," he said in an interview. "I'm grateful they decided to stay where their careers were." Run-off in January? The biggest challenge for Isakson at this point is getting to 50% -- the number he needs to avoid a run-off in January. The Monmouth poll has him at exactly that mark -- with a margin of error of 4.9 percentage points. Isakson aides predict a runoff would cost each side more than $20 million, and it could become a national spectacle should control of the Senate hang in the balance. "If Johnny gets into a general election runoff, there will be money from all over the country that's going to pour into Georgia," said Eric Tanenblatt, a longtime Republican fundraiser and power player here in the state. "If Hillary Clinton were to win the White House, does she come down here to campaign for Barksdale?" But that may be the Democrats' best hope at this point. "I was not the likeliest candidate," Barksdale said. "If anyone else had gotten involved that I thought I was credible, I would've certainly let them carry the water instead of me." 
Ivanka Trump will huddle Tuesday afternoon with just over a dozen female Republican Senators and House members on Capitol Hill, multiple sources told POLITICO. The GOP presidential nominee’s daughter will talk more about her father’s new childcare policy platform, which she helped create. She'll also hear from women in Congress about their own ideas and proposals related to family issues, women in the workplace, job flexibility and equal pay, one source added. Story Continued Below It’s all part of a policy roundtable hosted by House Republican Conference Chairwoman Cathy McMorris Rodgers (R-Wash.). The event kicks off at 3 p.m. at the Republican National Committee.
Donald Trump’s presidential campaign has paid his family's businesses more than $8.2 million, according to a POLITICO analysis of campaign finance filings, which reveals an integrated business and political operation without precedent in national politics. The GOP presidential nominee’s campaign has paid his various businesses for services including rent for his campaign offices ($1.3 million), food and facilities for events and meetings ($544,000) and payroll for Trump corporate staffers ($333,000) who helped with everything from his traveling security to his wife’s convention speech. Story Continued Below In all, the Trump campaign’s payments to Trump-owned businesses account for about 7 percent of its $119 million spending total, the analysis found. That’s an unprecedented amount of self-dealing in federal politics. Even the wealthiest of candidates have refrained from tapping their businesses’ resources to such an extensive degree, either because their businesses are structured in a manner that doesn’t legally allow them to do it with flexibility, or because they’re leery of the allegations of pocket-padding that inevitably arise when politicians use their campaigns or committees to pay their businesses or families. Trump, on the other hand, appears to have structured his businesses in a way that lets the campaign use them without legal restriction. And he certainly doesn’t appear to feel any embarrassment about flouting political norms that typically compel candidates to distance themselves from their businesses during campaigns. Quite to the contrary, Trump — who in 2000 predicted “I could be the first presidential candidate to run and make money on it” — has used the campaign itself as a marketing platform to promote everything from the difficult-to-find Trump Steaks to his golf courses and a new Washington hotel. Trump’s tangle of businesses has raised concerns about the potential for conflicts of interest should he win the presidency, while the Trump-branded campaign has drawn mockery and allegations of pocket-padding from Trump’s critics. His Democratic rival Hillary Clinton in July accused Trump of “spending his meager campaign resources on … himself.” In a statement, the Trump campaign said: "Mr. Trump has largely self-funded his campaign and continues to make significant contributions which far exceed the amounts the campaign is required to pay. The campaign has used known quantities as far as event space, air travel and accommodations, and has fulfilled all FEC requirements throughout the campaign.” The degree to which Trump or his corporations may be benefiting from his campaign is unclear, partly because the financial and legal structures of his businesses — and their relationships with his campaign — remain opaque. Trump has stubbornly refused to release his taxes, which could shed light on the issue. Additionally, the campaign’s payments to Trump-owned businesses are dwarfed by the $54 million Trump has pumped into his campaign. In fact, reports filed with the Federal Election Commission show that more than $500,000 in services such as rent, software and staff from Trump-owned businesses were donated to the campaign — including some of the salary paid to Trump’s head of security Keith Schiller, who travels everywhere with the candidate. In those situations, Trump likely either wrote off the cost of services rendered by his companies to his campaign, or he personally reimbursed the campaign for the costs of the services. While federal election law prohibits corporations from donating cash, goods or services to campaigns, the regulations do include an exception — and it’s the one that election law experts interviewed for this story say Trump is most likely using. It allows people who own certain types of companies — including LLCs or sole proprietorships — to donate from those entities to campaigns and have those donations be considered to have come from the person. It’s unclear precisely how Trump’s various businesses are structured, but he likely would have to be the sole owner of the ones that are donating services to the campaign in order for those donations to pass legal muster. “Most wealthy candidates separate their businesses from their campaign organizations, and that’s partly because their companies are either publicly owned or owned by multiple people,” said GOP election lawyer Jason Torchinsky. He represented Rudy Giuliani’s 2008 presidential campaign, which paid the former New York mayor’s companies for office space, security and legal consulting, but finished the campaign owing money to them. “It’s unique to have somebody who is independently wealthy and is able to so thoroughly integrate a privately held company into their campaign,” Torchinsky said of Trump. Regardless of how Trump’s corporate entities are structured, the campaign is legally required to charge them fair-market rates for goods or services received, even if Trump ultimately writes off the bills as donations. There have been allegations that the campaign failed to pay Trump’s companies fair-market value for some services, including for the Trump corporate staffer who helped write Melania Trump's convention speech (the campaign paid her $356.01 through Trump Tower Commercial LLC), and the corporate lawyer who penned threatening letters to a donor and PAC supporting Jeb Bush. Among the goods and services that Trump has paid his companies for are $34,500 for lodging and event staging at Trump National Doral golf course, $48,200 for room rental and catering from the Trump National Golf Club in Westchester, N.Y., and $142,000 to Trump Restaurants for rent, utilities, meals and office supplies. It paid more than $1 million to Trump Tower to rent office space for its main campaign headquarters. Trump Ice, his bottled water company, got $1,300, while his son Eric Trump's Virginia winery was paid almost $5,000 for catering and event space. The bulk of the spending, almost $6 million, went to a company called TAG Air for use of Trump’s private plane. The campaign has also paid $432,000 to Mar-a-Lago, Trump’s club in Palm Beach, Fla., for lodging, facility rental and catering. And Trump continues to simultaneously use and promote facilities he owns, even sometimes using misdirection to do so. One of Trump’s primary election victory speeches in March, held at Mar-a-Lago, was widely lampooned as an infomercial for Trump-branded steaks, water, magazines and wine. And last week, he lured the political press corp to his new Washington hotel by promising a revelation about his longstanding allegations that President Obama was born overseas, which he finally disavowed. Before getting to that, though, he took the opportunity to promote the hotel on Pennsylvania Avenue in the Old Post Office. Whatever the campaign paid to use the ballroom in the Old Post Office that day won’t be disclosed until next month’s FEC report. But back in January, the campaign spent $5,000 to rent space in the hotel. During a March tour of the hotel, Trump boasted to the press that the hotel would have “one of the biggest ballrooms in Washington, and by far the most luxurious ballroom." He also quipped that the completion of the hotel would mean he will wind up with a presence on Pennsylvania Avenue “one way or the other."
Hillary Clinton has secured another Bush administration endorsement. Donald P. Gregg, national security adviser to George H.W. Bush during his tenure as vice president, said he believes Clinton would be an "extremely good president." Story Continued Below "We now have a person at the top of the Republican ticket who I believe is dangerous, doesn't understand the complex world we live in, doesn't care to, and is without any moral or international philosophy," Gregg said in a statement. "I’ve met Hillary Clinton a number of times and followed her career in public service. I'm impressed with her knowledge and experience. She would make an extremely good president." Gregg, 88, served as Bush's national security adviser for six years and was part of the Reagan administration for eight years. He was ambassador to South Korea from 1989 to 1993. Bush is also voting for Clinton, according to Kathleen Hartington Kennedy Townsend, the former Maryland lieutenant governor and daughter of the late Robert F. Kennedy. Bush's national security adviser during his presidency, Brent Scowcroft, endorsed the former secretary of state as well, as have a number of other national security figures from both Bush administrations.
President Barack Obama on Thursday stressed the need for a "thoughtful" and "peaceful" resolution in Charlotte, in his first comments addressing three days of protests over the fatal police shooting of an African-American man. “The way we change the system requires to be able to reach out and engage the broader American community and that requires being peaceful, that requires being thoughtful about what are the specific reforms you're looking for,” Obama told ABC in an interview at the Smithsonian National Museum of African American History and Culture. Story Continued Below Obama emphasized that while some have resorted to violence in recent days, many more are responding to tragedies "the right way." “[The] overwhelming majority of people who have been concerned about police-community relations [are] doing it the right way,” he said. “Every once in a while you see folks doing it the wrong way.” The events following Monday's shooting have reignited a national debate about police and race relations. After two nights of protests grew increasingly violent in Charlotte, North Carolina Gov. Pat McCrory declared a state of emergency Wednesday in an attempt to ease tensions. Forty-four arrests were made in that span, with numerous injuries sustained by police officers and one protester fatally wounded in a civilian shooting. Obama also addressed the growing sentiment of injustice felt by many in the African-American community in the wake of another fatal shooting in Tulsa, Oklahoma. “I think it's important to separate out the pervasive sense of frustration among a lot of African Americans about shootings of people and the sense that justice is not always color blind,” he said. According to the White House President Obama has spoken over the phone to Charlotte mayor Jennifer Roberts as well as McCrory to express his condolences and offer any further federal assistance.
The recent connected bombings in New York and New Jersey and the stabbing attack at a mall in Minnesota have increased interest in how the presidential candidates would handle national security. Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump have spoken out since the attacks, which left dozens of people injured. John Cohen, a former counterterrorism coordinator for the Department of Homeland Security, said he believes that the terrorist attacks that have occurred during the campaign "have a significant impact" on voters. "When events occur like this ... you tend to have people become more fearful, and when people are more fearful, they tend to gravitate towards a candidate who appears to be more strong," said Cohen, who currently works as an ABC News consultant. Three of the latest national polls — all conducted before the attacks this weekend — had Clinton leading when respondents were asked whom they trust to handle the issue of terrorism.     In an ABC News/Washington Post poll released Sept. 11, Clinton led, 50 percent to Trump's 41 percent among all adults and 48 percent to Trump's 45 percent among likely voters when asked about who was more trusted to handle terrorism. A CBS/New York Times poll released Sept. 14 had Clinton doing "a better job handling terrorism and national security" according to 49 percent of respondents, compared with Trump's 45 percent. The split was closest in a Quinnipiac poll released Sept. 15, in which respondents were asked who they thought would do a better job keeping the country safe from terrorism, "regardless of how you intend to vote." In that poll, Clinton got 49 percent to Trump's 47 percent. "Traditionally, it's been the Republican Party who has projected strength and awareness in the area of law enforcement and homeland security, but today that's kind of flipped because, despite his rhetoric, there are a number of national security experts who have raised concerns about the level of understanding that Donald Trump has as it relates to terrorism and national security threats," Cohen said.   Current events are factoring into the political campaigns, with the candidates scheduling speeches about national security in the wake of attacks. But Cohen said political rhetoric could also be affecting and even motivating the attacks themselves. He said Trump's rhetoric and calls to bar foreign Muslims from entering the United States "may even serve to further along those who are becoming inspired to act on [ISIS'] behalf." James Campbell, a professor of political science at the University at Buffalo in New York who has written a book about political polarization, told ABC News that he believes the attacks translate to a potential advantage for Trump. "I have to think that terrorist events in this country help Trump and hurt Clinton. For these events to be occurring with the frequency they do may be read by many as a failure of the current administration and particularly its foreign policy team to effectively deal with the problem," he said. "It may also suggest that we need a tougher approach to dealing with terrorism, an approach associated with Trump. When suspects are identified who have Muslim-sounding names, then that may further fuel support for tougher immigration standards and scrutiny," Campbell added.
(CNN)Michelle Obama on Tuesday joked about the plagiarism controversy that engulfed Melania Trump during the Republican National Convention, delivering a dry retort when "The Late Show" host Stephen Colbert asked the first lady if she was sympathetic to the plight of a fellow political spouse. "Melania Trump was criticized for using what turned out to be a portion of your speech -- but do you have any sympathy? Because there are people around her creating things, and you know, I have sympathy for her. Do you understand how that might be sympathetic, for what happened to her?" the CBS host asked. "Yeah, that was tough," Obama deadpanned, prompting laughs from the audience. Colbert also asked the first lady if she was sympathetic to political spouses who are required to stand behind partners whose political beliefs are antithetical to their own -- a premise Obama flatly rejected. "Do you have any sympathy for the people who have to go there and stand by the person running for president?" "No," Obama replied. "Because if -- you know, you have to be, you know, in it. If you're in it, and if you don't agree, you should have agreed before they ran. Bottom line is, if you didn't agree with what Barack was saying, I would not support his run. So I stand there proudly, and I hope they are, too, standing with their spouses proudly. So no, no sympathy." During her appearance on the show, Obama also joked around with Colbert, climbing into a blanket fort with the host (a recurring segment on the show) to discuss serious issues, like investment in education for young girls around the world, and less serious ones -- such as when a conversation about healthy eating turned into a joke about how eating too many carrots can turn someone orange. "And if you turn really orange, you have to start saying crazy things and run for president," Colbert cracked. 
Following the shooting death of an unarmed black man by a police officer in Tulsa, Oklahoma, last Friday, Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton spoke out today against police violence. “This horrible shooting again. How many times do we have to see this in our country? In Tulsa, an unarmed man with his hands in the air,” Clinton said, calling into "The Steve Harvey Morning Show." Forty-year-old Terence Crutcher was fatally shot by a white police officer after his SUV stalled on the road. Video of the incident released after the shooting appears to show Crutcher with his hands raised in the air.     Calling the act “unbearable” and saying officer-involved shootings “need to be intolerable,” Clinton appealed to a white audience to address unconscious discrimination. "Maybe I can, by speaking directly to white people, say look, this is not who we are. We have got to do everything possible to improve policing, to go right at implicit bias," she said.  Another unarmed Black man was shot in a police incident. This should be intolerable. We have so much work to do. #TerenceCrutcher -H  Clinton’s policy proposal for criminal justice reform includes developing national standards on police officers’ use of force, supporting legislation to end racial profiling, and committing $1 billion in funding to training programs and research to “tackle” implicit bias. ABC News’ Julia Jacobo and Josh Haskell contributed to this report.
The latest shootings by police of black men show that little has been done to reduce the violence at the hands of law enforcement, Black Lives Matter activist DeRay McKesson said on Wednesday, as he expressed frustration over the frequency of such incidents. "Police kill almost three people everyday," McKesson told POLITICO, as unrest simmers over the two deaths of black men by police over the past week. "We have to hold the police accountable for their actions." Story Continued Below Protests shook the city of Charlotte, North Carolina, overnight and into the early morning after a black man was shot dead by police Tuesday night. The demonstrations, which at times turned violent, spilled over into the apartment complex where Keith Lamont Scott was killed. Charlotte police maintain that Scott stepped out of his vehicle with a gun when officers arrived at the scene, but his family disputes this claim, saying he was sitting in his car reading a book. The Charlotte Police Department could not be immediately reached for comment. The shooting comes as racial tensions were already high across the country after police shot dead an unarmed black man in Tulsa, Oklahoma last week. Terence Crutcher's family says officer Betty Shelby inappropriately fired on him after their SUV broke down, while her lawyer contends that Crutcher was acting suspiciously and appeared to be reaching inside the vehicle for a gun. While the shootings have again grabbed national headlines – and attention from the two presidential candidates – McKesson said police need to start being held accountable for the violence, and that he hopes there are consequences for the officers in the most recent fatal shootings. "[I'm] looking forward to how this plays out in terms of criminal charges,” said McKesson, who was an early leader of the Black Lives Matter movement and co-founded Campaign Zero, the first effort to organize activists around a set of policies to stop police violence. McKesson said while the federal government has a role to play in reforming police behavior, the onus is really on local departments to change their ways. "What's he to say?" he said when asked if President Barack Obama is doing enough to combat police violence, adding "The Department of Justice could reduce funding to local police departments, and they haven't really done that aggressively.” In the meantime, McKesson said he would continue trying to draw attention to the issue. Campaign Zero on Wednesday launched a new project at useofforceproject.org, which takes a look at 91 of 100 police departments in the biggest cities in the United States. The report examines the use of force policies of the departments and concludes whether there are basic protections against police violence in the policies. "Many police departments fail to establish common sense restrictions on police use of force — including deadly force — that would actually benefit the communities they are supposed to protect and serve," the report states. "According to our findings, fundamentally changing use of force policies can dramatically reduce the number of people killed by police in America." "The police has a shadow system that almost guarantees they won't be held accountable," McKesson said, adding that these policies, and the lack of provisions to safeguard against police violence make it extremely difficult to reduce these incidents from recurring.
For Donald Trump, his repeated questioning of the African-American community about what little they had to lose by supporting his candidacy has "resonated because it is true," the Republican nominee declared Wednesday. Addressing a gathering of pastors in Cleveland, Trump discussed his strategy to fix crime and other issues in the "inner cities." Story Continued Below "And I talked about jobs. The jobs are just so bad. And I said it three or four five times. Then one day I said, what do you have to lose? I mean what do you have to lose? I'm going to fix it. What do you have to lose?" Trump said. "And somehow that resonated." "Some people didn't like it. But I said, what difference does it make? I mean, it's true," he said, to laughter. "What do you have to lose? And, it resonated and it has been amazing how it has resonated because it is true."
There were a couple of not-so-very-subtle signals here inside of Hofstra University that Donald Trump lost Monday night’s highly-anticipated debate against Hillary Clinton, and badly. The first was the audible sound of groaning by some of his supporters (picked up by my attentive colleague Steve Shepard) inside the debate hall as Trump meandered self-defensively through a succession of answers against a very focused, very energized and very well-rehearsed Hillary Clinton. Story Continued Below Another tell: After the 90-minute sparring match finished, Clinton’s team practically bounded into the spin room – more in glassy-eyed disbelief than visible elation that things had gone so much better than expected. The GOP nominee’s people, by contrast, dribbled into the media pen like surly seventh-graders headed for homeroom the day before summer vacation. “F—k, let’s do this,” a prominent Trump surrogate said before diving into a scrum. Trump and his new-ish messaging team have labored mightily to turn the avatar of populist rage into a reasonable facsimile of someone who you could see sitting in the Oval Office. But this best-laid plan unraveled on Monday – amid Clinton’s steely assault and the dignified interrogation of NBC’s Lester Holt, who struck a deft balance between facilitator, BS detector and lion tamer. Within minutes of the opening bell, Clinton’s attacks forced domesticated Donald to go feral – he bellowed, interrupted her repeatedly, grunted, and toward the bedraggled end, became muted and pouty. “It was bizarre,” said Barack Obama’s campaign manager David Plouffe, who, like many Clinton allies, seemed visibly relieved. “He was clearly rattled, and clearly focused on defending himself, which I’m told narcissists are prone to do, and he clearly faded at the end. It’s not like she’s going to jump out to a 10-point lead, but this was good.” Whether or not this reverses Trump’s momentum, or reestablishes Clinton's control of the race is an open question. Who won is not. Here are five takeaways. Trump was wimpy when defensive. He is supposed to be the big meanie but it was Clinton who hit him where it hurt most. It doesn’t take a Jung (or even Dr. Phil after a couple of Bud Lights) to figure out that the GOP nominee – who boasts like a barfly – just might be over-compensating. Hence, Clinton, who started the debate a little tentatively, quickly launched into a carefully planned program of Freudian mind-games, contrasting her own middle-class businessman dad (who had his own issues) with Trump’s imperious, larger-than-life father Fred who launched his son’s business career but also was said to be extremely tough on him. First she started in with a paean to her father’s running a small printing business in Chicago (This might be the first time a candidate has described, in detail, the silk-screen squeegee process on a debate stage) – then she pivoted to mocking supposedly self-made Trump’s start in the real estate business. “You know, Donald was very fortunate in his life and that's all to his benefit. He started his business with $14 million, borrowed from his father,” she said icily. “My father gave me a very small loan in 1975 and I built it into a company that's worth many, many billions of dollars,” he responded weakly – and so it went on a range of topics. Whether it was because Clinton was so well prepped, and Trump was so breezily unprepared – or had a simple case of opening night jitters – the bully-boy nominee abandoned his most effective mode of debate combat, answering an attack with a harsher one. She went right for Trump’s ego – questioning his questionable $11 billion net worth, his boastful record on job creation and picking apart his tough talk on fighting ISIS. In 2007, preparing for a primary race she’d eventually lose, Clinton told me that the key to presidential political campaigns was understanding that the most effective attacks weren’t about exploiting someone’s weaknesses but challenging an opponent’s perceived strengths. When confronted with that assault, Trump wilted and offered a series of meandering answers that had his Republicans wincing. “It was a draw,” former Massachusetts Sen. Scott Brown said. “But he was on the defensive far too much. That’s a direct result of his inexperience.” What about the Clinton Foundation? The former secretary’s debate team (including longtime aide Phillippe Reines, who snapped a pre-debate photo in a Trump circled-finger pose) expected him to savage her on the various questions raised about her family’s foundation. They were worried about it. While he hammered her ever-so-briefly on emails, he was so engaged in self-justification, he flat-out forgot to pursue an attack that could have made the night a lot less lousy. His “30 years” attack worked – and he’ll use it again. Trump may have lost the first debate, but he’s proven to be a fast learner, and is likely to come back stronger in early October for the second debate, a town hall style affair, in St. Louis. And there were a few gold nuggets strewn in the wreckage of Hofstra – the most valuable an assault (demonstrable and fact-checker-friendly) on Clinton’s effectiveness in 25-plus years of public life. The been-there-not-done-that argument was particularly useful when coupled with his usual slams on Bill Clinton’s passage of the increasingly unpopular NAFTA agreement from the 1990s and Hillary Clinton’s election-year flip-flop from TPP booster to opponent. “When she started talking about this, it was really very recently,” Trump said of her opposition to the trade deal. “She's been doing this for 30 years. And why hasn't she made the agreements better? The NAFTA agreement is defective. Just because of the tax and many other reasons, but just because of the fact.” When Clinton claimed that she planned to “really work to get new jobs and to get exports that helped to create more new jobs.” He scoffed, and shot back, “But you haven't done it in 30 years or 26 years.” Clinton effectively attacked his business career. Trump’s attempt to head off debate-night questions about his five-year campaign promoting the birther slander against Barack Obama was a humbling face-plant. His attempt to pin the origin of the charge against Clinton associate Sid Blumenthal was semi-effective with the political press, but it withered under the insistent interrogation of an African-American moderator determined to extract an apology or reasonable explanation. Trump offered neither – and suggested Obama should actually be grateful he pursued the canard because it’s now been resoundingly put to rest. Politically, his tortured explanation helps energize black voters – who already oppose him in historic numbers. But later in the debate, Clinton plucked the strains of what could be a genuine crossover hit this fall among ever-elusive white working-class voters and independents: Trump’s failure to turn over his tax returns. Clinton went there with a vengeance – engaging in a little Trump-esque fact-free speculation about the motives of the billionaire developer-turned-reality TV star. “So you've got to ask yourself, why won't he release his tax returns?” Clinton mused, with relish. “And I think there may be a couple of reasons. First, maybe he's not as rich as he says he is. Second, maybe he's not as charitable as he claims to be. Third, we don't know all of his business dealings... Or maybe he doesn't want the American people, all of you watching tonight, to know that he's paid nothing in federal taxes, because the only years that anybody's ever seen were a couple of years when he had to turn them over to state authorities when he was trying to get a casino license, and they showed he didn't pay any federal income tax.” Trump’s answer did more harm than good: “That makes me smart,” he said – referring to his business, not his political, acumen. Her most effective attack – and his worst answer. If the GOP nominee needed any more proof that preparation trumps bombast in a general election debate, he got it when Clinton launched a merciless attack on his habit of stiffing contractors who have labored on his construction projects over the years. Again, Clinton brought it back to her father, describing how bad he would have felt if one of his clients had accepted his work without paying his bill. "I’ve met dishwashers, painters, architects, marble installers, drapery installers, who you refused to pay when they finished the work you asked them to do,” Clinton said, delivering a carefully scripted attack. “We have an architect in the audience who designed one of your clubhouses at one of your golf courses. It's a beautiful facility. It immediately was put to use. And you wouldn't pay what the man needed to be paid, what he was charging you to do.” This is a particular dangerous issue for a candidate whose entire campaign is rooted in fighting for the working class -- and his flippant response, yet again, gave comfort to his enemies. “Maybe he didn't do a good job and I was unsatisfied with his work,” Trump quipped.
Explore topics and guests discussed in this episode: Kevin Madden GOP MK Hamm Trump CNN America.
(CNN)Debate stages have long doubled as presidential burial grounds. With a few sharp lines, an acid quip, or just a well-timed nod, the candidates can do more to unravel their opponents than in a hundred speeches or television commercials. Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton have made no secret of their disdain for each another. But on Monday night, there will be no safety net and nowhere to hide -- just two people on stage and, as some analysts believe, 100 million more watching their every move. Clinton, Trump poised for historic debate battle Here are some of the most devastating lines in presidential debate history -- will Trump or Clinton need to be added to this list? Reagan rolls Carter The incumbent President Jimmy Carter wanted to talk about Ronald Reagan's work as governor of California. But Reagan had heard enough -- and bet that voters felt the same way. As Carter finished a long point with a comment on his opponent's "typical" positions, Reagan stepped in with four words: "There you go again." Obama mocks Mitt Mitt Romney had been hammering President Barack Obama for having downsized parts of the armed forces. But Obama turned it around on his 2012 challenger, mocking and painting him as out of touch with modern foreign policy questions. When Romney trounced Obama On the question of the smaller number of Naval ships, Obama said: "Well, Governor, we also have fewer horses and bayonets, because the nature of our military's changed. We have these things called aircraft carriers, where planes land on them. We have these ships that go underwater, nuclear submarines." A killer joke In 1984, Reagan sent Republicans into a panic with a garbled opening debate performance against Walter Mondale. 8 unforgettable presidential debate blunders The Baltimore Sun's Henry Trewhitt asked if the President's age would keep him from being able to do the job. Here is Reagan's cheeky response, which Mondale would later describe as having effectively ended the race: "Not at all. And, Mr. Trewhitt, I want you to know also I will not make age an issue of this campaign. I am not going to exploit for political purposes my opponent's youth and inexperience." Lloyd Bentsen knew Jack Kennedy, then he owned Dan Quayle You can see it about 15 seconds into the clip. Vice presidential candidate Sen. Lloyd Bentsen's brow shoots up as Dan Quayle, George H.W. Bush's 1988 running mate, answers a question about his relative inexperience, saying, "I have as much experience in the Congress as Jack Kennedy did when he sought the presidency." Bentsen fired back: "Senator, I served with Jack Kennedy. I knew Jack Kennedy. Jack Kennedy was a friend of mine. Senator, you're no Jack Kennedy." Mondale buries the "hatchet man" Before he was a warmly remembered war hero who lost his own presidential race in a 1996 landslide to Bill Clinton, Bob Dole had a different kind of notoriety. During a 1976 vice presidential debate with Walter Mondale, he showed why. Asked if Watergate, and then President Gerald Ford's pardon of Richard Nixon, were off-limits, Dole launched into a long rant essentially blaming "Democrat wars" for killing millions of Americans. Mondale hit back with one line: "I think Sen. Dole has richly earned his reputation as a hatchet man tonight." Perot sets himself apart With his Texas twang, Ross Perot made a serious dent in the 1992 presidential race. Here he underlines why his lack of experience in government was going to be a political asset: "I don't have any experience in running up a $4 trillion debt. I don't have any experience in gridlock government, where nobody takes responsibility for anything and everybody blames everybody else. I don't have any experience in creating the worst public school system in the industrialized world, the most violent crime-ridden society in the industrialized world. But I do have a lot of experience in getting things done." Lincoln prints and publishes his debate zingers Though the words were spoken during one of their celebrated 1858 Senate debates, Abraham Lincoln was so pleased with his performance against Stephen A. Douglas, he took the transcripts (which he edited, liberally, on his own) and published them in a book before their 1860 presidential rematch. In arguing that Douglas was using a flimsy principle as a bogus pretext for spreading slavery nationwide, Lincoln mockingly asked what remained of the substance of his rival's position: "Has it not got down as thin as the homeopathic soup that was made by boiling the shadow of a pigeon that had starved to death?" Gore questions (the first) Bush's resume Al Gore was running for vice president in 1992, but that didn't mean he wasn't aiming high. Here is the shot he took at George H.W. Bush, who had sought to attach his record to that of his former boss Reagan, during a three-way debate with Dan Quayle and Adm. James Stockdale: "George Bush taking credit for the Berlin Wall coming down is like the rooster taking credit for the sunrise." Bush shakes off Gore Sometimes, words are unnecessary. At 11:58 in this clip, early on in his debate with Al Gore, George W. Bush responds to the vice president's ill-timed stroll and apparent attempt to intimidate him with a simple -- but devastating -- silent shake of his head. 
Donald Trump said Wednesday he decided to finally address his "birther" controversy "to get on with the campaign" and discuss issues like the economy and the threat of terrorism. Speaking to Ohio's ABC6, the Republican nominee said, "I just wanted to get on with, I wanted to get on with the campaign. A lot of people were asking me questions. We want to talk about jobs. We want to talk about the military. We want to talk about ISIS and get rid of ISIS. We want to talk about bringing jobs back to this area because you've been decimated so we just wanted to get back on the subject of jobs, military, taking care of our vets, etc." Story Continued Below The Republican nominee had been pressed to explain why he refused to acknowledge President Barack Obama's birthplace as the United States -- a fact he questioned for years prior to becoming a presidential candidate. Trump conceded during an announcement last Friday that “President Barack Obama was born in the United States, period." "Now we all want to get back to making America strong and great again,” Trump added.
President Obama today vetoed a bill that would allow survivors of the 9/11 attacks, along with victims' families, to sue the government of Saudi Arabia. “I am returning herewith without my approval S. 2040, the ‘Justice Against Sponsors of Terrorism Act’ (JASTA), which would, among other things, remove sovereign immunity in U.S. courts from foreign governments that are not designated state sponsors of terrorism,” Obama notes in the veto message. “I have deep sympathy for the families of the victims of the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001 (9/11), who have suffered grievously. I also have a deep appreciation of these families' desire to pursue justice and am strongly committed to assisting them in their efforts.” The veto comes at the end of a 10-day constitutional window after Congress' overwhelming approval of the legislation, setting up a fight that's likely to hand the outgoing president his first veto override. Suffering his first veto override so late in his second term would be significant, especially considering the president's high approval ratings relative to the rest of his presidency. By comparison, former President George W. Bush was overridden twice during his two terms in office and only in his final two years when his approval rating had plummeted. The last president to make it through a full presidency without a veto override is Lyndon B. Johnson.       If passed into law, the legislation would allow victims of terrorism to sue foreign governments for damages. Obama and the White House have argued that language in the bill could potentially compromise the principle of “sovereign immunity,” and put the U.S. government and entities at risk of being sued by other countries. "Overriding the president's veto means that this country will start pursuing a less forceful approach in dealing with state sponsors of terrorism and potentially opens up U.S. service members and diplomats and even companies to spurious lawsuits in kangaroo courts around the world," White House press secretary Josh Earnest explained to reporters today. "Our concern extends not just to the impact this would have on our relationship with Saudi Arabia, but rather the impact that this could have on the United States' relationship with countries around the world." But the showdown has also put the Obama administration at odds politically with the wishes of countless 9/11 families who argue they haven't had their day in court against all parties responsible for the terror attacks. Saudi Arabia has itself spoken critically of and personally lobbied against the effort, maintaining it had no role in assisting the 9/11 terrorists. The House and Senate each passed the measure by unanimous consent. A veto override requires a two-thirds vote by each chamber, and the White House says it has been working diligently behind the scenes to rally enough Democrats to block the override effort. Obama's former Secretary of State, Hillary Clinton, has also indicated she would sign the legislation into law if she wins the presidential election.
(CNN)Donald Trump reacted to the turmoil in Charlotte this week by lamenting "a lack of spirit between the white and the black," adding that "it's very divided, our country, and it's getting worse, so I'm not overly surprised to see it." In an interview on "Fox and Friends" Thursday morning, Trump pointed to the violent protests over the fatal police shooting of an African-American man in Charlotte as an example of frayed relationships between law enforcement and minority communities across the country. "It just seems that there's a lack of spirit between the white and the black. I mean, it's a terrible thing that we're witnessing," he said. "You are seeing it, I'm seeing it, and you look at what went on last night in Charlotte, a great place, and you just see it. There's somewhat -- and I see it even going out. There's such a lack of spirit. There's a lack of something, something that's going on that's bad, and what's going on between police and others is getting worse." Trump had also discussed the tension between police and the communities they serve in a pre-taped town hall that was set to air on Fox News Wednesday night, but which was preempted by coverage of the Charlotte protests. During the town hall, Trump proposed expanding the use of the controversial "stop-and-frisk" program by police. "I think you have to," the Republican nominee said at the town hall. "We did it in New York, it worked incredibly well and you have to be proactive and, you know, you really help people sort of change their mind automatically." Trump elaborated on his call for "stop-and-frisk" in the interview on "Fox and Friends" Thursday morning, saying he was only referring to expanding its use to Chicago, where he said gun violence was particularly severe. "(Former NYPD Commissioner) Ray Kelly did a great job, and New York was not in a Chicago situation, but it was really in trouble," Trump said. "But stop-and-frisk worked. We had tremendous shootings, numbers of shootings. Now Chicago is out of control. I was really referring to Chicago stop-and-frisk. They asked me about Chicago." Under stop and frisk, police stop people on the street who they deem suspicious and then search them on the spot for guns and drugs, among other things. New York City's stop-and-frisk program was mired in controversy, leading to numerous complaints that the practice led to racial profiling. A federal judge ruled in 2013 that the program was unconstitutional because it unlawfully targeted blacks and Latinos, although stop and frisk was not banned. Trump also expressed doubts about the ability of cities like Charlotte to build trust in divided communities. "If you look at Dallas, there was a dialogue," Trump said, referencing the murder of five Dallas police officers by a sniper over the summer after videos showing two African-American men shot by police in Louisiana and Minnesota spurred protests and debate over police use of force across the country. "They prided themselves on dialogue, and they were constantly talking and meeting and having community groups. And that was a pretty tough situation, to put it mildly." 
(CNN)As Charlotte becomes the latest city to erupt in racial tension, Massachusetts' highest court ruled this week that just because a black suspect flees police, it does not necessarily signify guilt. The Supreme Judicial Court held unanimously that a black male in Boston, when approached by the police, "might just as easily be motivated by the desire to avoid the recurring indignity of being racially profiled as by the desire to hide criminal activity." The court pointed to statistics in a recent Boston Police Department report that revealed that "black men in the City of Boston were more likely to be targeted for police-civilian encounters such as stops, frisks, searches, observations and interrogations." The case at issue concerned Jimmy Warren, who was stopped in December 2011 by a Boston police officer responding to a break in that had occurred in the neighborhood. Responding police officer Christopher R. Carr saw Warren and a friend and called out, "Hey fellas." Warren turned and ran up a hill into a park and Carr observed him clutching the right side of his pants. Carr lost sight of Warren, but eventually caught up with him in the backyard of a house. Carr drew his weapon and yelled for him to get down. After a struggle, Carr arrested Warren and found no gun on his person. Minutes after the arrest police recovered a Walther .22 caliber firearm in the front yard. Warren told the officer that he did not have a license to carry a firearm and he was later charged with unlawful possession. Nelson P. Lovins, brought the case to the state's high court after Warren lost below. Lovins argued that police did not have the reasonable suspicion to issue a stop, and the gun evidence had to be suppressed. He argued that the police pursued his client with the intent of questioning him, but they lacked the basis to do so. "My client was never charged with a break in -- only with illegal possession of a gun, " Lovins said in an interview. The court ruled in Warren's favor, noting that a stop has to be grounded in an officers' "reasonable suspicion" that the person was involved with a crime. That suspicion, the court said, had to be grounded in "specific, articulable facts." "We are not persuaded that the information available to the police at the time of the seizure was sufficiently specific to establish reasonable suspicion that the defendant was connected to the breaking and entering under investigation," the court held, then walking through all of the factors the police had considered including the description of the suspects, the proximity to the crime, and the fact that Warren had run. On the last factor, the court pointed out a "cautionary note" pointing to statistics specific to Boston. The court warned that a reasonable suspicion calculus "cannot be divorced from the finding in a recent Boston Police Department report documenting a pattern of racial profiling" of black males in the city. The court said it did not eliminate flight as a factor for the reasonable suspicion analysis whenever a black male is the subject of an investigatory stop, but in those circumstances "flight is not necessarily probative of a suspect's state of mind or consciousness of guilt." "Rather, the finding that black males in Boston are disproportionately and repeatedly targeted" the Court said, "suggests a reason for flight totally unrelated to consciousness of guilt." Lovins hopes that this case will influence trial judges down the road that just because a black man is fleeing that doesn't necessarily mean he is guilty. "We've demonstrated that there are other reasons for flight, certainly in the case of black males who have been targeted for stops and searches disproportionally," he said. A spokesperson for the Boston Police Department issued a statement saying the court's decision was "very troubling." "For it to consider studies that were never introduced into evidence or offered into the record is concerning," the statement said, "At the very least the court should have heard from experts who compiled and analyzed the data." Matthew Segal, the legal director of the ACLU of Massachusetts, says that the police and prosecutors invited the data into the discussions because they are the ones who asserted that flight was automatically suspicious. The ACLU used the same statistics from the Boston Police Department to conclude that black people and communities in Boston were not being treated the same as white people in white communities. "This is a potentially huge decision," said Segal. "The Black Lives Matter movement can change the law in this country, if more courts follow the lead of the Supreme Judicial Court and look at the reasonableness standard from the perspective of the civilian. " 
Washington (CNN)A group of former national security officials and experts are calling on Donald Trump to disclose his overseas business dealings, questioning whether the Republican nominee has conflicts of interest with US foreign policy. More than 50 past officials signed the letter released Monday, a mix of Democratic and Republican national security leaders. The letter notes that Trump's business dealings overseas could pose "unprecedented" and "significant conflicts of interest" if he guided US foreign policy. It demands Trump disclose in full what his foreign business interests are, and to promise to divest himself of them if he wins in November. Global leaders meet at UN "Our next commander-in-chief will inherit complex national security threats and complicated relationships with allies and adversaries alike," the officials wrote. "But our policies must be motivated exclusively by what is in America's best interest, not by the financial interests of our president. The onus is on Donald Trump to assure voters that this will be the case by disclosing the nature of his overseas relationships and committing to divest such assets." Signatories include Hillary Clinton supporters like retired Gen. John Allen and former Defense Undersecretary for Policy Michele Flournoy. Also signing were a number of former George W. Bush administration officials, including former Homeland Security Secretary Michael Chertoff, former Deputy Defense Secretary Paul Wolfowitz, former national security adviser Robert Blackwill, former Deputy Director of National Intelligence for Analysis Thomas Fingar and former acting CIA Director John E. McLaughlin. The letter shares some overlap with a missive from a group of 50 GOP national security officials who last month wrote a letter opposing the Republican candidate. 50 GOP national security officials oppose Trump Trump has refused to release his tax returns, saying they are under audit, and has given limited information about his businesses to the public. He has said he will separate himself from the business if he became president, leaving it in charge of his children. But experts tell CNN putting his children in charge would not do enough to minimize potential conflicts of interest. Trump has more than a dozen properties all over the world. The letter was first reported by The New York Times. The Trump campaign did not immediately respond to a request for comment. 
Last October, Hillary Clinton and her top aides were debating one of those seemingly trivial yet politically consequential decisions that often bedevil a Me Generation candidate in the YouTube era. Should Clinton, at times cautious to the point of rigidity, sing a boozy ballad with her Saturday Night Live impersonator Kate McKinnon at the end of her turn as “Val the Bartender?” Story Continued Below The internal debate ebbed back and forth -- the candidate herself was ambivalent and some aides thought it would make her look silly. Quietly, they reached out to Philippe Reines, a former Senate and State Department aide who hadn’t been invited to work on the 2016 campaign, yet had always helped to manage her big-stage moments in the past. Reines urged her to do it. He flew with Clinton in a private jet to New York, negotiated some details of her appearance with the writers at NBC, and stood backstage while she was warbling “Lean on Me” to provide moral support, according to two people familiar with the situation. The selection of the colorful, combative, cloak-and-dagger, defiantly wise-ass Reines as Donald Trump’s stand-in during debate prep sessions, first reported by the New York Times on Saturday, came as a surprise to many outsiders. The idea: Clinton’s in-house Trump to be someone with no vested interest in pulling a punch -- like SNL alum Al Franken, the Minnesota senator; or financier Robert Wolf, who lobbied for the gig. But it was no shock to the people who know the candidate or the 46-year-old Reines, who lives a bachelor’s life in Washington with two doted-upon cats named after Saddam Hussein’s sons, Uday and Qusay. Clinton, facing what could be the biggest night of her political life on Monday when she squares off against Trump in the first presidential debate of 2016, made an intuitive, even predictable choice, turning to a member of the tiny inner circle she has often relied on in times of maximum stress. The fact that she would tap a trusted defender to portray her most savage enemy says a lot about Clinton’s management style, and her circle-the-wagons psyche even during times when other politicians might reach outside for help. There’s staff, and then there’s the palace guard – and Reines, despite an up-and-down career with Clinton, is practically Jaime Lannister. “The debate prep team is made up of people who are really comfortable with her and she's comfortable with them,” said Clinton’s 2008 campaign manager Patti Solis Doyle, who began her career as young member of Clinton’s Hillaryland posse in the East Wing in the 1990s. “Everybody’s always saying Hillary needs to project her authentic self, but Philippe is one of the only ones who knows what that is, and knows how to get her to go along with that,” said a person who knows both. “He’s the one who urges her to abandon the caution, to go for it. And she’ll listen to him, and that’s because she trusts him.” Clinton’s relaxed SNL appearance, self-deprecating but dignified spot, shows why. She flubbed the song but laughed her way through it – and It worked. That hasn’t always been the case for a 68-year-old pop culture staple who struggles to understand pop culture: Many on her staff still regret letting the boss do a deeply awkward version of the "nae nae" dance on the Ellen Show. Clinton also trusts Reines precisely because he shares her skepticism – bordering on hostility – toward most of the D.C. and national political press to whom he routinely refers as “idiots” or worse in private conversation. He’s famous for his flame-out emails to reporters over the years -- calling former POLITICO blogger and current BuzzFeed editor-in-chief Ben Smith a moron in a 2008 email, telling the late BuzzFeed correspondent Michael Hastings to f—k off in another, and challenging yours truly in 2009 to take a lie-detector test after it was suggested Reines was scheming to force Caroline Kennedy out of contention for Clinton’s vacated Senate seat in New York. Clinton aides expressed astonishment that the fake Trump’s identity hadn’t been ferreted out sooner – Reines has, according to one person with direct knowledge of his involvement, participated in as many as a half-dozen mock debates and more relaxed moot-court sessions, peppering the candidate with lines cribbed from Trump’s primary debates and personal attacks meant to keep the candidate off balance. “Nothing is really off-limits,” the person told POLITICO. “In some ways it’s easier for him to say these nasty things to her because she knows he has her best interests at heart.” His brushes with the media – and his flamethrower reputation with fellow staffers – left him largely on the sidelines in 2008 until he emerged, late in the primaries, as a travelling adviser and PR bodyguard for Chelsea Clinton – and, consequentially, as a late add to her debate-prep team. Reines’ relationship with Hillary Clinton is personally close, but has been professionally rocky from time to time; she has long told people she likes him “because he makes me laugh,” but has lectured him for picking public fights and nearly sacked him when he worked for her in the Senate for a variety of over-the-top transgressions, according to former Clinton staffers. Controversy followed him to Foggy Bottom, where he waged endless turf battles and was rapped over the knuckles in an inspector general’s report. And Clinton was none too happy when Reines, who has a weakness for too-clever-by-half schemes, handed her a Staples “Reset” button to deliver to dour Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov – only to be told the Cyrillic inscription was wrong. But Reines endeared himself in other ways, and exhibited skills that serve him in his role as debate stand-in. In 2007, Reines – then a member of Clinton’s Senate staff – oversaw an effort to discredit and defuse a pair of potentially damaging biographies of his boss. He obtained bootlegged pre-publication printouts of the tomes from various sources and distributed the contents to a team of researchers who scoured the texts for errors, inconsistencies and off-key passages he later trotted out in Clinton’s defense. “Is it possible to quote me yawning?” Reines said when asked to summarize the contents of an investigative biography penned by two New York Times scribes. She loved that one, and has rewarded him with loyalty, even when other called for his scalp. When Clinton accepted Barack Obama’s invitation to run the State Department in late 2008, Obama’s deputy chief of staff Jim Messina tried to block his appointment as a strategic adviser assigned to Clinton’s personal staff – and the new secretary overruled the decision and installed Reines as a central member of a management team that included longtime Clinton confidante Cheryl Mills, aide-de-camp Huma Abedin and Jake Sullivan, who is now her campaign policy chief. Prior to the Democratic convention in late July, Reines, who works at a consulting firm that specializes in defense and foreign policy, had been speaking with Clinton from time to time on messaging and press issues, but “not in a regular, systematic way,” according to one Clinton insider. Around the time of Clinton’s SNL appearance, Reines accompanied Clinton on a flight to a town hall in New Hampshire moderated by Reines’ friend, “Today” show co-host Savannah Guthrie – but he kept a low profile after that. Then, after the Democratic National Convention, Clinton’s staff began informally kicking around names for people to play Trump – a list that included Franken, along with entrepreneur and reality show host Mark Cuban. The sticking point with all of those people, sources told POLITICO, was the candidate’s comfort level. It’s not clear who came up with the idea of tapping him but Sullivan, Abedin and Karen Dunn, one of the lawyers overseeing debate prep sessions (and a Reines friend), backed the idea – and Clinton quickly approved. There was another consideration: Reines had a day job, but controlled his own hours, and the Trump role, above all, requires “someone who has lots and lots of free time,” according to one Brooklyn aide. It also required days of cramming, along with hours of YouTube-watching to replicate Trump’s distinctive speech patterns and habitual lines of attack. Yet there was one skill Reines didn’t have to study up on: New York attitude. “I was a good Bush for Gore because I am stupid but cocky,” said Paul Begala, a central player in Al Gore’s ill-fated 2000 debate prep effort. “Philippe is a good Trump for Hillary because he is clever but obnoxious.” Annie Karni and Rebecca Morin contributed.
Rudy Giuliani on Wednesday ripped into President Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton for a "dereliction of duty" in their efforts to combat terrorism, while calling the Bush administration's failure to come to grips with the threat before the Sept. 11 attacks "excusable." Writing in USA Today, the former New York City mayor and current Donald Trump surrogate accused Obama and Clinton of investing “too much time and energy into the narrative that there is no ongoing War on Terror.” Story Continued Below He argued that Obama and his former secretary of state had responded inadequately to the recent violence — including the planted bombs in New York and New Jersey — and underestimated the threat of terrorism to the country generally. “Obama and Clinton continue to ignore the reality that a worldwide terror campaign is being deliberately executed by the very people they refuse to define: radical Islamic terrorists,” Giuliani wrote. “Obama and Clinton's gut reaction is to tell the American people that we’re defeating the Islamic State terrorist group abroad while systematically downplaying connections between radical Islam and attackers in the United States and Europe.” While Clinton first urged officials to “let this investigation unfold” after hearing reports of an explosion in the Chelsea neighborhood of New York on Saturday, Trump emphatically declared it a bomb and then boasted when authorities later confirmed the planted explosive devices. (Clinton, however, also made reference to "bombings" in her initial statements.) Republicans have also repeatedly criticized Obama for arguing against using the term "radical Islamic terrorism" for the Islamic State and its sympathizers. Clinton previously refrained from repeating the term, but has since used the words "radical Islamism" to describe the threat in the wake of the mass shooting in a gay nightclub in Orlando, Fla., in June. Also faulting its withdrawal of troops from Iraq and blaming the move for the rise of the Islamic State, Giuliani argued that the Obama administration fails to “comprehend the threats before us today,” which he charged is a “clear dereliction of duty.” Giuliani had warmer words for Obama’s predecessor, however, suggesting that the Bush administration’s "failure to fully comprehend the threat before Sept. 11 is excusable."
Washington (CNN)Donald Trump on Monday reiterated his support for the controversial practice of racial profiling by police amid increasing threats to the homeland. "Our local police -- they know who a lot of these people are. They are afraid to do anything about it because they don't want to be accused of profiling," Trump said on Fox News on Monday. Trump pointed to how Israel used profiling and "done an unbelievable job." Trump did not say on what attributes he would encourage police to profile possible suspects, but It's illegal for police to subject US persons to disparate treatment based on their race or other protected status. "They see somebody that's suspicious, they will profile," Trump said. "Look what's going on: Do we really have a choice? We're trying to be so politically correct in our country, and this is only going to get worse." RELATED: Trump labels Clinton 'weak and ineffective' in wake of bombings Trump's campaign manager, Kellyanne Conway, disputed that Trump meant police should start "racial" profiling. "I mean if authorities are going to look the other way, then at least we have a presidential candidate who is telling the Americans who say, 'I'm are so tired of looking the other way' we don't have a vetting process, we don't have borders," she told CNN's Erin Burnett on "Outfront" Tuesday. "We have people so worried about political correctness that look at what this did the other night, people were injured." The man suspected in Saturday's bombings in New York and New Jersey was captured Monday after a manhunt and shootout. Ahmad Khan Rahami is suspected of bombings Saturday in New York City and Seaside Park, New Jersey, and is believed to be connected to pipe bombs found Sunday night in Elizabeth, New Jersey, sources told CNN. Republican Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell declined to comment on the issue of profiling Tuesday. But Trump's running mate, Indiana Gov. Mike Pence, defended Trump's comments. "I think it's all about common sense," Pence told MSNBC's Kelly O'Donnell. "Talking with law enforcement officers, they'll tell you that today they feel like they operate in an environment of political correctness, where they can't use common sense to be able to target resources and target their energies against individuals who would be the most likely potential threat to our families and to the safety of our communities." Trump 'bets' terror suspect not on a watch list Pence acknowledged the difficult balance between smart policing and respecting civil liberties, but cited Rahami as an example of how political correctness can hinder law enforcement. The FBI said Tuesday that Rahami's father was interviewed after a tip alleging that he called his son a terrorist, but the FBI never investigated Rahami or placed him on a FBI database of potential terrorists. "I don't know why that occurred but it smacks of the kind of political correctness and eggshells that law enforcement feels that they have to walk on in the environment that we're in today," Pence said. "Of course it can (go wrong and infringe upon people's rights), but we're talking about common sense profiling." CNN's Evan Perez, Manu Raju, Daniella Diaz and Naomi Lim contributed to this report.
Newark (CNN)Former Port Authority executives and New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie staffers planned to make the traffic from the September 2013 lane closures at the George Washington Bridge "as bad as possible," according to testimony heard in federal court Monday. David Wildstein, former Port Authority director of Interstate Capital Projects, testified that in June 2013, Bridget Kelly, Christie's former deputy chief of staff, was upset that their office had not secured the endorsement of the Democratic mayor of Fort Lee New Jersey, Mark Sokolich, for Christie's reelection campaign. Wildstein, who has previously pleaded guilty to one charge of conspiracy to commit fraud on federally funded property and one civil rights violation, told Kelly that shutting down access lanes to the George Washington Bridge to put some political pressure on Sokolich was an option, according to his testimony. Wildstein is testifying as part of his plea deal. Sokolich testified last week that being a "Democrat in a Democratic town" put him in an uncomfortable position vis-a-vis a Christie endorsement, and he eventually declined because he did not want to "alienate anyone." On August 13, 2013, and as CNN has previously reported, Wildstein received an email from Kelly saying: "Time for some traffic problems in Fort Lee." "Got it," Wildstein responded. A phone call with Kelly the same day established the lane closures would go forward, it was revealed in testimony Monday. "I did not question senior officials in the office of the governor," Wildstein said in court when asked if he questioned the decision. Wildstein became the de facto organizer of the eventual lane closures, and communicated every step of the way with Kelly and his then-boss, former Port Authority deputy executive director, Bill Baroni, according to his testimony. Wildstein and Kelly discussed and agreed that there would be no advance notice of the closures to Fort Lee officials or the public. They discussed how the Port Authority would respond to any inquiries, and agreed that all calls would be directed to Baroni's office and Baroni would not return the calls, testimony revealed. This "radio silence" policy was discussed with and approved by Baroni, Wildstein said. Wildstein testified that that lack of advance notice was to "maximize the impact on Fort Lee." Wildstein also recalled discussing the timing of the closures with Baroni and Kelly. Baroni asked when the first day of school in Fort Lee was, and when Wildstein told Baroni it was September 9, Baroni smiled and said, "Fantastic," according to Wildstein's testimony. Kelly agreed on the September 9 date. Wildstein testified that his initial plan was to shut down all three Fort Lee access lanes, but after discussing the matter with Port Authority engineers who feared this could cause "sideswipe crashes," Wildstein recommended to Baroni and Kelly that they shut down two lanes. On Friday, September 6, 2013, Wildstein informed several Port Authority staffers of the closures that were scheduled to begin on Monday, September 9. Bob Durando, Port Authority general manager of the George Washington Bridge expressed concern, telling Wildstein that the closures would cause a "mess." Wildstein told Durando the closures would be going forward, and to prepare accordingly. "I told him not to say anything to anybody," Wildstein testified. Wildstein told Durando to direct any inquiries he gets during the closures to Baroni's office. Wildstein then informed former Port Authority chief engineer, Peter Zipf, of the closures, and asked Zipf to organize a way to get "some numbers" on the traffic patterns. Wildstein also informed Cedrick Fulton, Port Authority director of Tunnels, Bridges and Terminals. Fulton asked if Port Authority executive director, Patrick Foye, was aware. Wildstein testified that he told Fulton "yes," but that this was a lie. All of these staffers were under the impression that the closures were part of a traffic study. On the day the closures began, Wildstein watched the traffic build up on screens inside a Port Authority administration building on the Fort Lee side of the George Washington Bridge. "I knew the plan that I had set into motion was working," Wildstein testified. A Port Authority lieutenant also drove Wildstein around Fort Lee so Wildstein could see the traffic on the ground. Wildstein testified that he called Kelly that morning to tell her that traffic was building up, and "she was pleased." Several calls and emails began coming in to Baroni and Wildstein from Fort Lee officials, including the mayor, Sokolich, but their plan of "radio silence" was put into effect and no messages were returned. Last week, Wildstein testified that Baroni's role at the bi-state agency was essentially to be a representative of Christie's administration and that their top priority was to represent Christie's office's interests. Wildstein said he created a phrase that he and Baroni often used, "the one constituent rule." This referred to the fact that Governor Christie's opinion or good favor was the only one that mattered when it came to Port Authority affairs. Wildstein and Baroni used the "one constituent rule" as a barometer by which decisions would be made. Kelly and Baroni face conspiracy and fraud charges in connection with Bridgegate. Their attorneys have previously said they will both testify in their own defenses. 
Washington (CNN)Boxing promoter Don King thrust himself back into the political scene Wednesday when he dropped the N-word at a Donald Trump minority outreach event. It's the latest step into the political fray for King, who has a long history of colorfully weighing in on politics on both sides of the aisle going back half a century. After serving nearly four years in prison for a manslaughter conviction in 1966 for killing an associate who owed him $600, King was later pardoned of the crime in 1983 by then-Ohio Gov. Jim Rhodes. The governor received letters of recommendation from several luminaries, including former presidential candidate Jesse Jackson, a Democrat, and then-Cleveland mayor (and future Ohio senator) George Voinovich, a Republican. In 1992, King invoked his Fifth Amendment rights and refused to answer questions before a Senate subcommittee investigating ties between boxing and organized crime. Here are a few other political highlights from King's career: 'Republicrat' At the June funeral for Muhammad Ali, with whom King at one point worked, he declared his non-partisan status. "I'm endorsing the people. I'm not a Republican or a Democrat, I'm a Republicrat, and I go with the will of the people," he told the New York Daily News. Hillary Clinton King previously praised Trump's Democratic presidential rival, Hillary Clinton, calling her "dynamic" at a 2014 fundraiser for Senate Minority Leader Harry Reid, a major Trump critic. "I have been a supporter of Secretary Clinton for a long time," King said at the event, which benefited the Nevada senator's re-election campaign. "She is a dynamic woman, and I am a fighter for woman's rights," he added. Barack Obama The Cleveland native supported President Barack Obama in both 2008 and 2012. At the time, he said white voters struggling to get behind a black candidate need to move past it. King said they should "ask God to help you pretend that Barack Obama is white," he told journalists. "I understand very well that after more than three centuries of being taught, conditioned and indoctrinated to hate the black man as your inferior, it is unrealistic to think that now you can just change to respect him," he wrote. "Try to think of your beloved country America and what's best for Miss Liberty," King added. "Then try not to think of Barack Obama as a black man but as an American fighting for what's best for your children and your country." Reince Priebus King, The New York Times reported, was supposed to address this summer's Republican National Convention, but several Republican National Committee officials, including chairman Reince Priebus, nixed the idea, citing the promoter's legal problems. King later said the party chairman removed him because he doesn't "like black people." "I'm not speaking because Reince Priebus is still thinking he don't like black people," King told reporters in July. "I have less than a damn about what Reince Priebus thinks, especially when he's so antiquated." Black Lives Matter King spoke on the tensions between black residents and law enforcement, saying the "root" of the problem gets lost in social media. "You can't use short-term slogans because people don't understand and they twist them around," he said on the floor of the Republican National Convention. "In our hashtag culture, we treat the effects, not the cause. You've got to get to the cause." Female voters "You got to understand what I'm trying to say to you is that the white woman -- and I put it in this kind of (words) so you understand what I'm saying -- the white woman and the slave, the people of color," King said Wednesday while campaigning for Trump. "When the system was created, they did not get heard. The first will be last and the last will be first." "The white woman did not have the rights, and she still don't have the rights," he added. "And people of color don't have their rights -- those are the 'left outs.'" "Donald Trump says no -- we (are) going back to inclusiveness," King added. "Everybody counts." On which political party is best for black voters "Martin Luther King says that both the Republican and the Democrat have a long history of using the black vote as a political football: Promise us everything, give us nothing," he told New York Magazine in 2004. George W. Bush "Oooh! I get a passion. I'm getting excited right now when you said that. George Walker Bush -- he's tough-minded but he's tender-hearted. He's trying to reclaim that glory of that American Dream for all Americans. He put African-Americans in top policy positions higher than any president. He took two people, black, and put them in charge of 300 million people for their security," he told New York Magazine. On Bush and terrorism "George Bush utilizes the big stick. Whatever means necessary. If he wasn't in that White House when we had that despicable attack of terrorism in New York, I shudder to think, I tremble at what would be happening. We would probably have to be doing this interview on the underground, secretly, for fear if we'd go to the street, the treachery that abounds would take alight," he said in New York Magazine. 
Wells Fargo's embattled CEO is resigning his position on the Federal Reserve's advisory council amid a scandal over millions of accounts allegedly opened by the bank without customers' permission. The San Francisco Fed said Thursday that John Stumpf is giving up his position as representative from the central bank's San Francisco region on the advisory council. The move was a "personal decision" by Stumpf, Wells Fargo spokeswoman Jennifer Dunn said. "His top priority is leading Wells Fargo." His resignation from the council, which meets four times a year with the Fed's board of governors to discuss economic and banking issues, was effective immediately. Members serve one-year terms starting in January. The announcement came two days after Stumpf faced bipartisan outrage from a Senate panel over the alleged misconduct, believed to have gone on at the second-largest U.S. bank for years. Some 5,300 employees were fired. Wells Fargo & Co., which is based in San Francisco, was fined $185 million by U.S. and California regulators earlier this month. In a feverish drive to meet sales targets, bank employees opened the unauthorized accounts, transferred customers' money into them, and signed people up for online banking, according to the regulators. Debit cards were issued and activated, as well as PINs created, without customers' knowledge. Stumpf told the Senate Banking Committee in his testimony Tuesday he was "deeply sorry" the bank failed to meet its responsibility to customers and didn't act sooner to stem the misconduct. He promised to assist affected customers. The bank says it has already refunded to customers $2.6 million in fees charged for products that were sold without authorization. Senators of both parties accused the bank of fraud and told Stumpf he was scapegoating legions of lower-level employees while senior executives kept their jobs and received hefty pay packages. Stumpf, a 34-year veteran of Wells Fargo and CEO since 2007, earned $19.3 million last year. Carrie Tolstedt, the former head of the retail banking business, announced in July that she would retire from the bank this year. She is expected to leave with as much as $125 million in salary, stock options and other compensation. The bank says it will end its sales quota system at year's end. While it varied by branch size and day of the week, a typical employee had to sell between 13 and 15 banking products a day — a new account, a mortgage, a retirement account, or even online banking. The targets were high even in small towns.
New York (CNN)There's one thing Donald Trump brings to the debate stage Monday night: unpredictability. The Republican nominee and his allies hope his unconventional style will be a huge asset when he squares off against Hillary Clinton -- a skilled debater in her own right. Clinton, Trump poised for historic debate battle But with 11 debates under his belt from the brutal Republican primary season, Trump has plenty of go-to moves when it comes to debating. Here's what we've learned from Trump's primary debate performances and what they could tell us to expect Monday night: Face-to-face insults Trump's affinity for insults and name-calling quickly became a staple of his presidential campaign. Jeb Bush may forever be remembered for the "low energy" moniker the billionaire coined. But Trump's name-calling on the stump before friendly crowds didn't stop when he joined his opponents on the same stage. Trump repeatedly called Texas Sen. Ted Cruz a liar to his face in several of the debates, and even pulled out the "Lyin' Ted" moniker. Poll: Clinton, Trump virtually tied headed into debate And when Marco Rubio repeatedly needled Trump, the brash billionaire didn't think twice before throwing "Little Marco" and "lightweight" in the Florida senator's face. "This guy's a choke artist and this guy's a liar," Trump once said of Cruz and Rubio during a debate. The name-calling and insults served the dual purpose of drawing attention to the core vulnerabilities of Trump's opponents, while also deflecting from whatever attack they were throwing his way. If Trump sticks to this pattern, Clinton should gird herself for the "Crooked Hillary" moniker and a volley of adjectives from "corrupt" to "criminal." There's nowhere he won't go Trump has done more than just name-calling in the debates. A big reason his attacks have been so effective has been his willingness to strike where traditional politicians would hold back or take a less direct tack. After all, Trump is the candidate who suggested Ben Carson was incurably mentally ill due to childhood anger issues and floated the conspiracy theory that Cruz's father was involved in JFK's assassination. Perhaps most memorably, during the March 3 debate, Trump defended himself from Rubio's attacks on the size of his hands -- and the implications about his manhood. "He referred to my hands, if they are small something else must be small. I guarantee you there is no problem, I guarantee," Trump said. Team Trump: We didn't invite Gennifer Flowers And physical appearance wasn't beyond the pale for Trump, who once threw this zinger at Rand Paul: "I never attacked him or his looks and believe me there's plenty of subject matter right there." Trump has already thrown every scandal and conspiracy theory Clinton's way. He's raised her husband's sex scandals and called her a "nasty, mean enabler." He's also revived the debunked theory that she was involved in the death of White House staffer Vince Foster and has suggested she's mentally and physically unfit to serve as president. Trump has already hinted that there's a chance he'll cross that line, but only if Clinton does first. Belittles canned responses The canned zinger is a staple of presidential debates that, if done right, can leave a mark. But Trump loves to slap down anything he considers to be a pre-packaged, poll-tested line. During the late February GOP debate, Rubio hit Trump with an seemingly prepared line: "If he builds the wall the way he built Trump Towers he'll be using illegal immigrant labor to do it." Why the debate expectations game is a farce "So cute. Such a cute soundbite," Trump fired back, undercutting the zing of Rubio' line. Clinton can expect a similar retort if she deploys the same tactic. It's part of a larger theme of Trump's candidacy -- one that bemoans and belittles "all talk, no action" career politicians and makes a mockery of tired political tropes. That's not to say he won't bring any prepared materials Trump hasn't brought any focus grouped zingers to his debate performances, but he has frequently recycled lines he's prone to use during rallies and in interviews. Whether it's about the "third world" nature of US infrastructure or lamenting the US trade imbalance with Mexico while saying their leaders are "much smarter" than those in America, Trump's debate performances are laced with Trump's favorite throwaway lines. But while his campaign has consistently sought to lower expectations and downplay the amount of effort the billionaire puts into debate prep, Trump has also arrived prepared. 8 unforgettable presidential debate blunders After Cruz attacked Trump on his "New York values," Trump arrived at the following debate with a well thought out and even uncharacteristically poignant rebuttal. "When the World Trade Center came down, I saw something that no place on Earth could have handled more beautifully, more humanely than New York," Trump said. Rapid fire Trump has prided himself on being a counter-puncher. He waits for his rivals to go after him and then he hits them back twice as hard. Throw that into a debate context and Trump's counter punching gives him a chance to show voters he's quick on his feet to dismiss rivals' attacks or deflect with one of his own. But Trump's knack for returning fire is also a tactic to try and knock his rivals off kilter and make them look weak. Debate commission chief: Candidates should fact-check each other Rather than wait for his rivals to finish their attack, Trump might interject with a snide comment belittling the line or deploy one of his many facial expressions that will catch the attention of the television audience. The goal for Trump is to get under his rivals' skin, poking at them to draw them into a back-and-forth -- one Trump likely won't back down from. When it comes to Clinton, Trump's rapid-fire put downs are likely to sound a lot like the schoolyard put down, "I know you are but what am I." Pressed on his biggest weaknesses by Clinton, Trump has frequently replied in boomerang fashion, flinging Clinton's words right back at her. Go after the moderator If all else fails, Trump will turn to his favorite tactic of attacking the media -- in this case, the debate moderator Lester Holt of NBC. Faced with tough questions during the primary from conservative radio host Hugh Hewitt and Fox News anchor Megyn Kelly -- in two separate debates -- Trump deflected with a personal attack or threat. "First of all, very few people listen to your radio show, that's the good news," Trump responded when Hewitt asked Trump about releasing his tax returns. How Lester Holt is getting ready for Monday's debate And when Kelly asked Trump during the first primary debate last August about the disparaging comments he's made about women, Trump famously retorted with a warning. "I've been very nice to you, although I could probably maybe not be, based on the way you have treated me. But I wouldn't do that," Trump said. Already, Trump has sought to work the refs, suggesting Holt would be unfair to him and arguing that moderators shouldn't play the role of fact-checkers. 
(CNN)Even if their preferred candidate wins, a new poll released Wednesday found that supporters of Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton will feel more relief than excitement. The findings from the Pew Research Center revealed widespread disenchantment toward this year's presidential contest among American voters. Majorities of voters say they are frustrated (57%) and disgusted (55%) with the campaign, dwarfing those who say they are interested (31%), optimistic (15%) and excited (10%). Those lukewarm attitudes even extend to backers of the two major party nominees. Only 25% of Clinton supporters say they would feel excited if she were to win. There was little more enthusiasm among Trump supporters; just 28% would be excited if the GOP nominee triumphs in November. But many more Clinton supporters, 68%, say they would feel relieved if she were to win. Ditto for Trump supporters, 61% of whom say they would also feel relief if he wins. According to Pew, a mere 11% of voters overall say they would feel excited if Trump were to win, virtually the same number (12%) who would be excited if the former secretary of state is victorious. The race between Clinton and Trump represents a battle between two of the least liked major party candidates in history, and Pew's findings are hardly the first to show that voters are largely disappointed with both. A Washington Post/ABC News poll last month found Clinton and Trump to be the two most unpopular presidential candidates in decades. The Pew Research Center report is based on a random sample of 3,941 registered voters who are members of the Center's American Trends Panel. Respondents took the survey between August 16 and September 12 online or by mail, and were originally recruited via nationally representative telephone surveys. Results among registered voters have a margin of sampling error of 2.6 percentage points. 
Washington (CNN)Former House Speaker Newt Gingrich has some tips for Donald Trump before the next presidential debate. Gingrich, who is a supporter and adviser to Trump's presidential campaign, chatted with CNN Special Correspondent Jamie Gangel about Monday night's showdown. His assessment: "(Trump) didn't throw an interception. He didn't make a major mistake." The Georgia Republican believes Trump won, but concedes pundits are fair to criticize the Republican nominee for taking the bait and getting off message, especially on the "birther" question and his tax returns. Gingrich admits Trump "doesn't have a good answer on birther and he doesn't have a good answer on taxes." But he is quick to point out that Monday was Trump's first one-on-one debate, and "he is doing fine." Next week, when Trump faces Clinton again, Gingrich said the Republican nominee should alter his strategy: Prepare: Come to the debate with "a few more facts, but not too many." Discipline: Stay on offense and on message -- "He's change versus the old order." Pivot: Get off the topics you don't like faster, and make it about her. Specifically, when asked about tax returns, Gingrich suggests Trump focus on the disclosure of the Clinton Foundation and Clinton's emails. Earlier on Tuesday, Gingrich focused more on Hillary Clinton, when he tweeted: "I worked with Bill Clinton. Bill Clinton and I got a lot done ... Hillary Clinton is no Bill Clinton." 
As a fifth-generation Rockefeller, I was raised on the practical standards of what used to be known as Rockefeller Republicanism and later, Reagan Republicanism. One of the guiding principles of this political philosophy was to reach across the aisle to make progress on issues that would best serve the American people. We were above all a problem-solving party that was fiscally disciplined, fully accountable, less inflexible on social issues, and willing to compromise in order to get things done. I’m sad to say that the commonsensical “party of the people,” of which I was once proud to be a member, no longer exists. But that doesn’t mean it can’t exist again. Indeed, ironically enough, Donald Trump’s rapacious presidential campaign has done so much to destroy the soul of the Republican Party that he might be just the thing that allows us to reinvent it altogether, and along lines that will appeal to millennials and beyond. Story Continued Below True, for now, the rise of this very un-Republican, doomsday-is-here candidate has driven many of us who remained in the party—what I like to think of as the reasonable, forward-thinking Republicans—away. Some used to call us moderates; I prefer the term pragmatists. Now, we’ve either drank the Trump Kool-Aid, are hiding in embarrassment, are just sitting this one out or have reluctantly joined the other side. Our best hope of avoiding extinction is Trump’s resounding defeat, a definitive sign that the Republican Party must evolve and change. But we should look on the positive side of this disaster. Trump is like an amateurish hacker who’s implanted a virus that has exposed the party’s outdated operating system—its too-narrow ideology. Now we can start from the ground up again, and to install this critical update, we need the startup attitude and energy of our digital generation. My hope is that some Rockefeller Republican code will be a part of this transformation, rebooting a legacy of pragmatism and public service. At least that is what I’m working on now. Millennials now number 83.1 million, the largest demographic in the United States and equal in voting power to baby boomers. So, instead of directing my own philanthropy into the wasteland of campaign finance, I’m seeking to get young Americans working on solutions. That’s why I’ve supported a national college program that brings together diverse groups of socially minded Republicans, Democrats and independents, to converse, brainstorm and resolve problems based on issues, rather than affiliations. The raw material is plainly there, among the younger generation, to restore the Republican Party to its rightful place as the Party of Reason. Millennials value integrity over intransigence, action over rhetoric and equality over elitism. A poll by the Harvard Institute of Politics noted that among potential voters age 18 to 29 what is valued most in a candidate is integrity, level-headedness and authenticity. According to a Pew report, a majority of young Republicans say immigrants strengthen America, corporate profits are too high, and stricter environmental laws are worth the cost. And among the one-third of millennials who affiliate with or lean Republican, just 31 percent have a mix of political values that are right-of-center, whereas 51 percent take a mix of liberal and conservative positions and 18 percent have consistently or mostly liberal views. Trump is like an amateurish hacker who’s implanted a virus that has exposed the party’s outdated operating system.” To move toward a more purposeful party platform, here are a few proposals that place sound policy before partisanship. While increasing border security (without building a nonsensical wall), create a system where undocumented immigrants can work towards legal status, not citizenship. Acknowledge the dangers of climate change and promote a 20-30 year transitional path from fossil fuels to alternative energy sources, which includes a revenue neutral carbon tax. Close the gun-show loophole and expand the market for smart handguns that can only be used by their owners. Form a bipartisan commission on tax reform that will require two ironclad criteria: revenue neutrality and the guarantee that recommendations would receive only an up-or-down vote preventing riders and amendments. In addition, to keep the swarms of lobbyists at bay, members of the House and Senate would have to wait a minimum of three years before becoming a consultant or lobbyist. The idea isn’t to go back in time and turn Republicanism into a kind of Norman Rockwell painting. We’re talking about the evolution of a new paradigm where some of the valued principles of the party are encoded with a state-of-the-art brand of logical thinking that addresses reality and gets government working again. *** I come to practical politics from a very personal perspective. At 19, I was in a horrific car crash and lost my right leg above the knee and the use of my right arm. This life crisis reframed everything, and I had to learn to look at challenges and obstacles through the simple prism of “either this is going to work or it isn’t.” Over time, my politics shifted, as well. Instead of caring about what was more conservative or more liberal, my focus turned to what’s doable and efficient. When he lost the Republican presidential nomination to Barry Goldwater in 1964, my great-uncle, Nelson Rockefeller, became one of the first victims of the extremist element’s rise in the party. During the campaign, he accused Goldwater of being out of touch with reality, which sounds disturbingly relevant today. My uncle, Jay Rockefeller, the only Democrat in the family to serve in public office, retired last year after 30 years in the Senate. While reliably liberal, he was always more concerned with policy than politics. He mourned the loss of a system where reasonable negotiation and collaborative deal making were mutually agreed upon standards. Hence my hope for the future of the party rests largely on the next generation of reasonable Republican leaders. Like many of those who identify as Republicans, I’m not a “RINO” (Republican In Name Only), but rather someone seeking to update essential but dying traditions from the inside of a party that is on the verge of falling apart. When I became eligible to vote in 1979, I was proud to be a Reagan Republican. Now, younger GOP supporters, who aren’t aligned with the party’s platform or want no part of a Trump candidacy, have no place to turn. As part of our college project, I sent out a request for opinions and feedback on today’s party platform. One note that was particularly moving was from a 25-year-old gay man named John, who preferred to remain anonymous. “I have found it very difficult to support the Republican Party, with the attractive free-market ideals clouded in divisive rhetoric and obstructionist tactics,” he wrote. “As a gay person, I have also been repelled by the Party's socially conservative agenda. If the Republican Party wants to survive and gain the support of my generation, it needs to become the party of Reason. My generation is largely nonreligious, supportive of our diverse citizens (including race, sexual orientation, etc.) and solution focused. I hope Republican leaders will consider this going forward. Now is the perfect time to reinvent the Party.” It is indeed time—or will be after November 8—from the rubble left behind by the Trump candidacy. The way to do that will be to remind ourselves what the party once stood for and what it was built on. If Ronald Reagan were talking to disheartened millennials today, that’s exactly what he would say: We’re the party that freed the slaves, the party of inclusion, the party of immigration. The harsh truth is Reagan wouldn’t even qualify as a Republican today—and he would call out a demagogue like Donald Trump as a perilous threat to traditional conservative tenets. Moreover, Reagan brought a sense of optimism and hope to a nation that had been worn down and divided and made people proud to be Americans again. Trump’s apocalyptic prophecies are anathema to the confidence and positivity Reagan inspired in us. There must be a sea change in the GOP definition of visionary leadership. We need to encourage millennials who identify with the party of Lincoln to start running for school boards, city councils and state legislatures, as well as develop online communities and databases. And to elect Republican representatives, senators and governors who reflect their values and stands on issues. This is where the next great Republican leaders and president will come from. I don’t approve of some of President Barack Obama’s policies, but I agree 100 percent when he says, “democracy isn’t a spectator sport.” For me, it’s time to be investing in GOP 2.0.
Washington (CNN)Eight days before a critical deadline, congressional negotiations over government funding stalled Thursday, prompting Senate Republicans to force a vote on a bill that Democrats warned they would reject. The GOP gambit came after months of talks between the two parties and raises doubts about the ability of Congress to pass a bill before the September 30 deadline, when the government could shut down. Frustrated by the lack of progress, Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Kentucky, went to the Senate floor and announced the GOP would drop several thorny issues -- known as "riders" -- that still need to be resolved. The tactic was designed to pressure Democrats to accept what McConnell called a "clean" government funding bill. "There have been broad requests for a clean continuing resolution. So that's what I've just offered. It's the result of many, many hours of bipartisan work across the aisle," McConnell said when he filed the GOP bill. "It's a fair proposal that funds all current government operations through December 9." The GOP proposal was immediately panned by Democrats because it left out funds for Flint, Michigan, where the drinking water supply was poisoned by lead in the past year. If the chamber's 46 Democrats stick together, they can block the bill from advancing. "We are now down to a handful of issues, but they are down to the real issues. Now the Republican leader, the majority leader, has filed a Republican-only bill," said Sen. Barbara Mikulski of Maryland, the top Democrat on the Appropriations Committee. "We Democrats cannot vote for that." House Democratic Leader Nancy Pelosi criticized the Republican proposal, saying "it falls very short." Pelosi said Democrats objected to the way Republicans offset the money directed at Zika and said the riders Republicans were pushing showed they have "a tin ear." On Thursday night, however, Florida Sen. Bill Nelson became the first Democrat to publicly say he will support the bill because it offers Zika funding, a priority for his state. The turn of events was somewhat unexpected as leaders in each party had signaled for days they were close to a deal and didn't anticipate a real threat of a government shutdown, just weeks before the election. With the balance of power in the Senate at stake, GOP leaders are anxious to complete their work and send their vulnerable members home to campaign. They also want to demonstrate to voters they can govern effectively and deserve to remain in power. House Speaker Paul Ryan downplayed the back-and-forth between the parties over the must-pass bill to avoid another re-run of the 2013 shutdown, saying "our members realize that we want to get our work done. We don't want to have high drama around here this time." Ryan said members aren't necessarily pleased that they will have to vote for a short-term funding bill, but recognize that is the option they ultimately have to back to avoid a shutdown. "There's never no drama around here -- we're going to have low drama and our members want that," Ryan said. In addition to funding the government at current levels for the next three months, the measure offered by McConnell includes $1.1 billion to combat Zika, $500 million to respond to flooding in Louisiana and elsewhere, and $37 million to tackle the widening opioid epidemic through the recently enacted Comprehensive Addiction and Recovery Act. McConnell called the $500 million for flooding a "down payment" suggesting additional money would be approved soon. Democrats dispute the bill has that much money in it for opioids. A handful of unresolved and controversial riders were dropped from the bill. One would have forced a delay in turning authority over Internet domain names to an international consortium -- something Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump and Sen. Ted Cruz, R-Texas, oppose. Others dealt with how the Export-Import Bank functions and truck driver fatigue. The decision to drop the riders had immediate implications as Sen. Lindsey Graham, R-South Carolina, said he would not vote for the measure without the Export-Import Bank provision, which is important to his state. Despite moving forward without Democrats, a top Senate GOP leadership aide said Republicans are still open to continuing talks to resolve differences. McConnell said there would have the next four days to consider the bill before any votes take place. In the meantime, neither chamber is expected to be in session until next week. 
At least 858 people who had previously been ordered to be deported or removed from the U.S. were instead granted citizenship, the Department of Homeland Security’s inspector general announced Monday. The mistaken citizenships were granted, the Department of Homeland Security explained in a press release, because neither its digital fingerprint repository nor the FBI’s fingerprint repository contain exhaustive records of individuals who have previously been deported. Story Continued Below The discovery was made by the Department of Homeland Security’s office of inspector general, which released a report Monday on the incomplete fingerprint records and the mistakenly granted citizenships. The Department of Homeland Security’s records are incomplete, the release said, because paper fingerprint cards used before 2008 were not consistently digitized. The FBI’s records are incomplete because fingerprints collected during immigration enforcement activities were not always shared with the bureau. The inspector general's report specified that those granted citizenship were only "potentially" ineligible and were not necessarily granted citizenship incorrectly. A statement from the Department of Homeland Security said that the department is taking steps to correct the issues that led to the incomplete fingerprint records and that not all applicants whose records were incomplete wound up being granted citizenship. "It is important to note that the fact that fingerprint records in these cases may have been incomplete at the time of the naturalization interview does not necessarily mean that the applicant was in fact granted naturalization, or that the applicant obtained naturalization fraudulently. Preliminary results from the file reviews show that in a significant number of these cases naturalization had been denied and that, in some, naturalization was not improperly granted," department spokesman Neema Hakim said in the statement. "Other cases are subject to ongoing criminal investigation or to denaturalization proceedings that are pending or completed." In at least three cases, the inspector general’s office discovered previously-deported individuals who were granted citizenship and then obtained clearance for “security-sensitive work at commercial airports or maritime facilities and vessels.” The release said all three have since had their security credentials revoked. “This situation created opportunities for individuals to gain the rights and privileges of U.S. citizenship through fraud,” Inspector General John Roth said. “To prevent fraud and ensure thorough review of naturalization applications, [U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services] needs access to these fingerprint records.” Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump has made the vetting of immigrants as they enter the U.S. a major part of his presidential platform, suggesting during the GOP primary that America temporarily ban all Muslims from entering the U.S. until a more stringent vetting process could be put in place. He has since backed away from that proposal, which drew widespread criticism from both parties, in favor of a ban on immigration from “any nation that has been compromised by terrorism.”
Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump ushered the 2016 presidential campaign into a new phase tonight, and they did it with plenty of barbs. The two candidates faced off in their first general election debate at Hofstra University in Long Island, New York, in front of what was expected to be a historic number of television viewers. Here are 10 moments that mattered at the first general election presidential debate:        Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump have lobbed insults at each other from far away for months, but tonight they tried to start their highly anticipated face off on a genteel note, although the mutual contempt was just below the surface. When Clinton walked out in a red pantsuit and Trump in a blue tie -- the opponents’ trading traditional party colors -- the two shook hands and Clinton said, “How are you, Donald?” Perhaps trying to throw him off at the top with a warm greeting. Shortly after the debate began, Trump talked about overseas trade deals, saying, “But in all fairness to Secretary Clinton,” before stopping himself and turning to his opponent and saying, “Yes, is that OK? Good. I want you to be very happy. It's very important to me.” He seemed to be referring to his addressing her as “Secretary Clinton,” although it wasn’t completely clear during the moment.  Clinton was first to go on the attack during tonight’s debate, taking aim at Trump’s business roots by claiming he borrowed $14 million from his father to start his real estate business. “Donald was very fortunate in his life and that's all to his benefit. He started his business with $14 million, borrowed from his father, and he really believes that the more you help wealthy people, the better off we'll be and that everything will work out from there. I don't buy that. I have a different experience,” Clinton said, before expanding on her father’s work as a drapery maker. Trump responded to that personal claim rather than addressing her subsequent remarks that he believes in “trumped up, trickle-down” economics. “For one thing, and before we start on that, my father gave me a very small loan in 1975 and I built it into a company that's worth many, many billions of dollars,” Trump said.  Voters saw the first fiery moment of the debate when the two candidates sparred over the Trans-Pacific Partnership trade deal. Trump accused Clinton of supporting TPP, the proposed trade agreement between the United States and 11 other countries along the Pacific Rim. “And now you want to approve Trans-Pacific Partnership. You were totally in favor of it,” Trump said. Clinton fired back, “Well, that is just not accurate. I was against it once it was finally negotiated and the terms were laid out.” Trump then pointed to Clinton’s once referring to TPP as the “gold standard of trade deals.” “Well, Donald, I know you live in your own reality, but that is not the facts,” Clinton said. Clinton promoted TPP as secretary of state under President Obama, who is pushing the trade deal. While speaking in Australia in November 15, 2012, Clinton said, "TPP sets the gold standard in trade agreements to open free, transparent, fair trade, the kind of environment that has the rule of law and a level playing field.” Clinton came out against the trade deal October of last year, saying that “what I know about it as of today I am not in favor of what I have learned about it.”  Less than 30 minutes into the debate, Trump went after Clinton, attacking her on trade, ISIS, taxes, the economy and more. Clinton quipped: "I have a feeling by the end of this evening I'm going to be blamed for everything that's ever happened.” Trump didn’t miss a beat, saying to his opponent: “Why not?” Clinton responded: "Why not? Yeah. Why not? Just join the debate by saying more crazy things. Now, let me say this—“ Trump interjected: "There's nothing crazy about not letting our companies bring their money back into the country,” before the moderator reminded Trump, "This is secretary Clinton's two minutes, please."    Trump clashed with his Democratic rival over his decision not to release his tax returns. “I don't mind releasing. I'm under a routine audit and it will be released,” he said. Trump went on to tout his disclosure of a different federally mandated form required by the U.S. Office of Government Ethics of everyone from presidential candidates to the postmaster general. Trump then pivoted to attack Clinton over her private email server. “I will release my tax returns against my lawyer's wishes when she releases her 33,000 e-mails that have been deleted,” he said. “I think you've just seen another example of bait and switch here. For 40 years, everyone running for president has release their tax returns,” she said. “You got to ask yourself: Why won't he release his tax returns? “Maybe he doesn't want the American people, all of you watching tonight, to know that he's paid nothing in federal taxes,” she said.  Moderator Lester Holt asked Trump “what took you so long” to acknowledge that President Obama was born in the United States, bringing the Republican nominee’s recent turnaround on an issue that was central to his public positions for years. At first, Trump claimed that two Clinton aides were the ones who initially looked into Barack Obama’s birth certificate during the 2008 campaign -- a claim that he has made before -- and then said that he was “satisfied” with when Obama released his birth certificate. Holt noted that Obama released his longform birth certificate in 2011, but Trump continued to raise questions about it’s authenticity until 2015. “Nobody was pressing it, nobody was caring much about it,” Trump said, referencing the years between the release and Trump’s decision this month to acknowledge Obama was born in America. “I figured you'd ask the question tonight, of course. But nobody was caring much about it. But I was the one that got him to produce the birth certificate, and I think I did a good job.”    Trump was talking about crime in the inner cities when he said, “I’ve been all over the place. You decided to stay home and that's OK,” seeming to jab Clinton for leaving the campaign trail in recent days to prepare for tonight’s faceoff. "I think Donald just criticized me for preparing for this debate,” Clinton said. "And, yes, I did. And you know what else I prepared for? I prepared to be president. And I think that's a good thing.” Throughout the debate, Clinton tried to portray Trump as unprepared and unwilling to do the hard work to prepare for the presidency. She also hit back against an attack he regularly makes on the campaign trail: That she doesn't stump as much as he does because she doesn't have his endurance.  Trump’s support of stop and frisk, a controversial tactic once heavily used by the New York Police Department, was discussed at length during the debate. “Stop and frisk had a tremendous impact on the safety of New York City. Tremendous beyond belief. So when you say it has no impact, it really did, it had a very very big impact,” Trump said. Trump said that the tactic was not deemed unconstitutional -- which it was -- and added instead that “it went before a judge who was a very against-police judge.” “They would have won an appeal,” he said, noting that there was no appeal. Trump and Clinton went on to debate various crime rates in cities like Chicago and New York for nearly 10 minutes of the debate.  Toward the end of the debate, Holt corrected Trump on whether he supported the war in Iraq before it started. “I did not support the war in Iraq,” Trump said. "That is a mainstream media nonsense put out by her because she frankly I think the best person in her campaign is mainstream media.” Holt corrected him, saying, “The record shows otherwise.” The only time Trump seems to have spoken about the war publicly before it started was to Howard Stern in 2002 and seemed to support the invasion. Stern asked Trump, “Are you for invading Iraq?" Trump appeared to hesitate, responding, “Yeah, I guess so. I wish the first time it was done correctly.” Despite the attempt to correct him, Trump continued to stress he was against the war, saying, “The record shows that I am right.”  Holt asked Trump about when he once said that Clinton does not have a “presidential look,” asking Trump what he meant by that. Trump pivoted to attack her “stamina.” "She doesn't have the look, she doesn’t have the stamina,” Trump said. "I said she doesn't have the stamina. And I don't believe she does have the stamina. To be president of this country, you need tremendous stamina.” Trump has been hitting Clinton on her stamina and strength on the campaign trail for months, but tonight Clinton tried to shut that line of attack down. "Well, as soon as he travels to 112 countries and negotiates a peace deal, a cease-fire, a release of dissidents, an opening of new opportunities and nations around the world, or even spends 11 hours testifying in front of a congressional committee, he can talk to me about stamina,” Clinton said. She also attempted to remind voters of some of the more controversial things he has said about women: "One thing Lester, he tried to switch from looks to stamina,” Clinton said. "But this is a man who has called women pigs, slobs and dogs. And someone who has said pregnancy is an inconvenience to employers. Who has said women don't deserve equal pay unless they do as good a job as men.”
(CNN) Hillary Clinton sat down for an interview with the irreverent Zach Galifianakis and almost immediately -- albeit jokingly -- regretted it. Clinton sat down with the comedian on September 9, the day her doctor diagnosed her with pneumonia. Clinton, who was introduced as "Had Pneumonia" at the start of the video, plays along with Galifianakis' off-color humor and shows a bit of comedy herself. "When you see how well it works for Donald Trump, do you think to yourself, oh maybe I should be more racist," the comedian asks Clinton, who just shakes her head and laughs. Galifianakis also knocks Clinton for going to Trump's 2005 wedding to Melania Trump. "When you went to Donald Trump's wedding, did he write his own vows? And did Michelle Obama write Melania's," the comedian says, a joke about how Trump's wife plagiarized the first lady in her speech to the Republican National Convention. The interview is part of the Clinton campaign's attempt to show a funnier, softer side of the former secretary of state. Led by Kristina Schake, Clinton's deputy communications director, the effort has seen Clinton do a number of non-traditional interviews like the one with Galifianakis. Galifianakis opened the interview with, "Critics have questioned some of your decision making recently and by you doing this show I hope it finally puts it to rest." Clinton deadpanned, "I think it absolutely proves their case, don't you?" Clinton is not the first politician to sit down with Galifianakis. President Barack Obama also sat down with the comedian in 2014 to tout the Affordable Care Act. RELATED: The backstory to the Obama-Galifianakis Funny or Die video Nodding to the historic significance of Clinton's candidacy, the comedian joked that while she could be the first female president, "for a younger, younger generation, you will also become their first white president and that is pretty neat, too." Trump was not spared during the interview. Galifianakis also asked if Clinton will lead the civil war if Trump wins. Clinton says, "No, I wouldn't take up arms. I think that might be a little extreme." "Oh right, because you were saying before we were rolling that you wanted to take away everyone's guns. Very cool," Galifianakis jokes. "I really regret doing this," Clinton says. After implying that Clinton's pantsuits make her look like a "librarian from outer space," Galifianakis also asks Cllinton what she thinks Trump will wear to the debate. "I assume he will wear that red power tie," Clinton says. "Or maybe like a white power tie," Galifianakis says. "That is even more appropriate," Clinton adds. The over 5-minute interview closes with a joke about Clinton's email controversy. "Well, this has been a lot of fun Mrs. Clinton," Clinton says. "We should stay in touch. What is the best way to reach you? Email." Clinton responds by staring the comedian down. 
Washington (CNN)Senate Minority Leader Harry Reid offered an explanation Tuesday for why Donald Trump won't disclose his tax returns: the Republican presidential nominee is "faking his net worth." The Nevada Democrat -- and frequent Trump foe -- levied the charge on Twitter, evoking a similar claim he made against the GOP's 2012 nominee, Mitt Romney. "Trump is faking his net worth. He's not as rich as he would have us believe + a bad businessman. That's why we can't see his tax returns," Reid tweeted. Reid, citing an unnamed source, memorably accused Romney during the 2012 race of going 10 years without paying federal income taxes. Romney released a 20-year summary of his tax liabilities from 1990 through 2009, and his tax returns from 2010 and 2011. But he did not release additional returns. The Trump campaign did not return CNN's request for comment. Reid on Tuesday then went to the Senate floor to rip into Trump. "The last thing the American people want or need is a president who will run another financial scam on each of them," the Nevada Democrat said. "If elected, Donald Trump would be the scammer in chief. Trump is a fraud." "He's always looking for a mark, some victim for one of his schemes," Reid added. "And now our country is Trump's next target. He wants this to be his biggest payoff ever." Reid's speech focused what he sees as lies about Trump's money and said the real estate mogul is only wealthy because he was born with "a silver spoon." Trump's father was a wealthy real estate magnate who loaned his son money to jumpstart his career. "Litigation is nothing new to Donald Trump. Over the last decade and a half, Trump and his companies and have been sued in federal court 72 times. That doesn't take into consideration the many times he's been sued in state courts," Reid said. "But Trump being the flim-flammer he is just moves on to another scam." Reid, who is supporting Hillary Clinton, has repeatedly attacked Trump this campaign. Following Clinton's pneumonia diagnosis earlier this month, Reid attacked Trump's health. "Take a look at this character that's running for president. He complains about her health. What does he do? He's 70 years old. He's not slim and trim. He brags about eating fast food every day. Look at his health a little bit," Reid said last week. And on Thursday, Reid tore into Trump on the Senate floor, calling the Republican presidential nominee a "spoiled brat," "a con artist" and a "human leech who will bleed the country." 
Speaker Paul Ryan, Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell and House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi are trying to hash out an agreement to break an impasse over government funding as the Sept. 30 budget deadline fast approaches. In a series of three-way discussions on Tuesday night, the trio of party leaders were forging a compromise to extend government funding until Dec. 9. In turn, Republicans would provide an "iron-clad commitment" that funding to address the water crisis in Flint, Michigan, will be included in the Water Resources Development Act, which covers hundreds of federal water projects. Story Continued Below Late Tuesday, congressional leaders made headway on at least one part of the multi-layered discussions: Pelosi and Ryan agreed to incorporate an amendment to the sweeping waters legislation that would add about $170 million in federal aid for Flint. "The amendment represents a bipartisan agreement between Speaker Ryan and Leader Pelosi to allow germane authorization language to be added to WRDA as an amendment that will, at the end of the day, provide the necessary funding Flint needs in the final WRDA conference report," a Pelosi aide said late Tuesday night. The water resources legislation could head to the House floor as early as Wednesday. Pelosi and other Democrats had refused to support any continuing resolution, or a CR, to keep the government open without the Flint funding. Ryan, for his part, faced problems rounding up GOP votes for a short-term funding bill. With Ryan and Pelosi holding direct talks, a deal was expected soon to break the impasse. McConnell and Pelosi had also held discussions on the Flint-WRDA issue, said GOP and Democratic sources. McConnell had been pushing to include Flint funding in the WRDA package. Meanwhile, Senate Minority Leader Harry Reid (D-Nev.) had been making his own insistence for Flint aid clear with Republicans. Earlier, Senate Republicans had been considering stripping Louisiana disaster aid money from the stalled stopgap spending bill, which in theory could have resolved Senate Democratic objections to the legislation and ultimately stave off a government shutdown at the end of the week. That proposal had come after Democrats voted Tuesday to reject the stopgap spending measure — which would keep the government open until Dec. 9 — because the package provides money for Louisiana and other states but did nothing to address Flint. McConnell had been expected to unveil a revised legislative text with no Louisiana disaster relief, one senior GOP leadership aide said, but any formal action will now wait until Wednesday. The Kentucky Republican floated the idea at a news conference Tuesday shortly before the procedural vote failed 45-55, far short of the 60-vote threshold. "We keep hearing that their position is no Flint, no floods," McConnell said. "That's certainly an option worth discussing." Informed of that comment, Reid told reporters he wanted to see exactly what McConnell would do, and again said Democrats wanted relief for both Louisiana and Flint. But other Democrats suggested the move would pave the way to a resolution. "If Louisiana were not in there, it would reduce the profile of disaster aid in this bill. And that would be helpful,” said Senate Minority Whip Richard Durbin. “There's still really deep felt feelings by our Michigan senators and many others that this is just fundamentally unfair to the victims in Flint and we don't trust the House to help at all,” Durbin added. House Minority Whip Steny Hoyer also said Democrats wanted assistance for victims in both communities, but that they would likely back a so-called continuing resolution that included aid for neither. “I doubt that we would turn that down,” he told reporters. Hoyer said Democrats would insist the legislation still contain $1.1 billion to combat the Zika virus, which has long been stalled on Capitol Hill. The measure also includes popular provisions to fund veterans programs and implement a July law to curb prescription opioid addiction. Senate Republicans had argued that the proper place for Flint aid is water infrastructure bill moving through Congress. The Senate passed the Water Resources Development Act, which includes $220 million for Flint and other communities with failing infrastructure, on a 95-3 vote earlier this month. “Why do you feel as if you have to punish people in Louisiana who are digging out from a flood — sounds kind of crazy, but they have mud in their home they have to dig out — for Flint when there’s a pathway forward on Flint through the WRDA bill?” argued GOP Sen. Bill Cassidy, who has repeatedly pressed the need for flood aid for his home state of Louisiana. Still, despite vows from some Senate Republicans that Flint aid will be included in any final bill negotiated by the House and Senate in a lame duck session, Democrats had been skeptical. Meanwhile, Democrats also objected to language in the stopgap bill that continues a prohibition on the Securities and Exchange Commission’s ability to require corporate disclosure of political spending. But that provision has been a secondary issue to the fight over Flint. McConnell and Reid each accused the other of bringing the federal government to the brink of a shutdown, but few think such a politically-damaging scenario would take place just weeks before the presidential election. If the Senate is able to pass a funding bill, the House would be expected to follow suit relatively quickly. Among the 45 votes in favor of the bill were four Democrats, including those representing conservative leaning states, like Jon Tester of Montana, Joe Manchin of West Virginia and Joe Donnelly of Indiana, as well as Bill Nelson of Florida, where the Zika virus is spreading quickly. Thirteen Republicans joined most Democrats in voting against the bill, including conservatives Ted Cruz of Texas and Mike Lee of Utah, and South Carolina’s Lindsey Graham. Cruz led a failed fight to include language blocking the Obama administration from relinquishing oversight of the Internet domain system to an international body. Graham promised to oppose the bill because it would not lift financing restrictions on the Export-Import Bank. Heather Caygle, Rachael Bade and Annie Snider contributed to this story.
While the biggest attraction during the presidential debate tonight will be the two candidates on stage, at least some attention will likely be paid to those in the audience. Here's a look at who the candidates invited to sit in the audience at tonight's debate.  Hillary Clinton's campaign this morning released a partial list of guests invited by the Democratic presidential nominee to the debate at Hofstra University in New York. The four women on the list are all supporters who have developed a special relationship with Clinton over the years. They include a 9/11 survivor; a single mom and domestic abuse survivor; and a woman who became a pen pal to Clinton when she was the first lady. The list also includes Anastasia Somoza -- a woman with cerebral palsy who was recently featured in a campaign attack ad about Donald Trump's mocking of a disabled reporter.       Most notably, the Clinton campaign has also given Dallas Mavericks owner and Trump antagonist Mark Cuban a front-row ticket for the show. Chelsea Clinton is also expected to attend, according to a spokeswoman for the former first daughter. And, the Clinton camp said this morning it is hosting 1,200 debate-watch parties across all 50 states tonight. Clinton's running mate Tim Kaine will attend a watch party in Orlando, Florida, organized by the Human Rights Campaign. Former Congresswoman Gabby Giffords and her husband, astronaut Mark Kelly, will also attend that event, an aide said.  This morning, reports emerged that the Republican nominee invited Mark Geist, one of the survivors of the attack on the U.S. Consulate in Benghazi, Libya, to attend the debate. Geist has been vocal in his support of Trump's candidacy; he spoke on the first night of the Republican National Convention alongside fellow security contractor John Tiegen about the attack in Benghazi. Trump also over the weekend fired off a tweet about a possible guest to the debate. After Mark Cuban posted about his plans to attend the event in support of Clinton, Trump tweeted Saturday: “If dopey Mark Cuban of failed Benefactor fame wants to sit in the front row, perhaps I will put Gennifer Flowers right alongside of him!”  If dopey Mark Cuban of failed Benefactor fame wants to sit in the front row, perhaps I will put Gennifer Flowers right alongside of him!  Bill Clinton admitted in the 1990s to having had a sexual relationship with Flowers two decades earlier. On Sunday morning, Trump campaign manager Kellyanne Conway told ABC's "This Week" that Flowers, "has not been invited by the campaign." However, the Clinton camp used Trump's tweet to accuse the Republican nominee of acting unpresidential. "He's a reality TV star. He’s very experienced at providing television entertainment. The presidency is not about entertainment. It’s about serious decisions," Clinton's campaign manager Robby Mook told ABC News’ George Stephanopoulos Sunday. ABC News' Jessica Hopper contributed to this report.
MIAMI — Hillary Clinton leads Donald Trump by 5 points in the newest Florida poll of likely voters, the latest in a series of topsy-turvy surveys that show the race shifting left, right and center by the day. Monmouth University’s survey showing Clinton up 46-41 percent over Trump comes a day after a New York Times/Siena College poll that had the race essentially tied at 41-40 percent in Clinton’s favor in a four-way contest that included the Libertarian and Green party candidates. Story Continued Below The Times/Siena poll had a larger sample, 867 likely voters, compared to Monmouth’s 400 sample that has an error-margin of 4.9 points. Both polls also showed Sen. Marco Rubio ahead of Democratic U.S. Rep. Patrick Murphy, with Monmouth’s survey showing the Republican’s lead at a narrow 2 points. And the surveys showed that Clinton leads with non-white voters, while Trump is ahead with whites. Monmouth’s poll, however, does indicate the race has tightened. Last month, she led by 9 points. The new poll also indicates that voters don’t believe Trump when it comes to his longstanding crusade to question President Obama’s status as a natural-born citizen qualified to be president. “Although Clinton’s lead is smaller than in our last poll, she is maintaining her advantage in Florida given the ominous state of her poll standing last week,” Patrick Murray, the Monmouth University Polling Institute’s director, said. “Florida has become less of a crucial battleground now that the campaigns’ attention has turned to the Rust Belt,” he said. “However, a win here would make the path to 270 electoral votes that much easier for the victor and difficult for the loser.” Monmouth’s poll shows that three quarters of voters said they heard that Trump finally admitted that Obama was born in the United States. However, only 24 percent think Trump believes that Obama is a natural-born citizen; 54 percent said Trump made the admission for political expediency. Though Trump tried to implicate Clinton in the birther controversy, 47 percent said that they didn’t believe she had a role in it; 35 percent believe she did — and nearly all were Trump supporters. For the overwhelming majority of voters, 76 percent, the birther issue won’t affect their vote; but 18 percent said it would make them less likely to support Trump and 4 percent said it would make them more likely to favor his candidacy. Trump tried to say that he has now ended the issue by way of his admission, but Democrats aren’t letting it go. They see the issue as paying two dividends for Clinton in the race: undercutting perceptions of Trump’s honesty and juicing turnout among African-Americans upset that Trump crusaded for years to de-legitimize the first black president. “If Trump wanted to put an end to his role in the birther controversy with his statement on Friday, it does not seem to have had the intended effect,” Murray said. Read the complete results of the Monmouth University Polling Insitute Florida poll here: http://bit.ly/2ckfol1 UPDATED at 2:15 p.m. to include link to Monmouth University Polling Insitute Florida poll results.
New York (CNN)Former Sen. John Warner will endorse Hillary Clinton for president Wednesday morning, handing the Democratic nominee another high-profile Republican endorsement just 42 days before the election, CNN has learned. Warner will join his fellow Virginian and Democratic vice presidential nominee Tim Kaine at a campaign event in Alexandria, Virginia -- a state Clinton is favored to win but that Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump has been eyeing. A Clinton campaign official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity to speak freely about the forthcoming GOP endorsement, said that Warner's public show of support will help underscore that the former secretary of state has the temperament and experience to serve as president and head of the U.S. Armed Forces. Warner is a former US Navy secretary, who served 30 years in the Senate, most of those in a senior position on the Armed Services Committee. Several other former high-ranking Republicans have already endorsed Clinton over Trump including diplomat John Negroponte, who served under President Ronald Reagan and President George W. Bush, and Brent Scowcroft, national security advisor under Presidents Gerald Ford and George H.W. Bush. 
Washington (CNN)At a rally in North Carolina on Tuesday, Donald Trump, the Republican nominee states: "Our African American communities are absolutely in the worst shape they've ever been in before. Ever, ever, ever." The statement is so patently absurd, fact-checking it seems kind of silly. But rather than just give the general response of "What about slavery?" or "How about segregation?" or "How about when black people couldn't vote?" a couple of empirical data points and a bit of history provide just a few examples of how wrong the statement is. Consider: - A number of black men have been shot and killed by police officers in recent years. That is tragic. But between 1882 and 1931, there were 3,318 black people lynched. That's, on average, more than 1 black person strung up without a trial every week during a 50-year-period. - Last year 32.7% of black children lived in families with incomes below the poverty line. Pretty horrible. But in 1965, it was 65.6% of all black kids who were living in poverty. - The shooting of an unarmed black man in Tulsa is horrible. But in 1921, marauding white mobs, some dropping dynamite from airplanes, killed scores of black people - some estimates range up to 300 - in Tulsa's Greenwood neighborhood. Authorities detained more than 6,000 black folks just to protect them from being slain. History is loaded with examples of how while things may be tough for black people now, times were infinitely more difficult in the past.  
NEW YORK — The Clinton Global Initiative has alerted dozens of employees that their jobs will be eliminated at year’s end, even as it plans to retain some staff to continue working with donors, according to two former Clinton Foundation officials who remain in communication with staff. The winding down of CGI after this week’s glitzy gathering and the resulting layoffs stem from concessions made by the Clinton Foundation to controversies swirling around Hillary Clinton’s presidential campaign. Story Continued Below But the recent moves to sunset the project have prompted controversies of their own around the Clinton Foundation, which administers CGI. And they presage the difficulties the Clintons can be expected to face if Hillary Clinton wins the presidency and they move forward with plans to scale back the rest of the foundation. Some foundation allies grumbled that the announcement of CGI’s elimination — and of many of its positions — was handled in an insensitive manner, according to the former officials. Others predicted that retaining some staff to work with deep-pocketed government, corporate and nonprofit donors on existing programs would only feed criticism about whether some of the businessmen, companies or foreign governments that donated to the global charity got preferential treatment from Hillary Clinton’s State Department. It’s a “bad idea” to retain CGI staff, said one of the former officials, adding, “I really think they should make a clean break, and apparently so do most staff.” CGI at its peak employed around 200 full-time staffers. Many of those have sought — or accepted — new jobs in recent months as the fate of the initiative became uncertain. It’s not clear how many remain employed, precisely how many jobs are being eliminated at the end of the year or how many would be retained in 2017. A Clinton Foundation spokesman would not answer those questions, but he defended the foundation’s handling of CGI’s wind-down. “All full-time CGI employees will have their jobs with benefits at least through the end of the calendar year,” said the spokesman. The foundation is providing departing staff with “a wide range of resources that include career coaching, access to job leads in a variety of fields, and resume and job search strategy,” the spokesman said, explaining, “we informed CGI staff of this transition more than four months before the end of the year, and have provided information about CGI-related roles that will continue.” Remaining staff will be working with government, corporate and individual partners that have pledged assistance for ongoing humanitarian projects around the world, the spokesman said. “Staff will be performing a number of roles, including continuing to provide advice with respect to commitment development and commitment improvement, based on our commitment database and experience having previously developed over 3,600 commitments with our members, and continuing to facilitate introductions and partnerships between members,” the spokesman said. He added that not all of those partners give directly to the Clinton Foundation. The spokesman pointed to an open letter written by former President Bill Clinton in which he announced the sun-setting of CGI, while also crediting its partnership model for changing the face of modern philanthropy and corporate social responsibility. “It’s been one of the great honors of my life to be part of this special community, and I hope the hard work and benefits of CGI’s great staff and its members’ creative cooperation will keep rippling out into the world,” Clinton wrote. In his opening remarks on Monday, Bill Clinton said, “I think the way to end this is not on a nostalgia trip, but doing what we set up to do. Which is just keep working to push the ball forward.” Since Clinton launched CGI in 2005, its members have made more than 3,600 commitments in areas including housing, education, workforce training sustainable energy and food systems, according to the foundation’s website. It says the commitments “have improved the lives of over 435 million people in more than 180 countries.” This is the 12th and last CGI conference, regardless of whether Hillary Clinton or her Republican opponent Donald Trump win the presidency. The foundation hasn’t provided details on how CGI’s programs might continue, though many of the commitments made by CGI partners are to multi-year projects, and it is unlikely that all would wrap up at the end of this year. The foundation has provided more detail on other changes that the Clinton Foundation will enact if Hillary Clinton is elected. It will no longer accept new contributions from foreign or corporate donors and will formally change its name from the “Bill, Hillary and Chelsea Clinton Foundation” to the “Clinton Foundation,” while Bill Clinton will step down from its board. CGI originally was intended as a 10-year program of the foundation. But it continued for longer, partly because it attracted so much interest — and money — from the corporate and NGO worlds and partly because it became Bill Clinton’s favorite showcase, according to sources who worked with the foundation. Its annual meeting is a see-and-be-seen event featuring a mix of swanky parties and high-minded discussions about finding solutions to global problems ranging from climate change to childhood obesity. This week’s final gathering includes panels and parties featuring heads of state, Fortune 100 CEOs, Hollywood actor Ben Affleck and world-class athletes. But it also has prompted teeth-gnashing among foundation staff and allies who are concerned that it’s an easy target for Trump supporters. Those concerns were exacerbated Monday when Bill Clinton conceded that some donors may have given money to the foundation to build a relationship with the Clintons or to gain access to the State Department during Hillary Clinton’s tenure as secretary of state. Trump campaign spokesman Jason Miller responded Tuesday, asking, “Doesn’t this validate claims of pay-for-play within the organization?” Sponsors also seemed less eager to affiliate with CGI this year than in the past. The final meeting lists 23 sponsors, down from 33 last year and 46 at the annual meeting’s height, in 2011. Notable dropouts this year include Coca-Cola, which sponsored the event the last three years, and Barclays, a sponsor since 2010. Longtime sponsor Goldman Sachs also declined to participate this year. Some staffers grumbled after being told that they couldn’t leave after the meeting and receive severance through the end of the year, so that they could hunt for jobs full-time, said the former foundation official. Instead, the former official said they are “being asked to stay until the end of December to update data into a database.” Few staffers were informed about the move before it was announced in an August staff meeting by foundation CEO Donna Shalala and Bill Clinton, said the former official. Since then, they’ve learned their fate on a piecemeal basis, according to two people with knowledge of the process. “It was poorly managed, treated too glibly, patronizingly, completely lacking empathy at the fact that so many young people were going to be laid off,” said the former official.
An anti-Donald Trump super PAC is going on the offensive ahead of the first presidential debate this Monday at Hofstra University in New York. The group, the Not Who We Are campaign, is using students at the very university where the debate will be held to make a point. A new web ad produced by the group features students unfriendly to Trump's message.     “I don’t think you can have a racist bigot as president,” one student says in the 60-second spot that was filmed on campus. Another chimes in, “He makes me terrified.” And a third simply says, “I don’t want him on campus.” The Not Who We Are campaign plans to run the ad on Twitter and Facebook ahead of and during Monday’s debate.   “Since the Donald himself is coming to campus, these Hofstra students are standing up and sending a message that bigotry and hatred are not who we as Americans and not who they are as part of the Hofstra community,” Not Who We Are’s campaign manager Josh Hendler said in a statement. Hendler’s group bills itself as a venue for “community members and leaders across the country” to “organize their friends, neighbors and coworkers to take a stand against” Trump by writing open letters. “We’ll help you craft the language and organize co-workers to take a stand against bigotry and hate,” the group’s website says. The site features letters from companies, universities and groups ranging from members of the clergy to scientists to golfers. One recent letter, written by Hofstra student Rob Bielunas, reads in part: "As a community, Hofstra has worked to root out racism, sexism, and xenophobia, the very ideas Mr. Trump has used to get where he is today. His hateful rhetoric and complete disrespect for his fellow citizens are why we, as members of the Hofstra community, stand up against Donald J Trump’s run for president."
(CNN)A defensive Bernie Sanders argued Monday appearance and style mattered little to voters during the primary when he was debating Hillary Clinton, at least to those weighing in "online" afterward. "As you know, though, senator, appearance and style matter a lot in a debate, it's not just the ideas, it's the art of it," CNN's Erin Burnett said to Sanders ahead of the pending faceoff between Donald Trump and Clinton. "No, no, I don't know that," Sanders, who now supports Clinton, responded. "Let me just say this, with all due respect, I disagree with you." "When I debated Clinton, it was a very interesting phenomenon. Most of the time, not all of the time, the media seemed to think Clinton looked more presidential. And she 'won the debate.' But you know what? You go online, we did much better because people listened to what I had to say," he said. "So I do not agree that style and looks and how you comb your hair is what the important issue is." Sanders offered that Clinton doesn't need his debate advice because "she does these things very well," but it would be best not to see the matchup as "an entertainment show." "I think what we have to do is focus on the issues and not see tonight as an entertainment show," he told Burnett. Sanders said that he wants the debates to be more about the issues than about personalities. "Let's talk about which candidate is going to be better for working families," he said. "I believe that as a nation we have struggled as a long time to overcome bigotry and racism. Donald Trump is making the cornerstone of his campaign in fact bigotry." 
House Speaker Paul Ryan, who tussled with Joe Biden on the national debate stage in 2012, had one piece of advice as GOP presidential nominee Donald Trump prepares to take the stage for the first time in the general election Monday: “Overprepare.” Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton is the “consummate pro,” the Wisconsin Republican said on CBS’ “Face the Nation.” “This is new for Donald, so I think he should probably overprepare for it. … I hope he’s doing this." Story Continued Below But Trump doesn’t appear to be doing that. Reports suggest he’s done little traditional preparation — from poring over briefing books to participating in mock debates. The New York Times reported Friday that Trump has been studying videos of Clinton’s previous debate performances, and POLITICO reported last week that his team has been building a psychological profile of Clinton to exploit her tics and tells. Ryan in 2012 debated Biden as Mitt Romney's running mate at Centre College in Kentucky. Asked about how Trump is getting ready, GOP vice-presidential nominee Mike Pence, also appearing on CBS, said the real estate mogul has been preparing for the debate “his whole life.”
The bodies of 162 people had been pulled from the waters off the Egyptian coast by Friday, two days after a boat carrying hundreds of migrants capsized in the Mediterranean while attempting to head to Europe. Dozens more are feared dead, said Mohammed Sultan, the governor of Beheira, who provided The Associated Press with the latest figures. He also said that the search operation is still ongoing. Many of them are believed to be children and women who were unable to swim away when the boat sank. Wahdan el-Sayyed, the spokesman of the Nile Delta province of Beheira, told The Associated Press that the search operation was ongoing. An AP reporter near the Nile Delta city of Rosetta saw between 20 to 30 bodies brought in by coast guards in gray inflatable boats and fishermen in wooden boats early Friday morning and delivered to ambulances at the coast guard pier. Pictures posted on social networking sites showed dozens of bodies lined up in black plastic bags, and others floating near wooden fishing boats. Videos showed that some fishermen were using nets to bring up the bodies. In one video, a fisherman was heard shouting into his mobile phone that, "the sea is littered with bodies." Many of those gathered at the shore where the bodies arrived appeared to be wearing surgical masks to protect them from the smell of decaying bodies. Some brought chunks of ice to be placed on the bodies to prevent them from decomposing. Authorities have struggled to give accurate figures for the number of people on board the capsized vessel. The U.N. Refugee Agency, UNHCR, estimated that the boat was packed with some 450 people, while the state news agency MENA said earlier that the number might be as high as 600. The boat was located nearly 12 kilometers (7.5 miles) from the Nile Delta port city of Rosetta when it sank. It had waited at sea for many hours — perhaps days — for smaller wooden boats carrying migrants to arrive from different points along the Egyptian coastline. Survivors said that overcrowding caused the boat to capsize. Egyptian officials said that over 160 people were rescued and that the majority are Egyptians, while the others are Sudanese and other nationalities, including Somalians and Eritreans. The head of the local council in the area, Ali Abdel-Sattar, said that the currents have carried the bodies of the victims many kilometers away from the site of the sinking. "Today, four bodies, including two Egyptian children, were found 20 kilometers to the east," he told the AP. He added that many of the migrants are believed to have been "stored in the bottom of the boat, in the fridge." "Those are the ones who drowned first, most probably stuck, and their bodies might not be retrieved anytime soon," he said, adding, "those we found are the ones liberated from the boat. I believe many are stuck and now laying in the bottom of the sea." He said the boat may now have sunk to 16 meters (yards) below sea level. The EU border agency, Frontex, recently said more than 12,000 migrants arrived in Italy from Egypt between January and September this year, compared to 7,000 in the same period last year. Yet UNHCR says that since 2014 there has been a steady increase in the number of people intercepted while trying to leave Egypt, with 4,600 people arrested this year, a 28-percent increase compared to the previous year. On Thursday, four people described as members of the vessel's crew were arrested over charges of human trafficking and manslaughter. At a small pier called el-Borg, hundreds of families had gathered Friday, hoping to identify the bodies of their loved ones. Women screamed and relatives pushed and shoved while swarming the ambulances heading to the hospital. Fishermen said that they had difficulty collecting the badly decomposed bodies, with one saying, "we didn't know how to pull them out." Survivors and relatives told the AP earlier that the boat sank around 5:30 a.m. on Wednesday, and that it took coast guards around six hours to come to the rescue. Fishing boats in the vicinity were the first to provide help. "I have never seen such a large number of people drowning in the waters as I saw that day," a 42-year-old fisherman told AP. He said he arrived at 11 a.m. in the morning and helped the survivors. "We threw the ropes, we pulled them in, and many were unconscious. The strong majority are youngsters," he said, speaking on condition of anonymity because of security fears. Many of the survivors were briefly detained by police. Some of those rescued were taken to hospitals, where they lay handcuffed to beds and under police guard. The Egyptian news portal, Al-Youm al-Sabei, published interviews with several survivors who said that before their journey the migrants had been "stored" for several days in chicken farms by the traffickers to evade police. Some of the interviewees said the traffickers asked for $6250 per family, to be given on arrival in Italy. After his release, survivor Ahmed Darwish said, "my advice is that no one should undertake this risk, and especially anyone who saw these things, they will never do it again." The International Organization for Migration has said that this year over 3,500 have died while attempting to cross the Mediterranean to Europe, with this number "rapidly approaching" the record death toll set last year. Those who chose to risk the dangerous journey are often fleeing war and poverty in the Middle East and elsewhere. ——— Michael contributed to this story from Cairo, Egypt
The Axe Files, featuring David Axelrod, is a podcast distributed by CNN and produced at the University of Chicago Institute of Politics. The author works for David Axelrod. Kiev, Ukraine (CNN)Despite improving poll numbers, Donald Trump still faces the political equivalent of pulling an inside straight if he is to succeed to the presidency, says Karl Rove, mastermind behind both of President George W. Bush's presidential campaigns. "Democrats have an easier path to 270 Electoral College votes than Republicans," Rove told David Axelrod on "The Axe Files" podcast, produced by the University of Chicago Institute of Politics and CNN. That advantage makes Hillary Clinton the continued front-runner in the race headed into next week's critical first debate, Rove said.  "He's got to win all the Romney states, and as you know, three of them are up for grabs -- North Carolina, he's behind; Arizona, Georgia, barely ahead. He's got to win Florida, got to win Ohio, but that only gets him to 253. He's got to find another 17, and I think he'll win Nevada, I think he'll win Iowa, but even then that only gets him to 265. And that last five, he's got to win either New Hampshire and the second district of Maine, or Pennsylvania, or Michigan, or Wisconsin." Rove, a columnist for the Wall Street Journal, is a chairman of the Crossroads super PAC, which has thus far refused to deploy its significant resources on Trump's behalf, focusing instead on preserving Republican control of the United States Senate. The GOP entered the year in an uphill battle for the Senate, with six Republican incumbents running for reelection in blue states President Obama carried in 2012. Democrats must seize five seats, or win four and the presidency, to wrest control of the upper chamber away from the GOP.  Rove says Republican chances of holding the Senate are "better than 50-50," in part because this year's electorate has "a record number of undecideds, a record number of weak adherents" who do not want to give either presidential nominee "a blank check." The conversation with Rove was taped in Kiev, Ukraine, around the Yalta European Strategy conference, at which Rove and Axelrod participated in a panel discussion on the American election. During the panel, Rove, who has been a persistent critic of Trump on issues such as immigration and trade, pointedly declined several invitations to say he would vote for the Republican nominee this fall. In his "Axe Files" conversation with Axelrod, Rove suggested that should Trump lose in November, Rove said Republicans could look to their party in Texas, a diverse state where the GOP has firm control, for clues as to how to proceed. "We're a party in Texas that represents the diversity of our state. ... I think that's the formula for Republicans, and it doesn't involve sort of changing your principles; it involves sharing your principles with every community in every corner of the state." To hear the whole conversation with Rove, which also covered Rove's rise in politics; his misgivings, based on what he knows today, about the 2003 decision to invade Iraq; and the tragic family histories he and Axelrod share, click on http://podcast.cnn.com. To get "The Axe Files" podcast every week, subscribe at http://itunes.com/theaxefiles. 
Washington (CNN)Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump said he "bets" bombing suspect Ahmad Khan Rahami was probably not listed on a terror watch list because his family brought "a lot of litigation" against "different people." "The guy over the chicken stand brought litigation, a lot of litigation, against different people," Trump told Fox News' Bill O'Reilly in an interview set to air Monday. "I'll bet you that's why he was on no list. He was on no list they probably didn't want to put him on because they didn't want to get sued. They probably saw he was a litigious guy and they don't want to get sued so they left him alone." Rahami, who is suspected in Saturday's bombings in New York City and Seaside Park, New Jersey, was captured on Monday after a manhunt and shootout. He is also believed to be connected to pipe bombs found Sunday night in Elizabeth, New Jersey, sources told CNN. Ahmad Khan Rahami: What we know about the bombing suspect Rahami's family lives above First American Fried Chicken in Elizabeth, according to the city's mayor, Chris Bollwage. His family has a history of clashing with the community over the restaurant, which used to be open 24 hours a day. Additionally, in 2011 the Rahami family alleged discrimination and harassment in a lawsuit filed against the city and its police department, arguing that officials conspired against them by subjecting them to citations for allegedly violating a city ordinance on hours of operation. Trump added: "Who knows what the reason is." "But whatever the reason is, it's no good. We have to end this," he said. CNN's Ashley Killough contributed to this report.
(CNN)Early numbers from Iowa and North Carolina, where voters are already casting absentee ballots, look promising for Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton. And Democrats have also improved their position on the voter rolls in Colorado and Florida, outpacing Republicans in the past month, according to a CNN analysis of newly released statistics. Where and when to vote early Voters in a handful of states have already started to request, receive, and cast absentee ballots, and some states publicly disclose how many Republicans and Democrats have requested ballots. Of course, there is no guarantee that all voters will stay loyal to their party when they cast their ballot, and no results from any states will be announced until polls close on Election Day, November 8. In North Carolina, more than 56,000 people have requested absentee ballots: 36% of them were Democrats and 35% were Republicans. Another 28% were independents, according to the North Carolina State Board of Elections. Over 3,600 ballots already cast in North Carolina More than 3,600 people in North Carolina have apparently they've decided that they've seen enough of the 2016 campaign and already cast their ballots. It's a tiny fraction of voters -- more than 4.5 million people participated in the Tar Heel State in the 2012 presidential election. Democrats have returned 1,508 ballots, or 41%; Republicans 1,227 ballots, or 34%; and Independents 909 ballots, or 29%, as of Wednesday, according to the North Carolina state Board of Elections. In Iowa, more than 91,000 voters have asked for absentee ballots, according to the secretary of state's office. In all, 57% of those voters are registered Democrats, 22% are independents and 21% are Republicans. These are decent numbers for Clinton, but there is a significant drop-off from 2012. At this point, four years ago, more than 105,000 Democrats had requested absentee ballots. So far this year, only 51,663 Democrats have asked for ballots. The number for Republicans was almost the same both years. Democrats add voters in Florida, Colorado Democrats have seen their position improve in some key states when it comes to voter registration. Shifts in registration don't necessarily indicate which party is attracting new voters, because people switch parties, move to new states, and are removed from the rolls when they die. But these statistics contextualize the political landscape and are helpful data points in the big picture of electoral analysis. Democrats padded their existing registration edge in Florida, by adding almost 16,000 more voters to the rolls in the past month than Republicans did, according to the Florida Department of State. Their overall advantage in the state is about 274,000. It might seem like a nearly insurmountable a lead, but it isn't. President Barack Obama had an even larger advantage in 2012, but he only carried the Sunshine State that year by about 74,000 votes. Out west, in Colorado, Democrats have nearly erased what was once a formidable Republican registration advantage. They outpaced Republicans by about 9,000 voters in the past month, according to new data from the Colorado Secretary of State. That means the Republican registration advantage in Colorado is only about 2,600 right now. It was nearly 12,000 in August, and it was three times that size in November 2012, when Obama carried the state. Registration numbers have been stable in several other key swing states. That's good news for Democrats in Pennsylvania, North Carolina and Nevada, where they have the advantage. And that's good news for the GOP in New Hampshire and Iowa, where there are more Republicans on the rolls. Currently, Democrats lead Republicans by about 919,000 registered voters in Pennsylvania, about 644,000 in North Carolina and about 71,000 in Nevada. Republicans lead Democrats by about 34,000 registered voters in Iowa and about 24,000 in New Hampshire. The voter rolls were very stable in both states in the past month. For example, the GOP edge in Iowa grew by only 175 votes since August. 
New York (CNN)Hillary Clinton is visiting only two battleground states this week -- hardly a sign of confidence at her standing 49 days before the election, but an acknowledgement that one task reigns above all: Preparing for her first face-to-face confrontation with Donald Trump. While she is set to make a quick trip to Florida on Wednesday, after dipping into Pennsylvania on Monday, Clinton will devote the lion's share of her time huddling with her debate team, gaming out how she will confront Trump next Monday night at Hofstra University. The lead Clinton enjoyed for months in swing state and national polls has all but evaporated, raising the stakes for the first debate. The terrorism investigation in New York and New Jersey has also added to the urgency of her first meeting with Trump, which will touch on a litany of economic and security issues. Find out all you need to know for the 2016 election on "The Daily DC" podcast Clinton, who has participated in more debates than any presidential candidate in recent history, faces a new challenge with Trump. She is preparing for Trump to confront her on a litany of uncomfortable subjects, ranging from her email scandal to Bill Clinton's infidelity to her health. Trump showed he was willing to go there Tuesday when he tweeted, "Hillary Clinton is taking the day off again, she needs the rest. Sleep well Hillary - see you at the debate!" Clinton, in a radio interview Tuesday, said she was ready to deal with Trump's attacks. "I am going to do my very best to communicate as clearly and fearlessly as I can in the face of the insults and the attacks and the bullying and the bigotry that we have seen coming from my opponent," Clinton said Tuesday on the Steve Harvey Radio show. "I can take it, Steve. I can take that kind of stuff. I have been at this, I understand it is a contact sport." Clinton, Trump poised for historic debate battle To knock Trump off his game, people advising Clinton have been looking for a one-line retort that will be a memorable moment from the contest. Clinton has spent hours watching a highlight reel of Trump's Republican primary debates, according to several people familiar with her debate preparation. She took notes on what agitated him, particularly in his exchanges with rival Ted Cruz, and studied his style. But Democrats worry the first debate will give Trump a chance to show a more moderate, controlled side, while millions of people watch, possibly for the first time. This, according to people who have recently talked with the former secretary of state, is not lost on Clinton. Clinton told supporters at an August fundraiser that a friend told her: "There will be about 100 million people watching and 60 million will be paying attention to the campaign for the first time. So don't assume they have followed anything." "There will be a lot of new impressions to be made that night," Clinton said. A team of veteran advisers are leading her debate effort, including Ron Klain, who advised Obama, and Karen Dunn, a long-time lawyer and aide. She is not setting up a formal "debate camp," aides said, but intends to be secluded at her home in Chappaqua, New York, in the days leading up to the debate to prepare for her showdown on Monday. Clinton has also spent considerable time reading briefing books about Trump's policy, personality and politics, including receiving input from Tony Schwartz, who was the co-author for "Art of the Deal," the best-seller about Trump. Expectations game Clinton aides worry that they can't lower expectations enough ahead of the event. "For all his lack of substance, Trump's showmanship, as ex-reality TV star, makes him a formidable debate foe. He thrashed his rivals in GOP debates," Brian Fallon, Clinton's national press secretary, tweeted in August. With her Senate contests in 2000 and 2006, along with more than two dozen debates with Barack Obama in 2008 and nine meetings with Bernie Sanders in this primary campaign, she has stood on a debate stage more than 40 times. 2016 race tightens in Florida Trump will not be the first unconventional opponent Clinton has faced in a debate. Clinton all-but ended her 2000 Senate race against Rick Lazio during one of their debates when she stood strong as the Republican representative approached her lectern with a piece of paper and demanded she pledge to support stricter campaign finance rules. Lazio's bizarre move was seen as bullying and rude and Clinton handily beat him by 12 points in November. Her debate last fall against four Democratic primary opponents was seen as an outright win for the secretary of state because of the way she handled prickly questions, including about whether she is progressive enough for the current bent of the Democratic Party. "I'm a progressive. But I'm a progressive who likes to get things done," Clinton said, rolling out a line she would later use repeatedly while campaigning. Clinton's performances have not been without missteps, however. The former senator from New York cited the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks when asked about her ties to Wall Street, a response that aides later said came because their candidate was somewhat flustered by Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders attacking her on the issue. Which Trump will show up? In the last few weeks, as Clinton has publicly turned to a more affirmative message, the former secretary of state has started to focus on how to present her own policies and defend herself against attacks. Clinton and her campaign aides have tried to keep a lid on leaks about Clinton's debate process, preferring not to telegraph to the Trump campaign how the former secretary of state will go after the businesses magnate. When asked about the debates, Clinton has tried to laud Trump's debating skill while admitting that it is for her to have a strong showing at Hofstra. 8 unforgettable presidential debate blunders "I do not know which Donald Trump will show up," Clinton said at an August fundraiser in New York. "Maybe he will try to be presidential and try to convey a gravity that he hasn't done before or will he come in and try to insult and try to score some points." 
Delaware, Ohio (CNN)This time of year in Delaware, Ohio they like a close race with plenty of mud and lots of noise. It's not the rollicking presidential race but the Rough Truck competition at the county fair. But even here, politics are never far away. Across the midway in the merchants' barn, you'll find booths for both political parties. And just like the polls in Ohio, the booths are pretty close -- maybe too close. "We had a life size cut out of Hillary Clinton but somebody took it," said a Democratic volunteer. The volunteer wasn't pointing any fingers but this year the political shenanigans aren't limited to the fair grounds. In this key battleground state, both campaigns are reaching out to some very unlikely voters. For the Trump campaign, that would be Jeff Hill. "Yeah, Donald Trump"s who I'm voting for," Hill said. 2016: Last call for working class whites? He is a disaffected Democrat, drawn by Trump's promise to "make America great again." Hill is exactly the demographic Trump appeals to -- older, white and blue collar. Census numbers show Ohio has more voters like him than any other battleground state. It explains why Trump is in Ohio almost every week, showing up on traditional Democratic turf like factory towns, coal fields even Union halls. The Republican nominee recently appeared at the Canfield Fair, Ohio's largest county fair, where he drew a huge crowd in a county where Republicans rarely get more than 35% of the vote. Bob Paduchik, Trump's Ohio campaign director, credits Trump's message of security and fairer trade deals. "I think that resonates not just with Republicans but also Independents and Democrats," he said. Trump isn't the only one after non typical voters. Donald Trump: 'There's a lack of spirit between the white and the black' The Clinton campaign has set its sights on suburban neighborhoods like Powell just north of Columbus, which is predominantly white, upper middle class and rich in Republicans. The Clinton campaign believes some voters here might side with the Democratic nominee if they're unable to stomach the idea of voting for Trump. Some Republicans don't need much selling. Sherrie Scarton has been a long time conservative voting for Ronald Reagan, John McCain and Mitt Romney. She even voted for Ohio Governor John Kasich in the primary. But she is not voting for Trump. "Hillary's a smart woman and Trump is just, I hate to say it, he's a maniac," she said. But Paul Beck, a political science professor at The Ohio State University, isn't so sure this kind of political sniping is enough to win an election. He thinks many Ohio voters haven't made up their minds how they will vote or even if they will vote at all. "What events occur between now and November 8th, what the debates look like what kind of terrorism activity -- there are all these kind of things that are out there in the firmament that can have an impact on what people end up doing in Election 2016," Beck said. When asked whether anyone has the Buckeye State wrapped up, Beck's answer was simple: "I don't think so." 
Estero, Florida (CNN)Donald Trump, speaking two days after the latest terrorist attack on US soil, sought to paint his rival Hillary Clinton as a "weak and ineffective" leader not prepared to confront the threat of radical Islamic terrorism, as he talked up his radical policy prescriptions. The Republican presidential nominee, addressing more than 8,000 people at his first rally since the bomb attacks in New York and New Jersey, talked up his hardline immigration policies, argued domestic terror suspects, even US citizens, should be tried as "foreign enemy combatants" -- rather than receive due process under US law. He also slammed Clinton for what he said was being tougher on his supporters than on Islamist terrorism. "Hillary Clinton talks tougher about my supporters than she does about radical Islamic terrorists," Trump said, pointing to Clinton's comments that half his supporters belong in a "basket of deplorables." "Has she ever talked that way about radical Islam? No," Trump said. "Are those words reserved only for hard-working Americans who truly love our country and they want to make a statement? One can be forgiven for getting the impression that these hardworking Americans are somehow a greater threat to our country than these Islamic extremists." Clinton has, in fact, discussed terrorism. Earlier in the day, she touted her national security experience from serving as secretary of state, saying she would "launch an intelligence surge" and that she would put more into "training and intelligence they need to effectively prevent and respond to terrorist attacks." Rather than the policies of President Barack Obama's administration, which Trump argued are responsible for the threat of terrorism, Trump called once again for a radical rethinking of counterterrorism policies in the US. He emphasized the need for "extreme vetting" and again called for a ban on immigrants from countries that are hotbeds of terrorism -- the latest iteration of his ban on Muslims -- while arguing that "immigration security is national security." "My opponent has the most open borders policy of anyone ever to seek the presidency," Trump said. And championing the cause of many hawkish conservatives, Trump appeared to argue that terrorist suspects captured on US soil like Ahmad Khan Rahami, the New York and New Jersey bombing suspect who was apprehended earlier Monday, should be treated as "foreign enemy combatants." Rahami is a naturalized US citizen who under current law is entitled to due process rights. "Congress should pass measures to ensure that foreign enemy combatants are treated as such. These are enemies. These are combatants and we have to be tough and we have to be strong," Trump said. Those comments came after Trump lamented the fact that Rahami would be treated humanely and in accordance with the law. "He will be taken care of by some of the best doctors in the world. He will be given a fully modern and updated hospital room. And he'll probably even have room service, knowing the way our country is," Trump said. "We must also use whatever lawful methods are available to obtain information from the apprehended suspect to get information before it's no longer timely," he added. Trump also responded to Clinton's accusations earlier Monday that Trump and his harsh rhetoric against Muslims has been a recruiting tool for ISIS. Clinton had said: "I think it is important for voters to know and hear this and weigh it in making their choice in November. We know that a lot of the rhetoric we've heard from Donald Trump has been seized on by terrorists, in particular ISIS. Because they are looking to make this into a war against Islam." "Her attacks on me are all meant to deflect from her record of unleashing this monster of evil on us," Trump said. Instead, Trump boomeranged Clinton's attack back at her, arguing that Clinton and President Barack Obama's policies have helped ISIS's recruiting efforts. "Weakness invites aggression and silence in the face of a brutal enemy ... allows them to spread and that's what's happening all over the world," Trump said. The Republican nominee also speculated, without evidence, that if Obama could do it again he wouldn't choose Clinton to serve in his Cabinet. 
Republican Study Committee leaders are endorsing Rep. Andy Harris to lead the conservative group in the next Congress, picking the House Freedom Caucus member over freshman Rep. Mark Walker. The RSC's founders, an influential group which consists of current chairman Bill Flores (R-Texas), Rep. Sam Johnson (R-Texas) and previous leaders of the caucus, said while both Harris (R-Md.) and Walker (R-N.C.) are qualified to serve as chairman, Harris’ seniority in Congress helped sway the decision. Story Continued Below “While we determined that both candidates are qualified and would serve as effective chairs of the RSC, we believe that Andy’s additional experience from serving three terms as a conservative leader in the House of Representatives and his overall approach to serving his House colleagues will be beneficial to the organization,” the founders wrote in an announcement sent to RSC members obtained by POLITICO. The founders' endorsement comes after some House Freedom Caucus members were threatening to abandon the RSC in recent weeks. The RSC is the largest caucus on Capitol Hill with 178 members, and because of that boasts considerable sway within the Republican conference. The endorsement is signed by all of the group’s founders including Johnson, Flores, Rep. Jim Jordan (R-Ohio), leader of the House Freedom Caucus, House Majority Whip Steve Scalise (R-La.), Rep. Jeb Hensarling (R-Texas), Rep. Tom Price (R-Ga.) and Rep. Rob Woodall (R-Ga.). Walker downplayed the endorsement and made clear he still wants the job. "At these crossroads of the conservative movement, I firmly believe that members need to be empowered to choose a direction for the RSC that is considered and adopted by the whole RSC – not based on a recommendation from a select few,” he said in a statement after the announcement.
Eighteen months ago, three junior senators attempted something their chamber had never considered, much less accomplished—starting to roll back the long-entrenched federal ban on marijuana. Though all first-termers, the senators—Kirsten Gillibrand of New York, Cory Booker of New Jersey and Rand Paul of Kentucky—knew enough about the difficulties of marijuana politics to avoid any mention of full-scale legalization. They tailored the bill to focus narrowly on medical marijuana and the half-dozen stumbling blocks in federal law that have made it so difficult for Americans to get safe access to the increasingly popular drug. Story Continued Below They branded their bill with a clever acronym: the CARERS Act, for the Compassionate Access, Research Expansion and Respect States Act of 2015, which, if passed, would do a number of sensible things: reclassify marijuana so that it is considered to have some medical value; permit banks to handle money from legal marijuana businesses; prevent the government from interfering with state-legal medical marijuana programs; exclude non-psychoactive marijuana extracts from the definition of marijuana; grant military veterans access to medical marijuana; and break the government’s monopoly on medical marijuana research. To no one’s surprise, the bill went absolutely nowhere. But it didn’t die. Despite being ignored by leadership, it managed to collect 16 cosponsors by the end of 2015, a laundry list of mostly Democrats, two Republicans and an independent. Then, early this year, a 17th name was added, and a surprising one at that: Lindsey Graham. The senior senator from South Carolina, an establishment Republican if ever there was one, a foreign policy hawk who ran for president this cycle in large part because he perceived Rand Paul’s isolationism as a threat to national security, Lindsey Graham—who represents a state that doesn’t even allow medical marijuana—has become one of the unlikeliest and potentially most influential of the bill’s backers because he is unique among the bill's cosponsors (now at 20), as he’s the only one with a gavel. And unlike his colleagues among Republican leadership, Graham is using his authority to move the marijuana bill forward. In mid-July, he chaired a Judiciary subcommittee hearing focused on the pros and cons of changing the way the Drug Enforcement Administration classifies marijuana like it was heroin. Over the 4&frac12; decades of the war on drugs, there have been plenty of hearings on the dangers of marijuana, but before July 13 there had never been a hearing on marijuana's medical benefits. “If there was one, I don't know about it,” Graham told POLITICO Magazine. The emergence of Graham as an honest broker of information on this issue reflects rapidly shifting attitudes among conservative Americans. Opposition to marijuana legalization among Republicans has withered from 60 percent in December 2014 to 42 percent in July 2016, while the percentage of Republicans in favor of legalizing pot has grown from 28 percent to 45 percent over the same period. But Graham does more than just add a prominent voice. His decision to chair a hearing was a critical step (though no guarantee) toward getting a vote on the CARERS Act in the full Judiciary Committee, the only avenue by which it can reach the Senate floor. Graham, he is at pains to point out, rejects marijuana for recreational use, but he told POLITICO Magazine, “I am open-minded to the idea that the plant may have medical attributes that could help people.…I'm convinced that we should, as a nation, research the medical applications of the marijuana plant....It could be life-changing. I just want to do it in a scientific way…and the current system doesn't allow for the research that we need.” *** We’ve seen this before, when public opinion swings suddenly on a divisive cultural issue and yanks lawmakers along by the arm. It happened with gay marriage, and the impetus of the change is always personal experience. Graham’s conversion has been no different. “I have several people that I personally know who have children who have some epilepsy and other diseases,” Graham told POLITICO, “and the parents seem to think this helps. And…what stuns me is how little we know and how much more we could know. Some of these [diseases], like epilepsy, the families tell us that it has changed the child's life. That’s why I want more research. Is that anecdotal, or is it real? To me, that's very exciting.” Parents of children with epilepsy have become the most effective advocates for marijuana law reform at every level. Consequently, in a very short time frame, laws legalizing cannabidiol (CBD), a non-psychoactive compound found in the cannabis plant, have passed in 16 states, mostly in the south and southeast: Texas, Alabama, Mississippi and, yes, South Carolina. The problem is that most of these laws provide little access to actual CBD because marijuana is still classified as a highly addictive drug with no medical benefit. So the state laws, in some cases, have made matters worse by providing false hope for the parents of sick children, a problem the CARERS Act aims to solve. “When you ask if it is still illegal under federal law, it’s almost a trick question,” said Jill Swing, a South Carolina resident and mother of a child affected by a disease that is treatable with CBD. “Currently the federal government is in conflict with itself. The Federal Farming Act of 2014 allows for cultivation of hemp….That being said, all forms of cannabis, including hemp, are considered Schedule I controlled substances by the DEA. That is why the CBD component of the CARERS Act is so important.” It’s parents like Swing who helped educate Graham on the importance of CBD, and legalizing CBD has become sort of an entry-level course for former drug warriors who are now inching toward drug policy reform. Even Chuck Grassley (R-Iowa), chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee and longtime bête noire of marijuana advocates, made an appearance at Graham’s subcommittee hearing in July to express his support for legalizing CBD. But he made sure to limit his support to juvenile epileptics and “children who suffer from these rare conditions.” In essence, he was acknowledging the medical benefit of marijuana but reserving the right to determine which sick people deserve access to that medicine. Graham’s open-mindedness on the issue goes back to an experience with his own mother, whose death he wrote about in an autobiography he released in the run-up to his presidential campaign. In My Story, a 126-page e-book available on his website, Graham relates in gripping detail his mother Millie’s battle with stage IV Hodgkin’s lymphoma, her quick wasting, how the doctors pronounced her dead, and how Lindsey rushed to her bedside and revived her, if only for a few days. His mother, 56, told him, "Lindsey, let me go.” After a week, during which the 21-year-old college student witnessed his mother convulse with seizures, Graham, fighting back tears, told his mother: “Okay, let go. We’ll be fine. Let go.” “She smiled at me,” Graham wrote, “and died five minutes later.” The book never delves into whether marijuana might have helped his mother (she died in 1976, decades before the debate would emerge so publicly), but the anecdote is just the kind of experience that could cause even a lobbyist-besieged senator to empathize with cancer survivors evangelizing the benefits of medical marijuana. So, I asked Graham if that’s what happened with him. “Absolutely,” he said, without hesitation. “I mean, chemotherapy—they kill you to make you better. And people who go through chemo treatment go through hell. If there's an application of the marijuana plant that can help patients like that? I know they need all the help they can get. I just want to make sure we do it based on science, but that is a worthy goal....Sign me up.” *** But Graham’s votes haven’t always matched his thinking on the issue. It took some gentle nudging from Don Murphy, director of conservative outreach for the Marijuana Policy Project, to get Graham’s votes to reflect his rhetoric. It was the morning of June 11, 2015, when Murphy said he caught Graham in the hallway before Graham went into a meeting of the Senate Appropriations Committee to vote. Graham asked Murphy, “How you doing?” And Murphy seized the opening. “Well, that depends on how you vote on my amendment.” “Well, what amendment is that?” “It’s the medical marijuana amendment,” Murphy recalls telling Graham, “and I’ve read that you’ve made certain positive statements about the states making these decisions and patients making these decisions, and I hope your vote reflects your previous statements.” Indeed, in February 2014, Graham had told WBTV in Charlotte, North Carolina: “…when it comes to medicinal marijuana and this [CBD] oil, I think politicians should embrace what makes sense….This is about families with sick children.” In effect, Graham was making favorable statements for more than a year before Murphy grabbed him in the hallway. He just wasn’t voting that way. Murphy reminded him of this, he said, eliciting polite nods from Graham as the senator clutched the doorknob of the committee room before disappearing inside. Murphy’s amendment, sponsored by Sen. Barbara Mikulski (D-Md.), aimed at restricting federal law enforcement from meddling with state-legal medical marijuana programs. It passed the Senate Appropriations Committee that day by a vote of 21-9, with eight Republicans in favor. At the end of the meeting, Murphy was ecstatic, shaking hands and thanking members, but then he was disappointed to see that Graham had voted no by proxy. Later that day, while roaming the halls on the second floor of the Russell Office Building, Murphy said he just happened to bump into Graham and a staffer as they left his office. Graham was holding a laundered shirt on a hanger, which impressed Murphy because Graham hadn’t delegated that chore to his staffer. “How you doing?” Graham asked Murphy, recognizing him from earlier. “Well, I’d be doing better if, you know, I thought I’d get your vote.” “What do you mean?” Graham said. “You voted no by proxy." Graham looked at his staffer and said, “I did?” And the staffer said, “Yeah, you did.” In long committee meetings, it's not uncommon for a member to step out for a few minutes and for a staffer seated behind the member to indicate with a head nod to the chair how the member intended to vote for a particular amendment. In this case, Graham's staffer guessed incorrectly. “What!?” Graham said. “I didn’t want to do that!” And right there, Graham pulled out his flip phone and called the clerk to change his vote, but it was too late. From that moment on, Graham was thinking about the issue in a new way. About six months later, Murphy was in New Hampshire lobbying presidential candidates for the Marijuana Policy Project and he bumped into Graham at a Jeb Bush rally, just a few weeks after Graham had suspended his own campaign. Graham came up to Murphy and told him, “I’m on that bill!”—meaning the CARERS Act, which caught Murphy off-guard because it’s his job to know these things. He went back to his hotel that night and looked it up on his laptop and didn’t see Graham’s name listed as a co-sponsor, so the next day he hunted Graham down and found him at another Jeb rally. “Senator, respectfully, I don’t see your name on there,” Murphy said. “It’s on there! I promise you, it’s on there!” Graham insisted. For whatever bureaucratic reason, Graham’s name wasn’t officially added to the co-sponsor list until March 10, a month after the New Hampshire primary. *** On July 13, 6&frac12; months after Graham withdrew from the presidential race and six months after he saw Don Murphy in New Hampshire, Graham chaired the Senate’s first-ever hearing on medical marijuana. Murphy was sitting in the gallery. About an hour into the hearing, Graham shuffled through his papers, found what he was looking for, and holding it up, he said, “I don’t mean to advertise for this guy, but Dr. Reefer—”displaying a photo of a pot leaf-emblazoned billboard for a Las Vegas-area business that provides medical marijuana cards to qualifying residents. “He has a billboard. I think this is in Las Vegas," Graham said, eliciting enough laughs from the gallery to wake the room up. Graham entered Dr. Reefer into the record to demonstrate that some states’ medical marijuana programs “have not gone down the scientific route,” and he called Dr. Reefer a prime example of a bad actor using medical marijuana as a fig leaf to cover, in Graham’s words, “de facto backdoor legalization” of marijuana for recreational use. For Graham, the medical marijuana issue is a spectrum: On one end are the juvenile epileptics who need CBD, who he supports without reservation, and on the other end is Dr. Reefer, an operation that Graham sees as making a mockery of medical marijuana in order to legitimize criminal activity. During his hearing, practically in real time, it appeared Graham was trying to determine where along that spectrum he felt comfortable landing. Graham was introduced to the problem of Dr. Reefer by Miriam Adelson, a medical doctor and an addiction researcher who is also the wife of billionaire casino magnate Sheldon Adelson. “They said, 'This is not what you want,’” Graham tells POLITICO Magazine. “And I got a bunch of stuff from California, too. But the Dr. Reefer was just too easy, so I chose him.” A lawmaker looking for clarity on this issue isn’t likely to get much help from the Adelsons, who have taken seemingly contradictory positions on medical marijuana. The Dr. Miriam and Sheldon G. Adelson Medical Research Foundation studies medical marijuana in its facility in Tel Aviv, but just two years ago, in 2014, Sheldon Adelson, one of the most prolific donors to conservative causes, gave the anti-medical marijuana campaign in Florida $5.5 million. The Las Vegas Review Journal flipped its editorial position on marijuana from pro to con after Adelson purchased the newspaper. In September, the Adelsons reinforced their commitment to fight medical marijuana with an additional $1 million to fight legalization in Florida. “The Adelsons are strong opponents of medical marijuana,” says Michael Collins of the Drug Policy Alliance. Miriam Adelson has not responded to a request for comment from POLITICO Magazine. Craig Moon, publisher of the Review Journal , replied in an email, “the editorial board reports to me, I believe that Nevadans should vote no on the recreational marijuana amendment. The Adelson family also shares my view.” Dr. Reefer is not a real person; it’s a business that doesn’t grow or sell any marijuana. Since it opened in 2001, it charges patients a fee and provides them with a medical card that allows them to purchase marijuana legally at separate establishments. It was founded by a three-time felon who ran afoul of federal authorities in 2010, when he was caught overstepping the bounds of Dr. Reefer’s business model by selling marijuana directly to clients. Dr. Reefer continues its busy referral business with its provocative brand name under new ownership (whose identities are difficult to determine). “As for the billboards, it’s nothing new,” says Derek Sante, spokesman for Dr. Reefer. “Those billboards have been up for more than a decade.” Although advocates like Don Murphy have no love for the Adelsons (“It’s heartless to support making criminals out of cancer patients, and that's what Adelsons' position does”), Murphy concedes that operations like Dr. Reefer remain an obstacle to his work. “Look, he’s not wrong,” Murphy said, referring to Graham. “The nonsense that went on in California for years has made it very difficult for those of us who are advocating for legitimate medical marijuana patients.” But Murphy goes on to connect the dots between bad state law and a paralyzed Congress: “California happens because legislators don’t do their jobs.” “So, anyway,” Murphy said, bringing it back around to the CARERS Act hearing in July. “I’m real happy with Lindsey Graham.” Like many activists who sat through Graham’s historic Senate hearing, Murphy left that day feeling like Graham meant business. “I do mean business,” Graham told POLITICO Magazine. “Sen. Graham has gone above and beyond,” says Murphy. “He just didn’t put his name on it [the CARERS Act], he actually held a hearing. And I give him major props for that, and the hearing was pretty fair.” “What we're doing today is not enough,” Graham said of the federal drug-law status quo. “We need to do more, and I just want to make sure that what we do doesn't get us to legitimizing the Dr. Reefers of the world.” On August 11, the DEA refused to reclassify marijuana from Schedule I to the less-severe Schedule II, as the CARERS bill would do, but did promise to accept applications for licensed growing operations in order to improve access to research-quality marijuana. It didn’t indicate how many applications it would approve. (Graham has not responded to requests for comment regarding the DEA’s decision.) Unless something changes in the lame-duck session, the likelihood the CARERS Act gets a vote in this Congress remains close to zero; the fight over Supreme Court nominee Merrick Garland is all the Senate Judiciary Committee is focused on. While the CARERS Act's progress is historic, it's still just a marijuana bill on Capitol Hill. And the lame-duck session could indeed follow a landslide of state-level marijuana victories that could rattle even the most steadfast drug-war loyalist. Medical marijuana will be on the ballot in Arkansas, Florida, Montana and North Dakota, while full Colorado-style legalization will be on the ballot in California, Arizona, Maine, Massachusetts and Nevada, where voters could render Dr. Reefer and his "de facto legalization" scheme beside the point. But Don Murphy of MPP is having a field day with it. He tells all the Republican lawmakers in states where it's on the ballot: "I bet you marijuana gets more votes than you do."
KENDALL, Fla. -- Tim Kaine isn’t playing the lowered expectations game for Hillary Clinton ahead of the first presidential debate. The Democratic vice presidential nominee all but guaranteed a win by his running mate on Monday in New York, predicting Clinton will shine and Donald Trump will fumble when asked about specifics, the Trump Foundation and Trump University. Story Continued Below “When the lights are bright like they are now she brings the A-plus game. She’ll be very, very good tomorrow. Donald Trump’s a performer and an entertainer, I’m not taking that away from him,” Kaine said at a rally here on a campus of Miami-Dade College. “But he can't get away with the 15-second thing and then walking away. … No, it’s 90 minutes, mano y mano.” Kaine’s bullish view of the world came just hours after Trump campaign manager Kellyanne Conway called him the “Babe Ruth of debating." It’s a counterintuitive political strategy: Raising expectations ahead of what may be the most-watched debate in history is a risky proposition for both sides when the race is so tight. In 2012, President Barack Obama gave a rusty performance in his first debate that jolted the race and alarmed Democrats nationwide. The Virginia senator himself acknowledged that things had gotten closer than many Democrats had hoped, repeatedly calling Clinton’s lead “narrow.” But he suggested that Monday night could change all that. “You’re going to see him have to get into specifics and Hillary too. But we’re going to see who can answer the specific questions. I mean Donald Trump hasn’t answered a basic question that’s been asked of presidential candidates: show us your tax returns,” Kaine said. “Donald Trump’s had problems with the specifics so far, tomorrow night we’re going to see: Can he give some specifics?” Kaine barely mentioned Mike Pence, Trump’s running mate, even though the two will debate in just over a week. His only knock on Pence was that he was too easy on Russian President Vladimir Putin.
Rye Brook, New York (CNN)Hillary Clinton might be viewed as the favorite going into Monday's presidential debate. But she certainly didn't prepare like one. Clinton, a candidate known for being a homebody, was for most of the three nights leading up to Monday's debate working at a hotel a few miles from her Chappaqua, New York home, hunkered down with aides in a nondescript conference center surrounded by wedding parties and high school reunion goers. Clinton spent Friday, Saturday and Sunday night at the Doral Arrowwood, returning home past 11 p.m. every night after sessions with a tight group of aides and advisers. The late night sessions appeared to mimic the timing of Monday's debate at Hofstra University, which will run 90 minutes and start at 9 p.m. Clinton's prep was not limited to late at night, however. On Saturday and Sunday, Clinton visited the hotel twice a day: Once at night and again for a few hours in the afternoon. RELATED: Clinton, Trump poised for historic debate battle The frequency and timing of the sessions -- hours before Clinton meets Donald Trump -- are an acknowledgment that the former secretary of state took her debate preparations seriously, investing four days of would-be campaigning to find a way to do what no Republican candidate could: Defeat Trump. The sessions also mimic Clinton, a candidate who aides refer to as a worrier. "Like a lot of women, I have a tendency to over prepare," Clinton said at Greensboro, North Carolina event earlier this month. "I sweat the details." Trump, on the other hand, has said that he doesn't want to over-prepare for Monday's debate. While he met with top advisers on Sunday to hash out debate strategy, the Republican nominee has largely eschewed with traditional debate prep, deciding instead to trust his instincts on Monday night. Jason Miller, Trump's spokesman, mocked Clinton's two-a-day preparation on Monday morning. "That might be something to brag about when you are getting ready to high school football but I am not sure heading into arguably the biggest presidential debate that our country has ever seen that that is something that you want to be putting out there," Miller said. The Doral Arrowwood, a 337-room hotel better known locally as an event space and golf course, is an odd scene for such preparations: As Clinton worked with aides, the hotel was busy hosting a high school reunion, a wedding and a meeting of pharmaceutical employees. Clinton entered and exited the hotel through a back entrance and her van positioned so that she did not have to walk through the lobby to get to the conference center hosting her prep. Hotel guests were however aware of Clinton's presence and her secret service protected van was parked near the main entrance of the hotel. Aides worry that expectations for Clinton's performance might be impossibly high, given the fact that Monday's contest will be over her 40 televised debate, including contests during her 2008 presidential run and her Senate run in 2000. RELATED: 5 things to watch at Monday night's Clinton-Trump debate Blatantly playing the expectations game, aides have publicly looked to muddy the view that Clinton should dominate on Monday by touting Trump's reality show personality and showman qualities. Their argument: Debates are about theater more than substance, and on that measure Trump has more experience. "For all his lack of substance, Trump's showmanship, as ex-reality TV star, makes him a formidable debate foe. He thrashed his rivals in GOP debates," Brian Fallon, Clinton's national press secretary, tweeted in August. To try to compensate -- and knock Trump off his game -- people advising Clinton have been looking for one-line retorts that could become memorable moments from the contest. The all-day sessions are being led by Ron Klain, who advised President Barack Obama, and Karen Dunn, a longtime lawyer and aide. RELATED: Donald Trump's 6 debate tactics Clinton was joined in the sessions by Huma Abedin, her longtime aide; John Podesta, her campaign chairman; and Jake Sullivan, Clinton's top policy aide, according to the sources. Philippe Reines, a longtime adviser known for his combative style and fierce loyalty to Clinton, is playing Trump in debate prep. Reines has spent more time playing "Presidential Trump" than "bombastic Trump," according to a source with knowledge of the prep. Reines, in an effort to prepare Clinton for a more polished Trump, has even ad lib an opening statement heralding the milestone of Clinton becoming the first woman nominee of a major presidential party, the source says. What Donald Trump shows up has been a key concern for Clinton's top aides, including that small group of advisers who have been inside her debate prep. According to the source, the aides expect Trump to be a more polished, reserved candidate than the boisterous and off-the-cuff candidate that has been seen across the country on the campaign's trail. The source says Clinton has done some prep with "bombastic Trump," but more have been with a more reserved candidate. Earlier in the process, Clinton spent hours watching a highlight reel of Trump's Republican primary debates, according to several people familiar with her debate preparation. She took notes on what agitated him and studied his positions with the hopes of getting under his skin with her familiarity. Clinton has told friends and supporters that her biggest concern is not knowing which Donald Trump will show up on Monday night: A more moderate, controlled Republican nominee or the more blunt and combative candidate? "I do not know which Donald Trump will show up," Clinton said at an August fundraiser in New York. "Maybe he will try to be presidential and try to convey a gravity that he hasn't done before or will he come in and try to insult and try to score some points." RELATED: CNN/ORC polls: Trump, Clinton deadlocked in Colorado, Pennsylvania CNN's Dana Bash contributed to this report.
House Republicans already struggling to protect their historic majority this fall are confronting a multimillion-dollar shortfall in their campaign budget — driven partly by Freedom Caucus members and other hard-line conservatives who are boycotting the GOP’s campaign arm. A bloc of conservatives is refusing to transfer cash to the National Republican Congressional Committee, convinced the committee is favoring moderate candidates over hard-line conservatives. Dozens of other Republican lawmakers also haven’t paid their expected party “dues,” including several in tough primaries or general election races who figure they need the money for themselves. Story Continued Below Several GOP sources told Politico that 3 in 10 members of the House Republican Conference are delinquent on their dues. And multiple senior Republicans said the shortfall exceeds $10 million. “There’s a group of us who associate the NRCC with the establishment wing of the party,” said Rep. Mick Mulvaney (R-S.C.), who added that he has a “principled objection to paying dues to the NRCC.” The Freedom Caucus member noted that a former top NRCC staffer helped outside groups unseat his friend, Rep. Tim Huelskamp of Kansas, in a Republican primary last month, and said the committee is partly to blame. (The NRCC doesn’t spend money in Republican primaries and says it has no control over outside groups.) Mulvaney also says he’s still upset by ads aired against him in early 2015 by American Action Network, a 501(c)(4) allied with then-Speaker John Boehner (R-Ohio). The spots implored Mulvaney and other conservatives to end their blockade of a spending bill backed by leadership. After that, several other Freedom Caucus members stopped paying dues. “There’s a group that’s still smarting from the fact some of our own went after us, and we’ll be damned if we’re going to put money back in their hands,” Mulvaney said. The dispute, which one chief of staff for a House Republican called a “brewing war,” is another sign that the schism between the activist and establishment wings of the House GOP Conference has spread to the campaign trail. Over the summer, conservative- and establishment-aligned outside groups poured millions into primary showdowns between far-right and center-right candidates. Now it’s continuing in the general election, as Republicans are struggling to head off double-digit seat losses with Donald Trump leading their ticket. The refusal by conservatives to pay has enraged some House Republicans, who say the NRCC and leadership have no control over outside groups. They also note that the NRCC helped many of the nonpaying members get elected in the first place. “Politics is a team game and outside of the HFC, almost every member of the Republican Conference is busting his or her ass to raise money and get Republicans elected,” said one senior Republican. “The HFC has chosen not to raise money or help get other Republicans elected, but for some reason they think they should control what the NRCC does or how it spends its money? That’s nuts.” While the NRCC has about $2.5 million more cash on hand than the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee, House Democrats outraised Republicans by more than $11 million combined in July and August. A big chunk of the disparity is attributable to members not paying dues, several Republican sources said. The NRCC would not comment on the dues figures provided to Politico. It downplayed the conservative boycott, saying in a statement that “we are always very grateful to our Conference for their commitment to ensuring we maintain and grow our historic Republican House majority.” But the problem appears to be serious enough that GOP leaders have pleaded with members several times in recent weeks to pony up. On a conference call with dozens of members the last week of August, Speaker Paul Ryan (R-Wis.) and NRCC Chairman Greg Walden (R-Ore.) urged lawmakers to donate. Walden said Republicans were getting outraised by Democrats in both big and small donations, and Ryan said he was disappointed in members who hadn’t paid their dues, encouraging them to work as a team. And at a closed-door GOP conference meeting last week, Ryan and his top lieutenants told members they need to meet their assessments to close the fundraising gap with the Democrats. A PowerPoint presentation highlighted members who were current on dues and those who hadn’t paid, according to sources in the room. Multiple lawmakers and staffers also told Politico the NRCC is cracking down on members who haven’t paid, even barring some from accessing committee resources or attending events until they do pay. One mid-August NRCC email to Republican chiefs of staff invited them to a reception on a rooftop terrace in downtown Washington, but only for “chiefs of members who have completed their assessments.” The same goes with lawmakers: Country band Big & Rich headlined NRCC’s second annual “house party” last week at The Hamilton restaurant in D.C. But emails inviting lawmakers in early September noted that “only members who are paid in full” on their dues can attend. Dues are based on ability to pay, factoring in a member’s committee assignments and seniority. Getting politicians to fork over their hard-raised cash is a recurring problem for the NRCC and DCCC. But the shortfall this year is especially pressing for Republicans — and increasingly appears to be based on ideological rivalries. A former NRCC staffer defended the committee, saying “many in the House Freedom Caucus would not be there if not for the NRCC.” The committee spent $1 million help elect Mulvaney in 2010, the person said, among other caucus members who’ve benefited from the committee’s largesse. At the crux of the conservatives’ boycott is a belief the NRCC is now supporting moderates who back the party’s leadership against conservatives who push the party further to the right. “When those folks are going against us … would I support that with my money? No,” said Rep. Dave Brat (R-Va.), a Freedom Caucus member who upset Majority Leader Eric Cantor in a primary two years ago. Some conservatives, including Rep. Jim Jordan (R-Ohio), have instead decided to transfer money to right-leaning candidates they personally support. If those contenders win the GOP primary, it could mean more influence for conservatives. Conservatives also suspect that leadership and the NRCC are behind outside establishment-aligned groups targeting the far right of the conference. When asked about NRCC dues, Brat said it’s “illogical for me to fund ads against myself” — though the NRCC does not directly play in primaries. Many conservatives are still furious with AAN for the round of ads they ran in early 2015 — though the Freedom Caucus did not take an official position on the matter. AAN told POLITICO they have spent multiple times the amount of money on positive ads for some for these same members since early 2015, including 10 times in Mulvaney's case. “I’m not sure how you use issue advocacy ads run for one day 18 months ago as an excuse not to pay political dues," said Mike Shields, president of American Action Network. GOP leaders have told conservatives countless times they’re not trying to undercut them in campaigns, arguing they have no control over groups like the U.S. Chamber of Commerce that might decide to target a conservative in a primary. Allies of leadership and the NRCC also note that one of the Freedom Caucus’ strongest outside allies, the conservative Club for Growth, has actively gone after sitting lawmakers, including Rep. John Shimkus (R-Ill.). Others Republicans have been slow to contribute because they’re afraid for themselves. Several lawmakers or top staffers for lawmakers who’ve faced tough primaries said the NRCC doesn’t help them when they’re challenged by fellow Republicans. “They want you to give a lot of money, but it weakens you in defending yourself in the primary, and for us, the primary is where we live and die now,” said the chief of staff for one member who no longer pays his dues. In the meantime, top House Republicans are donating millions above their dues assessments to compensate for the shortfall. Ryan, for example, has transferred nearly $30 million alone. An altar call during last Tuesday’s GOP conference meeting, for example, brought more than $3 million, including $1.5 million from Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy, $500,000 from House Financial Services Chairman Jeb Hensarling of Texas, $250,000 from Budget Chairman Tom Price of Georgia and $200,000 from Walden, sources in the room say. Leaders were hoping to inspire more transfers. It’s unclear so far whether they’ve succeeded.
Washington (CNN)Conservative megadonor Sheldon Adelson and his wife, Miriam, have committed roughly $45 million so far to Donald Trump's presidential campaign and downballot Republicans' attempt to control Congress, according to a person familiar with Adelson's thinking. The billionaire on Tuesday will disclose having given $20 million to the Senate Leadership Fund, a super PAC linked to George W. Bush hand Karl Rove and Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell. A check of a similar size is expected to go to the Congressional Leadership Fund, a similar super PAC focused on the House of Representatives. And to back Trump, a donation of at least $5 million is likely headed to the political operation helmed by the Ricketts family, who are expected to finally spend their fortunes on Trump as well. Other cash may be routed to Ricketts-led nonprofit groups that are not required to disclose the funders. The spending amounts to a historic investment in the Republican Party ticket's hopes for November, putting millions of dollars behind Trump's bid in a groundbreaking donation that could redefine the final two months of the 2016 campaign. The donation, the Adelsons' first major gifts of the entire 2016 cycle, puts an end to questions about how they would spend their fortunes in the Republican race. Courted by the entire Republican field during the primary, Adelson has been the most prolific Republican financier in recent cycles and bar none the most influential contributor in the donor class. Their decision could convince other major GOP donors to give as well, which would be a major boon for Trump. The real estate mogul has wooed Adelson throughout the year but had not convinced him to open his wallet. The chair of Las Vegas Sands casinos, Adelson signaled earlier this year that he would give $100 million to pro-Trump efforts, though he has yet to part with a single dime. The billionaire gave at least $93 million to conservative groups in the 2012 election. After sitting out of the Republican primary, Adelson became the most prominent megadonor to quickly support Trump, but he resisted months of pitches from pro-Trump operatives to finance their groups, which today still struggle to fund television campaigns. Adelson has also been courted strongly by American Crossroads, a network of super PACs. The Senate Leadership Fund is one of those Crossroads groups and will report Tuesday having raised $28 million in August, shattering fundraising records and injecting new optimism into the GOP's efforts to hold the Senate. The Congressional Leadership Fund or Ricketts groups will not be required to disclose the donations until mid-October. 
MASON CITY, Iowa — Hillary Clinton’s statement that Donald Trump’s incendiary rhetoric aids ISIL’s cause is a “new low” for the Clinton campaign, Mike Pence said on Monday. “The campaign of insults went to a new low this morning,” Pence said of Clinton’s campaign. “Hillary Clinton actually said my running mate’s rhetoric had been ‘seized on by terrorists.’ … And she said Donald Trump’s rhetoric was ‘giving comfort to our adversaries.’” Story Continued Below “Well, Hillary, strength does not give comfort to our adversaries, weakness does,” Pence said. Pence was referring to comments Clinton made Monday in response to attacks in Minnesota, New York and New Jersey. "We know that a lot of the rhetoric we've heard from Donald Trump has been seized on by terrorists, in particular ISIS, because they are looking to make this into a war against Islam rather than a war against jihadists," she told reporters during a statement Clinton has made this claim multiple times during the campaign. When she first leveled the charge in December, Politifact said there was no evidence for it. But after ISIL used a clip of Trump in a video after the group's attack on Brussels, Politifact updated its assessment, calling the claim true. Pence's comments came on the heels of a radio interview with Rush Limbaugh in which Pence said Clinton is oblivious to the threats posed by terrorism and complicit in weakening U.S. law enforcement. “I’m not sure that Hillary Clinton and Barack Obama know that we’re at war,” Pence said. He went on to blame Democrats for a “culture of political correctness that is tying the hands of law enforcement here at home.” Pence spoke to Limbaugh on the phone from his plane on the tarmac in Mason City, Iowa, where he's appearing at a town hall event ahead of a rally in Dubuque. He also slammed White House Press Secretary Josh Earnest for suggesting that the US and ISIL are engaged in a “narrative fight” and took issue with Clinton’s statement earlier Monday that Donald Trump’s fiery rhetoric aids ISIL. “The only thing that gives comfort to our adversaries is weakness,” Pence said. The Saturday explosions in New Jersey and New York appear to be unrelated to the Minnesota attack, officials say. The Minnesota assailant stabbed nine people before being killed by police. ISIL has taken responsibility for the attack. The Saturday night bombing in New York wounded 29 people, while the earlier explosion in New Jersey before a charity race caused no injuries. An Afghan immigrant believed to be tied to the bombings was arrested in New Jersey on Monday after a gunfight with police. “We are at war with radical Islamic terrorism,” Pence told Limbaugh. “We are at war with the ISIS caliphate.”
Tim Kaine doesn't feel much pressure when it comes to the day-to-day routine of defending and explaining the platform and background of running mate Hillary Clinton to voters, the Virginia senator said in an interview airing Wednesday on "The Ellen DeGeneres Show." "Obviously because you're the nominee for vice president you have to defend Hillary because that’s your job," DeGeneres remarked to Kaine during the friendly interview, to which Kaine affirmed, "Absolutely." Story Continued Below DeGeneres then asked, "Do you feel bad for Mike Pence that he has to defend … he’s got to be constantly like, 'oh, no what do I say now.' 'What did [Donald Trump] say now?'" as Kaine and members of the audience laughed. "It is part of the role," Kaine said, declining to specifically mention Pence or his defense of Donald Trump. "I don't find that a heavy lift at all to do the work I have to do to tell people Hillary’s story," Kaine added, drawing on their biographical parallels as Midwesterners who "both grew up in Republican families ... in small business families" and "in religious households." Kaine added, "I kind of know the vibe. I know that for example, for her it’s not easy for her to talk about herself, that’s just not the way we were raised, but it’s easier for me to talk about her so that’s something I like to do is to tell stories about things she’s done that really show who she is as a person and the kind of president she’ll be."
You can choose one or more of the explanations for what has happened to Hillary Clinton in recent weeks as Donald Trump has closed in on her in the polls. The “fundamentals” of this year—economic and political data—have pointed to a close race for more than a year; Trump has (until his recent birther nonsense) offered a more temperate version of himself; Clinton has been haunted by her emails and her health; Republican holdouts have been returning to the fold, another sign that the electorate will vote more and more along lines of party preference. But what is especially bedeviling the Clinton campaign is that, at least until now, constituencies most critical to her campaign seem to have no sense of urgency about keeping the Donald Trump out of the White House. While Hispanics, who backed Obama in 2012 by a more than 2-1 margin, support Clinton by a similar margin, they seem far less inclined to vote than they did four years ago. Story Continued Below That is what could change now that Trump threatens to actually take the White House. Younger voters, who not only backed Obama by landslide margins but turned out in record percentages in 2012, have until now expressed relative indifference to the campaign or have turned to the alternatives: Libertarian Party nominee Gary Johnson and the Green Party’s Jill Stein. If last week’s Quinnipiac poll is right, the race among 18-to-34-year-olds looks like a four-way split: She wins only 31 percent to Trump’s 26 percent. In fact, Johnson runs second, with 29 percent; Stein, running in low single digits nationally, pulls in 15 percent of 18-to-34 year olds. And remember: without massive support and a heavy turnout among younger voters, Obama’s margins in Florida and other key states would have been wiped out. Yes, support for minor party candidates tend to fall when the leaves do; yes, the Clinton campaign has a get-out-the-vote machine whose reputation—yet untested—is formidable. But what may be their most powerful weapon is the clear possibility that Trump could win, which is why Clinton’s very bad few weeks could, in the end, be very good for her. Trump’s climbing numbers could finally motivate her complacent Democratic base and other voters who have never been crazy about her and not especially motivated to come out to the polls, especially if she were running away with the race. Here is where Hillary Clinton might think about channeling the arguments of two historical figures you might not normally think of in the same paragraph: Oliver Cromwell and John McEnroe. Back in 1650, the first (and last) non-royal ruler of Britain tried to dissuade the Scots from declaring Charles II as king. Saying, in a famous appeal: “I beseech you, in the bowels of Christ, consider it possible that you may be mistaken.” Three hundred and eighty one years later, in the midst of another British field of battle—Wimbledon—John McEnroe saw one of his serves ruled a fault and screamed incredulously: “You cannot be serious!” Somewhere between Cromwell and McEnroe lies the Clinton campaign’s most plausible argument to its wavering voters: Get real, folks. “You’re looking at Johnson and Stein as a way of rejecting a corrupt, unresponsive two-party system,” England’s Lord Protector might say to millennials, sounding a lot like Bernie Sanders, “because there’s no difference between the two parties. But please be willing to consider that you might be mistaken. Look back 16 years, and see what a similar vote—for Ralph Nader—did. His 94,000 voters in Florida would have wound up giving Gore a net of about 20,000 votes—more than enough to make butterfly ballots and hanging chads irrelevant. Now, between launching the Iraq War and the two Supreme Court justices Bush appointed, did it really make no difference?” McEnroe—looking and sounding remarkably like Elizabeth Warren, who’s now out there stumping for Hillary—might then chime in: “You cannot be serious if you think you have the luxury of a ‘protest’ vote for Johnson or Stein. If you vote as a Libertarian for Johnson, you will materially increase the chances of a Trump presidency. Look at the list of potential judges. On everything from gay rights to abortion to his own views of the First Amendment, Trump is on record as rejecting core libertarian principles. If you vote for Jill Stein as a progressive, you are helping to put in power a president whose tax plan makes the rich richer, who thinks climate chance is a hoax, who wants to abolish whole swaths of environmental protection laws. So voting for Johnson or Stein means you’re voting for a label—a ’libertarian,’ or a ‘progressive’—without realizing that the consequence of that vote could lead to a president who rejects everything you claim to hold dear.” There’s no guarantee that any of these arguments will work. They come, after all, at the end of a 15-month-long Trump campaign that was guaranteed to collapse at countless moments (I’d list them, but anyone following this campaign has likely committed them to memory). And it still requires, as its ultimate point, an insistence that these voters summon themselves to vote for a candidate for whom they have little or no enthusiasm. Obama’s supporters turned out in significant numbers because they were hungry and saw in his presidency a feast; the voters Clinton must summon are being told “eat your peas because you have to.” That’s an emotional detachment that a dozen speeches heavy on policy, like the one she delivered Monday, won’t repair. Of course, it’s possible that Trump’s own character and temperament, revealed on the debate stage or in his bizarre-world campaign appearances, will convince voters that in the end , he is a risk they are not prepared to take. But for voters unsure about Clinton, relying on Trump to self-destruct after what he has survived is a risk they cannot take. So, even though the Scottish Presbyterians rejected Cromwell’s plea, and even though the officials at Wimbledon did not change their call, their pleas still suggest that Trump’s rise in the polls could be a powerful argument for Clinton.
Washington (CNN)Ivanka Trump will join female Republican House members and senators Tuesday in Washington to promote the GOP nominee's proposals on child care, in a continued effort by father's presidential campaign to reach out to women voters. The highest-ranking female House GOP leader, Washington Rep. Cathy McMorris Rodgers, is hosting the roundtable at the Republican National Committee, according to Donald Trump's campaign and a GOP congressional source. McMorris Rodgers worked closely with Trump's daughter on the plans that were officially unveiled last week at an event in suburban Philadelphia. McMorris Rodgers is the only House member to give birth three times while in office. Ivanka Trump is a top adviser and surrogate for her father's campaign and frequently mentions his record of hiring female executives in top positions in his businesses. As a mother of three Trump did several interviews with national outlets about the campaign's new proposals for paid maternity leave and more affordable child care. But she abruptly ended an interview with Cosmopolitan Magazine when the reporter pressed her on previous comments by Donald Trump on pregnant employees, accusing the interviewer of bias. RELATED: GOP policy guru: Trump can't 'fake his way through 90 minutes' Tuesday's session will cover workplace flexibility, child care, equal pay and the policies the campaign rolled out last week. Trump will also hear from the roughly 15 House members and senators about the issues they are working on in Congress, according to two GOP sources familiar with the plans. House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi swiped at Donald Trump's "disastrous maternity leave and childcare plan" ahead of the meeting. "Just like his tax plan, Donald Trump's maternity leave and childcare plan is designed to benefit the wealthy, while leaving hard-working women and families behind," Pelosi, a Democrat, said in a statement. "Unsurprisingly, LGBT families, fathers and adoptive parents have no place in Trump's pinched notion of hard-working America." The meeting in Washington comes a day after Trump's daughter met with House Speaker Paul Ryan, at her request, during the speaker's visit to New York. RELATED: Clinton's challenge: Rebuilding Obama's winning coalition The recent focus on this set of issues by the GOP nominee comes as polls show the race tightening, but Trump trailing Hillary Clinton among female voters in recent national and battleground state polls. The new proposals from Donald Trump reduce the costs for families by making child care expenses tax deductible for families making less than $500,000. Trump also proposed setting up tax-free accounts to be used for child care and child enrichment activities. He also proposed providing paid maternity leave by extending unemployment insurance benefits to those working mothers whose employers do not offer paid maternity leave. 
Pat Toomey is your classic, pro-trade Republican. The former president of the free trade-promoting Club for Growth has backed a slew of trade deals during his 12 years in Congress, and last year he even praised President Barack Obama’s Trans-Pacific Partnership as an economic boon that would help Pennsylvania’s economy. Then along came Donald Trump and his America-first, trade-bashing platform. Now Toomey — among the most vulnerable incumbent Republicans up for reelection this fall — is urging Obama to dump the TPP. Story Continued Below Toomey has plenty of company among Republicans on the Senate ballot. The GOP’s unshakable faith in free trade has been decidedly broken in the year of Trump — with everyone from a former U.S. trade representative, Rob Portman of Ohio, to free-market devotee Marco Rubio of Florida striking a much different tone. Indeed, the upended politics of trade offer a major conundrum for establishment-minded Republicans running for reelection this year, particularly in Rust Belt states that could help determine control of the Senate next year. Perhaps more than any other issue, trade has illustrated the tightrope GOP candidates have to walk in trying to appeal to Trump-fueled voters while not abandoning the GOP’s core economic principles. “I’ve always believed that you actually have to get an agreement that merits the support,” Toomey said in an interview when asked whether his TPP opposition was inconsistent with his record. Pointing to its dairy and intellectual property provisions, Toomey, who was careful never to explicitly endorse the trade deal as it was being negotiated, added: “There are real problems with TPP.” Of the Republicans who are running in the most closely watched Senate races this cycle, just two have publicly embraced the controversial trade deal: John McCain of Arizona — who warned that the United States’ future in Asia hinges on the TPP — and Mark Kirk of Illinois. One other Republican, Chuck Grassley of Iowa, is favorable toward TPP’s agriculture provisions but won’t weigh in on the other parts. Back in April 2015, Rubio wrote an op-ed in The Wall Street Journal and urged passage of TPP, which would “further our strategic goals in Asia and increase prosperity at home.” In an interview with POLITICO this week, Rubio said he is still evaluating the trade deal but noted that he was “disappointed” with results of a report from the International Trade Commission that gauged the TPP’s economic impact. Pressed on whether his concerns about the TPP constitute a reversal, Rubio responded, “How can it be? You can’t endorse a deal that isn’t written yet.” “The TPP as a concept is something I support. I’d love to have a free trade agreement with the Asia-Pacific region. But it has to be the right deal,” Rubio said. “Just like I support home ownership, but it has to be under the right terms.” Rep. Todd Young (R-Ind.), running for the Senate seat in Indiana, says he has “real problems” with TPP because its intellectual property provisions could harm Eli Lilly and Co., a pharmaceutical company headquartered in Indianapolis. And Republican Sens. Roy Blunt of Missouri and Kelly Ayotte of New Hampshire have their own problems with the trade deal with Asia. In Ayotte’s case, she’s even cited trade as one area on which she agrees with Trump. All of them voted in favor of a procedural measure last year that would allow Obama to ultimately fast-track the trade deal without any amendments. The election-year shift on trade is not limited to Republicans. Hillary Clinton famously pivoted on TPP after praising the deal as the “gold standard” of trade agreements as secretary of state. And Sen. Tim Kaine of Virginia was praising provisions of the TPP just days before he was selected as Clinton’s running mate. As soon as he joined the ticket, Kaine came out in opposition to the Pacific Rim deal. Back in Pennsylvania, Toomey and his allies correctly point out that Katie McGinty, Toomey’s Democratic challenger, supported and touted the North American Free Trade Agreement as an official in the Clinton administration. But the Republican sprint away from the TPP is a remarkable policy reversal for a party that has traditionally championed itself as the party of free trade. “On the campaign trail, it’s just too difficult to quantify the gains from free trade and too easy to point at a plant that closed and scapegoat trade,” Sen. Jeff Flake (R-Ariz.) said. He added that Trump was “obviously” a factor and said in an election year, “it always comes up like this. But it seems to be bigger this year.” McCain has warned that U.S. influence in Asia could diminish if Congress doesn’t approve TPP. And another reason that explains McCain’s warmth for trade, despite its decreasing popularity: Arizona’s robust trade relationship with neighboring Mexico that amounts to $16 billion in goods and services exchanged per year. “I believe in free trade, and I’m a student of history,” McCain said in defending his support for the deal, which Democratic challenger Ann Kirkpatrick opposes. Nowhere does the political toxicity over trade resonate more than in labor-heavy states, with unions vehemently opposing the deal and Democrats trying to stoke that sentiment to turn out those voters against Republicans. In Nevada, Democrat Catherine Cortez Masto expressed her opposition to the TPP months ago and has underscored that stance in front of union audiences such as the AFL-CIO. Meanwhile, Republican Rep. Joe Heck — who also voted to fast-track the trade deal last year — has declined to take an official position on the agreement, though he said he had “some concerns” about some of the trade deal’s provisions. “I think it’s difficult when you have a trade agreement with so many disparate partners that it’s hard to strike a good balance,” Heck said in an interview. He did not elaborate on his concerns. The massive trade deal’s prospects this year on Capitol Hill have all but evaporated, despite an intense public relations campaign from the Obama administration that continued through last week. An undeterred Obama hosted an elaborate event promoting the 12-nation deal last week, even marshaling Ohio Gov. John Kasich — a GOP presidential candidate vanquished by Trump earlier this year — to the White House to help press his case. Yet Ohio’s own incumbent GOP senator, Portman—who has a lengthy pro-trade record and counts Kasich as one of his most powerful boosters—came out in opposition to the Pacific Rim trade deal in February. Democrat Ted Strickland, who has struggled to gain traction, has hammered Portman over his past support of trade deals. But Portman, like Toomey, said his stances on trade have been consistent. “It hasn’t put me in a tough position because I’ve taken the same position for years … which is balanced trade,” he said. “We should open up more markets but we also have to make sure it’s fair as imports come into our country. So I’m very comfortable with that position and that’s where most Ohioans are.” Few expect Capitol Hill to act on the TPP while Obama remains in office, despite pressure from its advocates to take it up in the lame duck. Details of the massive trade deal remain largely unknown to voters; an August poll from Morning Consult showed that 62 percent of registered voters said they had heard little or nothing about the agreement. That same poll found that about 35 percent of voters support the trade deal and 22 percent oppose it, but 43 percent had no opinion. Meanwhile, other Republicans running for reelection have simply declined to answer questions about their TPP position. Wisconsin Sen. Ron Johnson has yet to take a stance on TPP and declined in an interview to say whether he even has any concerns. He rebuffed Democratic challenger Russ Feingold’s attempts to needle him into a position, accusing Feingold of making a “knee-jerk snap decision” on TPP. “This is over 6,000 pages. He read a 60-page leaked version on WikiLeaks?” Johnson said of the deal, which has numerous chapters and totals more than 5,000 pages, especially because it includes extensive lists of every tariff being cut. “I’m not feeling any pressure whatsoever. I’m actually doing my job and doing the hard work that I think Wisconsinites expect out of their senator.” Elena Schneider and Jeremy Herb contributed to this report.
Washington (CNN) Donald Trump's debate study habits, Hillary Clinton's strategy on millennials and the latest electoral trends in swing state Ohio -- they're just some of the future headlines in our "Inside Politics" forecast this week. 1. Debate crunch time, and questions about Trump's prep The first presidential debate is a week from Monday, and Donald Trump has made time on his Sunday schedule for prep sessions with senior advisers. But the unconventional nature of his candidacy extends to his study habits, and some on his team are a bit worried. Maggie Haberman of the New York Times shared her reporting on Trump's aversion to holding mock debate sessions, among other things. "He's playing it a little bit loose and in his sort of free-form style," said Haberman. "But a lot of people around him are concerned that won't translate quite as well in a general election debate." 2. Obama skipping Clinton Foundation event The Clinton Global Initiative, an offshoot of the Clinton Foundation, will hold its annual -- and final -- gathering Monday and Tuesday in New York. It's held at the same time as the United Nations General Assembly for obvious reasons: Major global leaders are in New York and can be sprinkled throughout the CGI sessions. But one big name will be missing from this CGI meeting. Julie Pace of the Associated Press notes that the Clintons' initiative has come under fire this election year. "Hillary Clinton would be happy if she could get through the rest of the campaign without having to talk anymore about the foundation, but she's going to have to grin and bear it for a few more days," said Pace. "This is a three-day gathering with lots of celebrities, lots of big donors -- but there's some speculation it might not be as glitzy as in past years. And there's going to be one very notable absence headlining this meetings, and that's President Barack Obama." 3. Clinton targets millennials in Ohio It's no secret Hillary Clinton has issues with younger voters, and she is looking to turn the tide. On Monday, Clinton will travel to Ohio to make her case to millennials by retracing some of her early work as a lawyer. Abby Philip of the Washington Post says trying to get younger voters to relate more to Clinton is the big goal. "The focus of the speech is going to be about her early years -- what she did after she left college -- the focus on idealism and reminding young voters that she was kind of like them," said Phillip. "And also like someone else, a young community organizer from Chicago, Barack Obama." Will this humanize her? Make her seem more like a real person and less like a politician? Stay tuned. 4. Signs of progress for Trump in swing state Ohio is always a giant presidential battleground, and the GOP primary candidacy of its governor, John Kasich, adds another interesting wrinkle this year. Kasich is no Donald Trump fan -- far from it -- but some Ohio Republicans see signs that even former Kasich primary voters are turning to Trump in the general election. There's a lot of talk about the influx of newly registered Republican voters and CNN's Sara Murray reports that GOPers surveying those new party members in the Buckeye State are finding firmer-than-expected Trump support. "They're finding Donald Trump has strong support from Democrats who are now Republicans, Independents who are now Republicans," Murray said. "People who registered to vote for John Kasich in the primaries are now backing Trump. And what should be particularly worrisome for Democrats in Ohio is that they (the GOP) are finding far more support than they expected among female voters." 5. Mixed ballots in Ohio pose dilemma  Suppose you're working a Republican phone bank in Ohio and a voter tells you they plan to vote for Hillary Clinton for president and Republican Rob Portman for U.S. Senate. Do you take time -- and resources -- to follow up with that voter to make sure they cast their ballot? Democrats privately concede that Portman appears to be on an easy path to re-election, so it is less of a conflict for them. Ohio is a tough state, and the Clinton campaign will try to motivate every last potential voter to turn out, no matter who they support for the Senate. But what about the Republican Party's ground-game efforts? Ostensibly such efforts are on behalf of all Republicans, but GOP candidates who don't have the best relationship with Trump don't all trust the RNC to fight on their behalf. So Portman is relying on his own get-out-the-vote effort. Those who have seen recent GOP polling in the state say this is one good reason why: Some 20% of Clinton voters in Ohio say they are planning to vote Republican for Senate. 
Senate Armed Services Committee Chairman John McCain will vote to override President Barack Obama’s veto of legislation that would allow families of the victims of the Sept. 11, 2001 attacks to sue Saudi Arabia — defying warnings from military officials that it could put U.S. troops at risk. McCain’s decision to back the Justice Against Sponsors of Terrorism Act is also a notable break from his usual hawkish allies on the Capitol. House Armed Services Committee Chairman Mac Thornberry of Texas has circulated a letter urging Republicans to sustain Obama’s veto, while close friend Sen. Lindsey Graham (R-S.C.) has also voiced concerns and worked behind the scenes on potential tweaks to the bill — but with little success. Story Continued Below “I plan to vote to override the president’s veto of the Justice Against Sponsors of Terrorism Act,” McCain said in a statement to POLITICO. “Going forward, I will continue to work with my colleagues in the Senate to ensure that American military, intelligence, and diplomatic personnel are protected from any potential retaliatory lawsuits and that the implementation of this law is true to its narrow intent.” Earlier Tuesday, McCain had declined to say where he could come down on the JASTA vote scheduled in the Senate for Wednesday, noting: “I have got to look at what the alternatives are.” McCain’s statement adds to the air of inevitability on Capitol Hill surrounding the 9/11 bill, which was formally vetoed by Obama last week but is expected to easily clinch the two-thirds support from Congress needed to override a presidential veto. It would be Obama’s first veto successfully overridden by Congress. Still, top Obama administration officials have tried to exert last-minute pressure on lawmakers to help sustain Obama’s veto. For instance, Secretary of State John Kerry has had several conversations with Senate Foreign Relations Committee Chairman Bob Corker (R-Tenn.), who has been one of the senators most skeptical of the bill. Gen. Joe Dunford, the top U.S. military official, weighed in Tuesday with a letter, obtained by POLITICO, outlining his concerns for U.S. service members and “risks to the close security cooperation relationships” with allies. And Defense Secretary Ash Carter fired off another warning to Congress, arguing that legislation has “potentially harmful consequences for the Department of Defense and its personnel.” "While we are sympathetic to the intent of JASTA, its potential second- and third-order consequences could be devastating to the department and its service members and could undermine our important counterterrorism efforts abroad," Carter wrote in the letter, obtained by POLITICO. On Tuesday, McCain’s Democratic counterpart on the Armed Services Committee, Sen. Jack Reed of Rhode Island, acknowledged the administration's concerns. “I’m looking closely at two significant issues,” Reed said. “One is that the families are looking not for any type of award, they’re looking for accountability as much as anything else. On the other side, is the real possibility this will be used against us and our troops and servicemen, and I’m trying to balance that.” McCain’s Democratic opponent, Rep. Ann Kirkpatrick, also plans to vote to override Obama’s veto, she said in a statement earlier this month. Kirkpatrick’s campaign has also raised Saudi Arabia as a campaign issue. As the Senate debated a vote to block a Saudi arms sale last week, her campaign accused McCain of having ties to the Saudi government through a donation to the McCain Institute. Even lawmakers who have voiced concerns say there is little question the Senate is set to easily override Obama’s veto. Corker and Graham had started to discuss a potential change to the legislation that would narrow its scope to just the families of the victims of the Sept. 11, 2001 attacks, according to congressional sources. Right now, JASTA applies to any foreign government found liable for terrorism conducted on U.S. soil – although the main target of the legislation has largely been viewed as Saudi Arabia and its alleged role in the terror attacks 15 years ago. Fifteen of the 19 hijackers were Saudi nationals. Speaking with reporters, Corker said limiting JASTA to just Sept. 11 victims was the “easiest” way to narrow the legislation, but it was still facing opposition from JASTA supporters. He predicted that lawmakers may push to pass a legislative fix to the 9/11 bill in the lame-duck session, after observing any potential “blowback” the United States ends up facing from foreign governments over the next several weeks. “This isn’t to me about Saudi Arabia,” Corker said. “It’s the blowback to us because we’re the most involved in the world. You end up exporting your foreign policy to trial lawyers, right? … What you’re really doing here is potentially exporting big issues to trial lawyers away from our own abilities as a government to conduct foreign policy. That’s an issue.” Though the veto override appears like a done deal, there was a clear and palpable sense of buyer’s remorse percolating among key lawmakers as the Senate barreled toward the key vote on Wednesday. Sen. Orrin Hatch (R-Utah), a senior member of the Senate Judiciary Committee, noted that he himself was a co-sponsor of JASTA. Still, that wasn’t stopping him from having second thoughts as the prospect of the legislation turning into law became a reality. “I’m worried about getting into a tremendous legal morass that can really cost this country, not just locally but by other countries across the world,” Hatch said. “I have to say, I don’t think we had enough time to consider all the ramifications. There are a lot of ramifications.” Sen. Dianne Feinstein (D-Calif.), the top Democrat on the Senate Intelligence Committee, also reiterated her concerns: “The more I think from an intelligence perspective, it’s the wrong thing to do.” Still, other senators appeared to have little change of heart ahead of the high-profile vote on Wednesday. “The vote passed overwhelmingly here in the Senate and the House,” said Sen. Deb Fischer (R-Neb.). “I supported it at the time. I haven’t seen anything that would change my mind.”
(CNN)North Korea went on the offensive Friday, blasting the US for "aggression" in Asia, blaming Washington for its pursuit of nuclear weapons and threatening the US with "tremendous consequences beyond imagination." The Democratic People's Republic of Korea "had no other choice but to go nuclear," Foreign Minister Ri Yong Ho told the UN General Assembly, to defend itself "from the constant nuclear threats from the United States." Ri's comments came as the US and Asian nations gathered in New York Friday with a fresh reminder of what they consider the gravest threat facing the region: North Korea's announcement this week that it had successfully tested its most powerful rocket engine yet. The test Tuesday was followed by a US show of force, as the Pentagon on Wednesday flew two B-1B bombers alongside the demilitarized zone separating North and South Korea, setting the the stage for US-South Korea joint military exercises in October that will include a simulated nuclear facility strike. The heightened tensions, North Korea's steady drumbeat of tests and its nuclear ambitions have put the region on edge and the Pentagon on notice. "North Korea's unpredictable behavior and capability development also continues to threaten allies and potentially the homeland," Gen. Joseph Dunford, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said Wednesday in Maryland. "It's consumed an awful lot of time -- I think it's fair to say -- of senior leadership's time over the past few weeks." The North Korean minister offered a through-the-looking glass version of the same events. "Only a couple of days ago, the United States has again threatened the DPRK by flying the strategic bombers 'B-1B' over the military demarcation line on the Korean peninsula and landing in South Korea," Ri said. "We will never remain onlookers at it and the United States will have to face tremendous consequences beyond imagination." Meanwhile, Secretary of State John Kerry met Friday on the sidelines of the UN General Assembly with foreign ministers from the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, a 10-member bloc dedicated to economic, political and security cooperation. "The United States will do whatever is necessary to defend our own citizens and to honor our security commitments to our allies," Kerry told the ASEAN meeting. He called on allies to "vigorously" enforce sanctions against the isolated regime and urged ASEAN members to "ensure that the DPRK pays a price for its dangerous actions." Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe made a blunt call for international action at the UN Wednesday. "Right before our eyes, North Korea is carrying out a plan about which there can be no doubt," Abe said. "There is no alternative but to say that the threat has now reached a dimension altogether different from what has transpired until now." The perceived threat is changing regional dynamics, bringing old rivals Japan and South Korea closer together. It's putting China on the spot as Washington pushes Beijing to do more to rein its ally in, even as tensions over the South China Sea complicate cooperation. And it will likely prompt a new international push for tougher sanctions, the likes of which were used to force Iran to the negotiating table. That's still unlikely to stop North Korea, formally known as the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, experts said. Indeed, US officials and scientific experts expect another nuclear test as soon as early October. "From North Korea's perspective, it only makes sense to continue these tests and continue to develop these weapons until there's a substantial shift in dialogue with the US," said Alison Evans, a country risk senior analyst at the global consulting firm IHS. "For North Korea, it's the recognition that's the important thing. It needs its status as a nuclear power to be recognized," Evans said, adding that, "The leadership sees developing a nuclear deterrent as a guarantor of survival." RELATED: US B-1 bombers fly over South Korea in show of force US officials say the Pentagon is watching carefully for another nuclear test. Meanwhile, the Union of Concerned Scientists said there is some speculation that Pyongyang may try another satellite launch around October 10, the anniversary of the founding of its Worker's Party of Korea. North Korea conducted its fourth nuclear test in January. In the ensuing months, it has followed that detonation with a total of 21 ballistic missile tests, including land- and submarine-based launches. In May, North Korea's 32-year-old leader Kim Jong-un made the country's ambitions official, announcing that Pyongyang was on a dual track of developing nuclear weapons and the economy. Pyongyang then staged its largest nuclear test yet on September 9, the anniversary of the DPRK's founding in 1948. And Tuesday's rocket launch was "substantially larger and more powerful than anything North Korea has tested before," according to 38 North, a program devoted to analyzing North Korea at Johns Hopkins University's School of Advanced International Studies. All this testing is unlikely to win it the US recognition it craves, though. After the more recent nuclear test, President Barack Obama made clear that "the United States does not, and never will, accept North Korea as a nuclear state." Obama said that the US would work with Asian allies, the UN Security Council and international partners to implement existing measures and "take additional significant steps, including new sanctions to demonstrate to North Korea that there are consequences to its unlawful and dangerous actions." However, the rhetoric from the presidential campaign trail is a constant reminder that Obama administration will soon no longer calling the American shots on the issue. Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump has held out the possibility of meeting with Kim in a dramatic break with US political conventions. He earned criticism for the remark, as well as for suggesting that South Korea and Japan should consider developing their own nuclear weapons. "At some point we have to say, you know what, we're better off if Japan protects itself against this maniac in North Korea," Trump told Anderson Cooper at a CNN town hall in Milwaukee in March. "We're better off, frankly, if South Korea is going to start to protect itself." The statements have rattled Tokyo and Seoul, and while Trump has said that China must play a stronger role in checking their neighbor and ally, his promise to play tough with Beijing on trade could also roil that effort. The Republican candidate's tough talk has only heightened the uncertainty surrounding American policy in the region and is likely to be something that US officials are asked to address in their consultations Friday.  Hillary Clinton has also articulated a strong stance on China, but is less likely to take the protectionist steps that could spark a trade war with the Asian power. On North Korea, specifically, she has emphasized ratcheting up US sanctions. International sanctions levied in March after the January nuclear test were the first on North Korea to do more than target weapons development or luxury goods for the elite. They ban all weapons trade and require inspections of all cargo to and from the country, among other steps. The international community could squeeze North Korea further by targeting the export of its resources, said Bruce Klingner, a senior research fellow at the Heritage Foundation, echoing the way UN sanctions targeted Iran by banning the export of its oil. "That is a big step," Klingner said, "it will impact the people of North Korea." China signed on for the March sanctions, but its officials have repeatedly said they believe sanctions are counterproductive and experts say China historically hasn't thoroughly enforced them against North Korea. US tensions with China over the South China Sea could make it harder to cooperate. Dunford said Wednesday that "China seeks to limit our ability to project power and to undermine the credibility of our alliances in the Pacific." The US can take additional unilateral steps to get tougher on Pyongyang, Klingner said, by sanctioning non-North Korean entities that act as an agent for the country -- most likely Chinese entities and financial institutions. In the meantime, US military officials are planning. From October 3 to 21, the US and South Korea will carry out the joint exercise "Red Flag" in Alaska, which will include an aerial exercise "simulating attacks on nuclear facilities and scenarios of sudden missile attack," a ministry spokesperson with the South Korean Defense Department told CNN. North Korea derided South Korea as a "puppet warmongers" in a statement about the Red Flag exercises. CNN's Jungeun Kim and Paula Hancocks in Seoul and Barbara Starr in Washington contributed to this report.
(CNN)An Ohio county chair for the Trump campaign resigned following an interview published Thursday, in which she suggested there was "no racism" until President Barack Obama was elected, and called the Black Lives Matter movement "a stupid waste of time." Kathy Miller -- who is white -- resigned from her position, which the Trump campaign said was a volunteer job, and apologized for the "inappropriate remarks," according to a statement from the Trump campaign. "My personal comments were inappropriate, and I apologize," Miller stated. "I am not a spokesperson for the campaign and was not speaking on its behalf. I have resigned as the volunteer campaign chair in Mahoning County and as an elector to the Electoral College to avoid any unnecessary distractions." Miller told The Guardian in an interview that she blamed Obama for exacerbating racial tension. "If you're black and you haven't been successful in the last 50 years, it's your own fault. You've had every opportunity," Miller told the publication. "I don't think there was any racism until Obama got elected. We never had any problems like this," Miller said. "Now, with the people with guns and shooting up neighborhoods and not being responsible citizens, that's a big change, and I think that's the philosophy Obama has perpetuated on America." Miller also wholly rejected the premise of systemic racism. "You've had the same schools everybody else went to. You had benefits to go to college that white kids didn't have. You had all the advantages and didn't take advantage of it. It's not our fault, certainly," she said. The Trump campaign announced that Tracey Winbush, an African-American radio host, will take over Miller's duties. According to a 2013 census report, black voters voted at the highest rate of any race in the 2012 presidential election. 
(CNN)Texas Sen. Ted Cruz is willing to lend a hand to Donald Trump, he said Tuesday. Asked by conservative radio host Hugh Hewitt whether he'd be willing to campaign for Trump or help with his debate prep, the former Trump nemesis was on board. He formally endorsed the Republican nominee in a Facebook post last Friday. "I am happy to help. I have conveyed that to them. I will do whatever I can to defeat Hillary Clinton," Cruz said, adding that he is equally focused on preserving a Republican majority in the Senate. "I'm going to do everything I can to urge conservatives to come out and vote, even if they may not be thrilled at the candidates on the ballot. I'm urging them to come out and vote anyway, because the consequences of staying home, I think, are really quite significant." Trump's former rival praised his "strong" debate performance, calling Clinton "tired" and "formulaic." "I thought it was a very strong debate. I thought Hillary did not have a good performance. I think throughout the night, she was tired, she was formulaic. The entire debate from Hillary was more Washington as usual. And every proposal she advanced was another big government solution that isn't working, that is failing. And I thought Donald had the strongest debate performance he's had in this election cycle," the Texas senator said. 
Hillary Clinton on Monday leveled some of her most charged attacks against Donald Trump yet, accusing the nominee of enabling Islamic State fighters with his rhetoric and hinting he may be committing treason. With a spate of domestic attacks over the weekend refreshing terror fears, Clinton and Trump hurled insults at each other on Monday, trying to convince voters that the other candidate would be a disastrous commander in chief. Story Continued Below Clinton held an impromptu news conference in the morning in which she presented herself as a steady hand in the face of terror threats and Trump as a reckless leader who is already making the United States less safe. “We’ve heard that from former CIA Director Michael Hayden, who made it a very clear point when he said Donald Trump is being used as a recruiting sergeant in and for the terrorists,” Clinton said. “We know from the former head of the Counterterrorism Center, Mike Olsen, that the language that Mr. Trump has used is giving aid and comfort to our adversaries,” she added, using the constitutional definition of treason. Trump’s camp fired back, blaming Clinton for the rise of the Islamic State because she supported pulling back on troops in Iraq in 2011. “Hillary Clinton’s comments today accusing Mr. Trump of treason are not only beyond the pale, it’s also an attempt to distract from her horrible record on ISIS,” Trump’s senior communications adviser Jason Miller said. Trump himself piled on, trying to shame Clinton and tying her to President Barack Obama on the terrorism issue. “Today, Hillary Clinton showed again that she will say anything — and blame anyone — to shift attention away from the weakness she showed as Secretary of State,” Trump said in a statement. “The Obama-Clinton doctrine of not taking ISIS seriously enough has emboldened terrorists all over the world. They are hoping and praying that Hillary Clinton becomes President so that they can continue their savagery and murder.” And during an afternoon rally in Florida, Trump accused Clinton of being tougher on his supporters than she has been on terrorists. “Hillary talks tougher about my supporters than she does Islamic terrorists, right?” he said, to cheers. “She called patriotic Americans who support our campaign, many of them cops and soldiers, deplorable and irredeemable, and she means it. Millions and millions of people,” Trump added, recalling remarks Clinton made earlier this month when she lumped half of his supporters into a “basket of deplorables.” The heated language on both sides comes as each are trying to reassure rattled Americans that they are the most capable of stepping into the commander in chief role. The series of planted bombs around New York and New Jersey over the weekend as well as the mass stabbing at a Minnesota mall has freshly raised fears of the reach of the Islamic State, even though details are still emerging about the inspiration for the attacks. While Clinton tried to present herself as the clearheaded alternative to Trump’s reckless bombast, she also had to thread the needle when it comes to her own legacy as secretary of state and Obama’s track record. “This is a serious challenge,” Clinton told reporters, as she sought to reassure voters that the U.S. is on the right track in combating that challenge. “We are well-equipped to meet it. And we can do so in keeping with smart law enforcement, good intelligence and in concert with our values.” She warned against getting “diverted and distracted” by Trump's inflammatory words, and dismissed Trump’s attacks on her past efforts to combat terrorism while at the State Department. “Well, it’s like so much else he says: It’s not grounded in fact. It’s meant to, you know, make some kind of demagogic point,” Clinton said. “I am prepared to, ready to actually take on those challenges, not engage in a lot of, you know, irresponsible, reckless rhetoric, but to do the hard work as I’ve done before, to put into place the strategies for local and state law enforcement for an intelligence surge, for the kind of preventive actions we need to take here at home and to intensify our efforts to defeat ISIS.” Clinton also suggested Americans won’t hear her opponent’s plan, and not because it's secret. “He keeps saying he has a secret plan. Well, the secret is he has no plan,” she said. “So let’s focus on what we really can do, and what I've laid out is a path forward that will keep us safer, protect our country and go after the terrorists to finally destroy them.” But Trump was eager to tether Clinton to Obama, and also pounced on a remark from White House press secretary Josh Earnest, who referred to the terrorism fight as a “narrative battle” against whether the U.S. and the West is battling against the Muslim religion. “I will bring an end to these senseless acts of violence. They are wrong to say that we’re in a fight about ‘narratives.’ These terrorists pose an existential threat to our country, our values, and our way of life,” Trump said. Trump’s running mate, Indiana Gov. Mike Pence, joined in the sniping, saying he was dumbfounded by the White House’s use of the term “narrative fight” and linking Clinton to it. “I’m not sure that Hillary Clinton and Barack Obama know that we’re at war,” Pence told conservative radio host Rush Limbaugh. “The White House spokesman today actually said that we were in a — quote — narrative fight, in a narrative battle. I don’t even know what that is.” Obama, meanwhile, pats himself on the back as he credited the U.S. for exposing the Islamic State “as the failed cause that it is” by taking more of its territory.
Politico POLITICO's must-read briefing on what's driving the day in Washington DONALD TRUMP has not held an open press availability in 56 days, and last night his campaign manager, Kellyanne Conway, told Erin Burnett on CNN that Trump “gives press availability every day by doing these rallies in these swing states.” That is not the same thing. (H/t Sopan Deb) Good Wednesday morning from Capitol Hill. Want free breakfast? The PLAYBOOK FOOD TRUCK is near the Capitol South Metro now, and will stay there until 10 a.m. today. Egg Sandwiches. Coffee. TOMORROW, which, for the record, is Thursday, we’ll be on the Senate side (location to come tomorrow, but it will be easily accessible for commuters). ON FRIDAY we’ll be at 17th and K for our downtown friends. M HILLARY CLINTON is in Orlando today, and will “talk about building an ‘Inclusive Economy’ – one that works for every American, not just those at the top – and that to compete and win in the global economy, we can't afford to leave anyone on the sidelines … The ideas she’ll talk about – that everyone has something to contribute in our country – date back to Clinton’s book ‘It Takes a Village,’” per a campaign official. She also previewed the speech in the New York Times: http://nyti.ms/2clD2gU Story Continued Below **SUBSCRIBE to Playbook: http://politi.co/1M75UbX UNGA BUNGLE -- “Trump Gives Ukraine Cold Shoulder in New York,” by Foreign Policy’s Molly O’Toole and Reid Standish: “Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump already has a contentious relationship with Kiev, irking the Ukrainian public and government officials with his praise of Russian President Vladimir Putin and Moscow-friendly views on the annexation of Crimea and the war in eastern Ukraine. Now, invited to meet with Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko on the sidelines of the United Nations General Assembly this week, Trump’s campaign didn’t even bother to send Kiev an RSVP. “A spokesperson for the Ukrainian presidential administration told Foreign Policy they reached out to both Trump and his Democratic rival, former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, to meet with Poroshenko. According to the official, only Clinton said yes, sitting down with the president on Monday. The Trump campaign did not give a clear answer. Trump’s campaign did not provide comment about the so-far snub by the time of publication. But according to the candidate’s public schedule, he’s already jetted to North Carolina and has plans to be in Ohio and Pennsylvania the rest of the week, not in New York, where the U.N. meeting ends on Sept. 26, the day of the first presidential debate.” http://atfp.co/2d7MYfG NEW TRUMP AD -- “Movement” -- SCRIPT: “It’s a movement. Not a campaign. It’s leader, Donald Trump, builder, businessman, success. Doing what others called impossible. Donald Trump’s priority: you. Dreaming big. Building bigger. United for family, jobs, country, defined by freedom, standing together, pushing ahead, leaving the past behind, changing our future. Together, we’ll make America great again.” http://bit.ly/2ctccHa SIREN -- AP: “Early ballots: Clinton sees strength in NC but lags in Iowa”: “Seven weeks before Election Day, the earliest numbers from advance voting for president show initial strength for Hillary Clinton in swing state North Carolina, good news for Donald Trump in battleground Iowa and a record number of requests for ballots in Ohio.” http://apne.ws/2cQKeUy -- “Tom Steyer puts more money into voter turnout machine,” by LATimes’ H. Charley Bodkin: “Tom Steyer -- the San Francisco billionaire, political donor and environmental advocate -- said Tuesday he would put $20 million of his own money behind a campaign to mobilize 2 million voters in eight swing states to boost support for Democrat Hillary Clinton. The overall effort, which includes partnerships with labor groups, is expected to cost $55 million, Steyer told Lawrence O'Donnell on MSNBC. He said they’ll be focusing on ‘economic justice, environmental justice, racial justice and good schools’ and targeting 200 college campuses.” http://lat.ms/2d3T44S HOT IN RIYADH -- IMPORTANT STORY -- “Dems waver on override for 9/11 bill,” by Seung Min Kim and Heather Caygle: “Democrats are starting to show cracks in their support for legislation that would allow families of 9/11 victims to sue Saudi Arabia -- suggesting White House opposition to the bill may be resonating with lawmakers. But to sustain his expected veto, Obama will need to persuade 34 senators to change course and oppose the bill -- a very difficult task. The legislation sailed through both chambers with no opposition. And the White House now has scant time to make their case to Capitol Hill, with a veto override vote in the Senate expected this month.” http://politi.co/2dhKdvx --WHY THIS MATTERS: If Congress overrides the president’s veto, that would mark a major defeat on Capitol Hill for the White House. It would be the first Congressional override of a veto of Barack Obama’s presidency. As SMK and Heather point out in their story, McConnell wants to hold the veto override vote before Congress leaves for the fall campaign season, which doesn’t give the Obama administration a ton of time to press its argument. White House press secretary Josh Earnest said: “As we’ve made this case, members of Congress in both parties have indicated that they are open to the concerns that we’ve expressed. In many cases, they share them. And the real question for members of Congress will be whether or not they’re prepared to cast a vote that is consistent with the views and feelings that they expressed in private.” SPOILER ALERT: Members of Congress oftentimes say one thing in private, and do something completely contradictory in public. Welcome to Washington! **** A message from BP: Over the past 10 years, no energy company has invested more in the U.S. than BP – $90 billion in total. Take 90 seconds to see what else we’re doing to help keep America moving forward. ****** DRIP DRIP -- “Trump used $258,000 from his charity to settle legal problems,” by WashPost’s David A. Fahrenthold: “If the Internal Revenue Service were to find that Trump violated self-dealing rules, the agency could require him to pay penalty taxes or to reimburse the foundation for all the money it spent on his behalf. ... More broadly, these cases also provide new evidence that Trump ran his charity in a way that may have violated U.S. tax law and gone against the moral conventions of philanthropy.” http://wapo.st/2cPwr2e --@SopanDeb: “.@JasonMillerinDC releases statement accusing @Fahrenthold of inaccuracies and bias, but doesn’t list specifics (I have asked.)”: http://bit.ly/2cCl6Qg DAILY DONALD -- After the Washington Post ran a story with the headline “Donald Trump’s new paid maternity leave plan might exclude single mothers,” they appended an update: “Update: After this story published, Trump campaign spokesman Jason Miller told The Post that Trump’s paid maternity leave policy would extend to single mothers. However, he could not explain why a marriage requirement is cited on the campaign’s website and in Ivanka Trump’s Cosmopolitan interview. ‘We don’t have the exact legislation written down,’ he said.” FOR YOUR RADAR -- “Obama Administration Considers Arming Syrian Kurds Against ISIS,” by the NYT’s Eric Schmitt: “The Obama administration is weighing a military plan to directly arm Syrian Kurdish fighters combating the Islamic State, a major policy shift that could speed up the offensive against the terrorist group but also sharply escalate tensions between Turkey and the United States. The plan has been under discussion by the National Security Council staff at a moment when President Obama has directed aides to examine all proposals that could accelerate the fight against the Islamic State ... Mr. Obama has told aides that he wants an offensive well underway before he leaves office that is aimed at routing the Islamic State from Raqqa, the group’s de facto capital in northern Syria.” http://nyti.ms/2d1o96n -- AP: “Man wounded after attempt to enter Israeli Embassy in Turkey”: “An attacker apparently armed with a knife tried to enter the Israeli Embassy in Turkey on Wednesday before being shot and slightly wounded by Turkish security officials, an Israeli official said. Emmanuel Nahshon told The Associated Press that all Israeli Embassy staff were safe and the attacker was captured. ‘The attacker was wounded before he reached the embassy," Nashon said in a statement in Jerusalem. ‘A person approached the embassy with a knife. He was lightly wounded by a local security man in the leg,’ he said.” http://apne.ws/2clIvEn HAPPENING TODAY -- Donald Trump will hold a rally at the Stranahan Theater in Toledo, Ohio, with Mike Pence. Hillary Clinton will be in Orlando, at the Frontline Outreach Youth and Family Center. Bill Clinton is addressing his Clinton Global Initiative for the last time (Annie Karni previews his speech here: http://politi.co/2cPTI3V). President Barack Obama is in New York, and will speak at the U.S.-Africa Business Forum at the Plaza Hotel. He’ll then hold bilateral meetings with Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel and President Juan Manuel Santos of Colombia. He’ll return to D.C. in the afternoon. YOU’RE INVITED! -- Join us for Playbook Cocktails TONIGHT with civil rights icon, Rep. John Lewis (D-Ga.)! Our conversation comes during the opening week of the Smithsonian’s National Museum of African American History and Culture. We’ll talk about civil rights and explore Lewis’s extraordinary life. Doors open at 5:30 p.m. The W Hotel, 515 15th Street, NW. RSVP here http://bit.ly/2cvXEEd CAMPAIGN CASH UPDATE -- “Trump forces lagged Clinton in August money race [by $42 million]: But Trump finally showed signs of building a more conventional political infrastructure,” by Isaac Arnsdorf and Ken Vogel: “The Trump campaign, two supportive super PACs and the [RNC] pulled in a combined $70 million, relying largely on small donors, during the tumultuous month of August ... By contrast, the Clinton campaign, an allied super PAC and the [DNC], leaning heavily on major donors, raised a total of $112 million in August.” http://politi.co/2cQyPUT -- “Clinton campaign raced through $50 million last month,” by AP’s Julie Bykowicz and Chad Day: “Hillary Clinton spent $645,000 more a day than her opponent Donald Trump last month, but even with her $50 million campaign outlay, she has not been able to pull away from him in the race for the White House. Clinton’s campaign had its most expensive month to date in August, eclipsing its previous monthly high by more than $12 million. And combined, Clinton and the national Democratic Party paid out $78 million in August, while Trump and the [RNC] spent about $47 million.” http://apne.ws/2d1miP1 THE PRIDE OF GREENWICH -- “The Bush family’s lament: They detest the GOP nominee, and now have become his foil,” by Eli Stokols: “Their distaste for Donald Trump was no secret. But they saw no point in publicizing it. From Miami to Houston, Crawford to Kennebunkport, members of the Republican Party’s first family remained quiet for months, avoiding cameras and questions about presidential politics and focusing their few fundraiser appearances on assisting the GOP candidates who would be forced to share the November ballot with a nominee they detest. But given the Bush clan’s proximity to public life, and their progeny’s desire to one day return the family to power, it was only a matter of time before their tongues would be held no longer. Over a 24-hour span that began with Jeb Bush’s surprising and sardonic cameo in Sunday’s Emmy Awards broadcast and Monday night’s reports that his father, former President George H.W. Bush, had told a family friend privately that he intended to support Hillary Clinton, the Bushes returned to the headlines, and are giving Trump just the establishment foil he so capably exploits … “George W. Bush, who is headed to Washington this weekend to headline a fundraiser for Senate Republicans and attend the opening of the National African American History Museum, has shared in private settings for months about his fear that he will be ‘the last Republican president.’ And while Bush family loyalists say they do not know if he is joking, they are certain he cannot support Trump.” http://politi.co/2clDmMH GOVT FUNDING WATCH -- “Senate advances budget deal that doesn’t exist yet,” by Ben Weyl, Seung Min Kim, and Burgess Everett: “Mitch McConnell summoned his Republican Conference to a late afternoon meeting Tuesday with an unusual ask: Would his colleagues support moving forward on a spending deal that doesn’t even exist yet? The answer, surprisingly, was yes. The Senate voted 89-7 on Tuesday evening to move forward on a bill that will eventually be used to fund the government through Dec. 9 and deliver $1.1 billion to fight the Zika epidemic. A bloc of conservatives voted no, but the measure easily cleared the 60-vote threshold to avoid a filibuster, powered by votes from Senate Democrats, centrist Republicans and GOP senators up for reelection.” http://politi.co/2cHpBy4 TERRORISM LATEST -- “Bomb suspect vowed ‘death to your oppression,’ feds say,” by AP’s Eric Tucker, Larry Neumeister and Jennifer Peltz: “Federal court complaints filed Tuesday gave a chilling glimpse into what authorities say motivated the Afghan-born U.S. citizen to set off explosives last weekend in New York City and New Jersey, including a bomb that injured 31 people in Manhattan. The blasts came two years after the FBI looked into him but came up with nothing tying him to terrorism.” http://apne.ws/2d1jwJm PETER HAMBY AND SCOTT CONROY ARE FAMOUS! -- “Megyn Kelly to Produce Comedy Series Set on Presidential Campaign Trail,” by Variety’s Justin Kroll: “Fox News star Megyn Kelly is attached to produce a new scripted series with ‘Fifty Shades of Grey’ producer Michael De Luca following a presidential campaign trail and the embedded journalists who cover it. Verizon-owned streaming platform Go90 has ordered six half-hour episodes of the political comedy ‘Embeds.’ The series will follow five young reporters who are in way over their heads as they find themselves shaping the future of the country while experiencing raucous adventures in an unexpected world of sex, drugs, and swing states. Big-name politicians are expected to cameo throughout the series. ... “Scott Conroy, co-author of the bestselling Sarah Palin biography ‘Sarah From Alaska,’ and Peter Hamby, a former CNN correspondent who is now head of Snapchat’s news efforts, co-created the show and penned the pilot. ... Conroy is leaving Vice’s upcoming nightly news show for HBO to work on the show.” http://bit.ly/2cYA7iI SNEAK PEAKS -- NPR’s Steve Inskeep interviewed British Prime Minister Theresa May for Morning Edition. INSKEEP: “Are you sure you are going to be able to make life better once Brexit is complete?” MAY: “There are opportunities for us once Brexit is complete and I’m absolutely clear that we are going to take those opportunities. We’re going to make a success and people will see a difference. I, what I said about my government is that it will be a government that will work with everyone. I want to see an economy that works for everyone and a society that works for everyone in the UK and that’s about spreading the benefits of economic growth across the country and among people. And there’s a number of ways in which we will do that. I think leaving the European Union with the opportunities it gives us for the trading relationships around the rest of the world will be an important part of that.” http://n.pr/2dg8Juc --PEOPLE’s interview with Hillary Clinton and Tim Kaine -- On her recent sick days at home, Clinton said she did “bounce off the walls a little bit – I’m not great at taking it easy.” Kaine on his role as the No. 2 to the potential first female president: “She’s the boss. The Vice President has a wonderful ability to influence and promote the administration, but at the end of the day it’s the President who has that weight on the shoulders. I relish that. I’m a strong man who’s excited to be supporting a strong woman in this way.” http://bit.ly/2cPQKN5 ... http://bit.ly/2d1nDFn CLINTON, INC. -- “Clinton Foundation to lay off dozens of staff,” by Ken Vogel and Katy O’Donnell in New York: “The Clinton Global Initiative has alerted dozens of employees that their jobs will be eliminated at year’s end, even as it plans to retain some staff to continue working with donors, according to two former Clinton Foundation officials who remain in communication with staff. The winding down of CGI after this week’s glitzy gathering and the resulting layoffs stem from concessions made by the Clinton Foundation to controversies swirling around Hillary Clinton's presidential campaign.” http://politi.co/2cP1ICg **** A message from BP: We’ve donated $147 million to U.S. community programs over the past five years. Check out the programs we support in your community. ****** TOP-ED – NORM EISEN and RICHARD PAINTER in WashPost, “A Trump presidency would be ethically compromised”: “As government ethics lawyers who have, respectively, counseled the most recent Republican president and the most recent Democratic one ... [w]e have come to believe a Trump presidency would be ethically compromised for the following reasons: Opacity. ... Lack of divestment. ... Domestic conflicts. ... Foreign conflicts. ... Legal exposure. ... Veracity. ... The ethics lawyer who would have President Trump as his or her client would face a far more daunting task than either of us — or any of our colleagues in recent years — has ever confronted.” http://wapo.st/2cTzL9g POLLS! -- MONMOUTH: FLORIDA -- Hillary Clinton 46, Donald Trump 41 … SENATE: Marco Rubio 47, Patrick Murphy 45. http://bit.ly/2cAKiqe -- Bloomberg Politics Purple Slice Poll, conducted by Purple Strategies, has Hillary Clinton ahead of Donald Trump 46 to 42 percent among likely voters with annual household incomes of $100,000 or more in a two-way race. Mitt Romney won this group by 10 percentage points in 2012 according to exit polls and made up 27 percent of the 2012 electorate. (Online panel survey, MOE +/- 4 percentage points) http://bit.ly/2diDtgY 2016 PLAYERS -- “Trump team talking to veteran GOP ad man Elsass,” by Alex Isenstadt: “[Rex] Elsass has deep connections to the Trump campaign. He previously served as a top strategist to vice presidential nominee Mike Pence, and in 2012 he worked with Trump campaign manager Kellyanne Conway for Missouri Senate candidate Todd Akin ... Trump’s advertising campaign has been led by Jamestown, a prominent political consulting firm with an anti-establishment edge. Two Jamestown employees, Jason Miller and Larry Weitzner, have taken senior roles in the campaign.” http://politi.co/2dfWaPn FLASHBACK – BuzzFeed’s McKay Coppins, June 13, 2013, “Inside The Meltdown At America’s Most Conservative, Most Christian Political Consulting Firm” http://bzfd.it/2cTxISH BEYOND THE BELTWAY -- “Protests erupt after fatal shooting by police,” by the Charlotte Observer’s Joe Marusak and Ely Portillo: “A dozen police officers were injured Tuesday night in clashes with several hundred people protesting an officer-involved fatal shooting in the University City area … In Charlotte, a crowd of several hundred shouting protesters continued to block streets well after midnight, despite the use of tear gas by police in riot gear. … The protesters also walked to nearby thoroughfares and disrupted traffic: By shortly before 3 a.m., the demonstrators had shut down all lanes of Interstate 85 northbound and started a fire on the highway, before being dispersed by police with nightsticks. “Throughout the night, protesters chanted slogans and held signs reading ‘Black Lives Matter’ and ‘Stop Killing Us.’ The scene was sometimes chaotic and tense, with water bottles and stones chucked at police lines, but many protesters called for peace and implored their fellow demonstrators not to act violently. ‘Accountability!’ one man shouted repeatedly at CMPD officers. ‘You don’t get to murder us and get away with it!’ yelled another.” http://bit.ly/2dagaHt -- “Justice Department Probes Police Shooting of Unarmed Black Man in Tulsa: Video shows man with arms up, hands on car just before shots fired,” by WSJ’s Shibani Mahtani: “Terence Crutcher, 40 years old, was shot Friday evening by Betty Shelby, a Tulsa police officer who was responding to a 911 call of an abandoned vehicle blocking a road. Widely shared videos of the fatal shooting recorded by a helicopter and dashboard camera … show Mr. Crutcher walking toward his car with his arms raised and then placing his hands on the top of the car. Just after a view of the man is blocked in two separate videos, shots rang out and he fell to the ground.” http://on.wsj.com/2ctky1b LATE NIGHT BEST -- MICHELLE OBAMA on Colbert last night: “The Late Show Blanket Fort (with First Lady Michelle Obama)” http://bit.ly/2d3J9MA ... “First Lady Michelle Obama Does Her Best Barack Impression” http://bit.ly/2d1g80Z ... “Michelle Obama Has No Sympathy for the Candidates’ Spouses” http://bit.ly/2cltYbL VIDEO DU JOUR -- “Trump’s War: ISIS or Women?” from Republicans for Clinton: “Donald Trump shares his knowledge of ISIS, Mila Kunis, Halle Barry, and Kim Kardashian in interviews with Hugh Hewitt and Howard Stern. Who’s he at war with?” 90-second video http://bit.ly/2cnZBqh --FIRST IN PLAYBOOK – “Drop Everything and Watch Chelsea Handler’s Hilarious Rap Song About Voting” -- in conjunction with Rock the Vote and POPSUGAR http://bit.ly/2cGAQ6M BATTLE FOR THE SENATE -- “Ron Johnson Launches TV Ad on Joseph Project Helping to Break Cycles of Poverty” -- 60-second version http://bit.ly/2cPAoUM ... 30 second version http://bit.ly/2ctcHkh SURE -- @Bencjacobs: “Like Trump, Evan McMullin will release a list of Supreme Court justices in the coming weeks” http://bit.ly/2d1ckgq HOT DOCS -- HUGE AUGUST DONATIONS -- Senate Majority PAC (Senate Democrats: Neil Bluhm, billionaire real estate and casino mogul, gave $1 million … Fred Eychaner, the wealthy Chicago-based chairman of the Newsweb Corporation, gave $3 million. Senate Leadership Fund (Senate Republicans): Ken Griffin, the CEO of Citadel, gave $2 million to the Senate GOP super PAC...Hedge fund titan Paul Singer gave $1 million … The Adelsons gave $10 million … Priorities USA (Hillary Clinton super PAC): The Laufer family of Florida gave $2 million to Priorities USA … Emerson Collective, the firm run by Laurene Powell Jobs, gave $2 million to Priorities … Daniel Abraham, the founder of SlimFast, gave $3 million to Priorities … Donald Sussman, the investor and husband of Rep. Chellie Pingree, gave $2 million to Priorities. SKITTLES UPDATE -- Yoni Appelbaum (@YAppelbaum): “A picture of a British candy, taken by a Cypriot refugee, tweeted from a phone invented by the son of a Syrian” http://bbc.in/2cTy6R9 JASON HOROWITZ in Vogue with photographs by Annie Leibovitz, “Italy’s Moment: “Italy’s dynamic young prime minister, Matteo Renzi, is charming, combative, pragmatic — and determined to reform his government, at whatever the cost.” http://bit.ly/2d06mfK FIRST IN PLAYBOOK -- The American Gaming Association has enlisted former Boston Police Commissioner Ed Davis and former FBI Deputy Director Tim Murphy to pen a report, that says the ban on sports betting isn’t working and “is driving a $150 billion illegal market and draining law enforcement resources in communities across the country.” http://bit.ly/2cTKHnh MEDIAWATCH -- “Fox News: Sean Hannity won’t appear in any more Trump ads,” by Kelsey Sutton: “After Fox News host Sean Hannity appeared in a pro-Donald Trump political video over the weekend, the network will prohibit him from appearing in promotional political materials through the end of the election, a spokesperson said Tuesday. ‘We were not aware of Sean Hannity participating in a promotional video and he will not be doing anything along these lines for the remainder of the election season,’ the spokesperson said in a statement to POLITICO.” http://politi.co/2diFaei … Video http://bit.ly/2dg7HOT -- “Ann Coulter, High Priestess of Trumpism, Takes a Victory Lap,” by Vanity Fair’s Abigail Tracy -- VF: “Did you support any other candidates in the field?” Coulter: “I hated them all.” VF: “All of them?” Coulter: “I hated them all. And in fact, I think Trump saved my life, because looking at that field of candidates, I mean, I was hoping that Mitt Romney was going to get in. ... But without him in the race, I just thought, ‘I can’t do this. I can’t defend any of these guys. I am not going to go on TV and pretend that any of them are going to be better than any Democrat.’ And you know, I have always wanted to learn French, so I figured that I would just go to France for 2016 and skip the election year, hang out, learn French. And I happen to love Eagles of Death Metal, so I totally would have been at that concert, except Trump ran so I couldn’t leave.” http://bit.ly/2d3FluO --“FOX Business Network Beats CNBC For the Week in Business Day For The First Time Ever”: “FOX Business Network hit a monumental record for the week beating CNBC in Business Day (9:30a-5p) with 181,000 vs CNBC’s 171,000 in total viewers for the first time ever.” --“CBS News finishes the 2015-16 broadcast year as the only network news division with audience growth on both morning and evening news broadcasts” http://bit.ly/2d2FkXO OUT AND ABOUT -- Speaker Paul Ryan and Democratic Leader Nancy Pelosi headlined the opening last night of the new LBJ Washington Center in the historic Greyhound Suite and Lobby at 1100 New York Avenue. Honorees included former Texas Lt. Gov. Ben Barnes (Founders Award); POLITICO executive chairman and CEO Robert Allbritton (Dean’s Award); CAP EVP for Policy Carmel Martin (Distinguished LBJ School Alumna); and Speaker Ryan’s Policy Director Austin Smythe (Distinguished LBJ School Alumnus). SPOTTED: Lynda Johnson Robb, Luci Baines Johnson, LBJ School Dean Angela Evans, Tom O’Donnell, former Senate Majority Leader Tom Daschle, Texas Reps. Eddie B. Johnson, Sheila Jackson Lee, and Marc Veasey; MPAA Chair Chris Dodd, Joe O’Neill, Walter Moore, Rep. Martin Frost; Ambassadors Jim Blanchard, Lloyd Hand, James Jones and Lyndon Olson, David Berteau, Mike Naeve, Rachel Hoff, Lyndon Boozer, Beth Frerking, Dave Grimaldi, Erik Huey, Carl Leubsdorf, Abby Livingston, Mark Murray, Maria Recio, Alexis Simendinger, Karen Tumulty, Matthew Cornelius, Alexander Ritchie. OUT AND ABOUT – At last night’s Sammies, the award ceremony for federal employees put on by the Partnership for Public Service, “House of Cards” chief of staff Doug Stamper, played by ceremony co-host Michael Kelly, and real White House chief of staff Denis McDonough appeared on stage and wished each other good luck on the election in the show and in real life. Pic http://bit.ly/2d7RHy7 … The winners http://bit.ly/2ctpAuM SPOTTED: ceremony co-host Stephanie Ruhle, Max Stier, Tammy Haddad, Ronnie and Larry Heyman, Tom and Andi Bernstein, Denis McDonough, Shaun Donovan, Adm. Thad Allen (Ret.), Secret Service director Joseph Clancy, Josh Bolten, Rep. David Price (D-N.C.), Rep. Garret Graves, NASA Administrator Charles Bolden, IRS Commissioner John Koskinen, Michele Flournoy, former Rep. Tom Davis, Sean O’Keefe, Mike Rogers, Hilary Rosen, Ruth Marcus, Craig Gordon, Elaina Plott, David Hawkings, Vikrum Aiyer OBAMA ALUMNI -- SAMANTHA VINOGRAD has been named a Visiting Fellow for the Fall 2016 semester at the Penn Wharton Public Policy Initiative. She is a Treasury alum, served on the NSC from 2009 to 2013 and is now the VP of the Environmental Markets Group at Goldman Sachs. http://whr.tn/2d7DpgI BUSH ALUMNI -- CATHY LYNN TAYLOR, former NSC director for international finance, has written “Red Is the New Black: How Woman Can Fashion A More Powerful America,” which was released yesterday. $19.25 on Amazon http://amzn.to/2cnVWbS TRANSITIONS -- “Jason Boxt Joins Penn Schoen Berland as Executive Vice President in Washington, D.C.”: “Before PSB, Boxt spent more than eight years at The Glover Park Group … and for the last three and a half years he led its research and analytics team as Managing Director.” http://politi.co/2cnZiLW --CALLY BAUTE has been named POLITICO’s new vice president and general manager of audience solutions. #THISTOWN -- @howardfineman: “In @Hardball greenroom with 1 of the first (& most talented) journos I’ve met in DC, my friend @NYTimesDowd. Her terrific new book is out.” http://bit.ly/2clr9rc SPOTTED: Bush alums Peter Watkins, Blain Rethmeier and Rob Saliterman last night at the Italian trattoria Morandi in NYC’s West Village WELCOME TO THE WORLD – Richard Cullen, SVP of public affairs at FP1 Strategies and an early POLITICO, and Laura Cullen of the National Petroleum Council, post on Instagram: Agnes Carrington Cullen. Born Sunday at 3:45pm. 7 pounds, 12 ounces. Mom and baby are doing great.” Pic http://bit.ly/2cYyRw9 NEW OBAMAWORLD BABY -- Longtime Obama staffers Jenny Yeager Kaplan, director of the President’s Commission on White House Fellowships, and perennial Obama fundraiser Jordan Kaplan welcomed Everette Grace Kaplan to the world on Monday morning just in time to witness her first (of many) Bears heartbreaks. Everette joins Benjamin and Harper as the Kaplans’ third baby of the administration. Pic http://bit.ly/2cCnvdA (h/t Finance_DD) --Melissa Bonine (formerly Bruns), HUD’s director of scheduling and advance, and David Bonine, Sen. Chris Murphy’s deputy chief of staff, welcomed Penelope yesterday. Pic http://bit.ly/2ctc3U8 BIRTHWEEK (was yesterday): Emily Grunewald, fundraiser for Sen. Blumenthal and Sen. Warner alum (h/t Natalie Raps) BIRTHDAYS: Dean Baquet is 6-0 ... Cass Sunstein is 62 ... former CIA director and Trump supporter James Woolsey is 75 … Kentucky Gov. Steve Beshear is 72 ... former Australian Prime Minister Kevin Rudd is 59 ... Brian Roehrkasse, VP of external comms at BAE Systems and a Bush DOJ and DHS alum (h/t BKR) ... Politico’s Karey Van Hall ... Anna Greenberg, SVP at Greenberg Quinlan Rosner (h/t Jon Haber) ... Kiki Burger, the pride of Manhattan Beach (h/t a source close to Dahl Burger) ... CNN senior political correspondent Brianna Keilar, who studied communications and psych at UC Berkeley and is the pride of Mission Viejo, Calif. (h/ts Richard Hudock and Ben Chang) ... U.S. Permanent Representative to the UN, Ambassador Samantha Power, fittingly falling on the week of the UN General Assembly (h/t Ben) ... Charles Garrison, director of business development at FiscalNote and a Politico alum (h/t colleague Mallory Howe) … ... Ian Russell, DCCC political director and pride of the Midwest (h/t Ty Matsdorf) ... Erin Graefe Dorton, managing director at Prime Policy ... Patricia Summers Edwards, vice consul for comms at the British Consulate General in NYC ... Elizabeth Wiebe, director of the Christian Alliance for Orphans ... Laurel Ruza, research associate at Hillary for America ... Monica Carmeant ... Jessica Andrews, public affairs officer for State’s Office of the Chief of Protocol … CQ Roll Call’s Toula Vlahou ... Maggie Dougherty, senior congressional advisor at the British Embassy and a Rubio alum … Lydia Stuckey, program director at ConwayStrategic ... Shealah Craighead (h/t Peter Watkins) ... John Celock is 37 ... Jonathan Robinson, entrepreneur-in-residence at the VA ... Rachel Barth of the American Road & Transportation Builders Association ... Mark Watson ... ... Sarah Sibley … John McKechnie … Chelsie Paulson … Ricki Lake … Kelly Lindner ... Dan Turrentine is 39 ... Lisa Marie ... Mike Veselik ... Soren Dorius … Jane Bowlsby ... David Craighead ... Joerg Wareka ... John Paul Croake (h/ts Teresa Vilmain) SUBSCRIBE to the Playbook family: POLITICO Playbook http://politi.co/1M75UbX ... New York Playbook http://politi.co/1ON8bqW … Florida Playbook http://politi.co/1OypFe9 ... New Jersey Playbook http://politi.co/1HLKltF ... Massachusetts Playbook http://politi.co/1Nhtq5v ... Illinois Playbook http://politi.co/1N7u5sb ... California Playbook http://politi.co/2bLvcPl ... Brussels Playbook http://politi.co/1FZeLcw ... All our political and policy tipsheets http://politi.co/1M75UbX
(CNN)Hillary Clinton's 2008 campaign manager dismissed as "absurd" Donald Trump's Monday night debate claim that she admitted a campaign ally pushed "birther" conspiracy rumors. "It is absurd what Donald Trump just said," Patti Solis Doyle said minutes after the debate's end. "I never sent anyone to Kenya to look for his birth certificate." Asked about his role in boosting and perpetuating birtherism earlier in the evening, Trump pointed to a CNN appearance from last week, when -- as he put it -- Solis Doyle "was on Wolf Blitzer saying that this happened. (Clinton confidant Sidney) Blumenthal sent McClatchy, highly respected reporter at McClatchy, to Kenya to find out about it. They were pressing it very hard." No, Hillary Clinton did not start the 'birther' movement But as Solis Doyle said during the post-debate panel -- and a transcript from September 16 confirms -- she made no such claim. During her interview with CNN's Wolf Blitzer, Solis Doyle flatly denied the campaign had any role in creating the conspiracy theory, instead recalling the firing of a volunteer for forwarding a chain email suggesting Obama was Muslim. "There was a volunteer coordinator, I believe in late 2007, I think in December, one of our volunteer coordinators in one of the counties in Iowa (who sent the email)," she said during the initial interview. "Hillary made the decision immediately to let that person go. We let that person go. Clinton puts Trump on defense at first debate Both then and on Monday night, Solis Doyle said the Clinton campaign apologized to the Obama campaign, which accepted the explanation according to former Obama political strategist David Axelrod. "Our campaign does not tolerate this kind of activity or campaigning," spokesman Mo Elleithee said at the time, after the email story initially went public in 2007. "As soon as it came to our attention, we asked (the second emailer) to step down." 
(CNN)Glenn Beck, a staunch Ted Cruz supporter in the 2016 GOP presidential race, interviewed the Texas senator Monday in a series of often-tense exchanges, after Cruz finally endorsed GOP standard-bearer Donald Trump. It ended with Beck apologizing to listeners for backing Cruz. "Do you have any new information that has made you say 'Oh my gosh, he's now not a sociopathic liar and now there's suddenly a reason to believe him?'" Beck had asked Cruz on "The Glenn Beck Radio Program." Cruz, who in July dramatically declined to endorse Trump during his Republican National Convention, responded that the election is "is a binary choice" between Democrat Hillary Clinton and Trump. Cruz said he was never "Never Trump," but always "Never Hillary." But Beck repeatedly asked Cruz why he changed his mind and decided to back Trump. "This is all the information you had in Cleveland," Beck said, unsatisfied by Cruz's answers. "What I was trying to do in Cleveland was lay out a path to uniting Republicans," Cruz said. "This is about principle, about ideas. That's the test I'm applying. What I do know is that Hillary Clinton fails that test profoundly." After the interview concluded, Beck said for the first time, he "heard Ted Cruz calculate." Beck ended his conservative radio program with an apology to his listeners for supporting Cruz, adding that he should have backed Marco Rubio instead. "That was so calculated that it was stunning to me," Beck said. "I think I have to apologize and say, maybe, perhaps, those of you who said Ted Cruz is calculating and a smarmy politician, I think I may have to slightly agree with you and apologize for saying, 'No, he wasn't.'" 
(CNN)Mike Pence on Monday night was tight-lipped about running mate Donald Trump's planned debate tactics, offering an opened-ended "We'll see where it goes" when asked. "I think what you'll see tonight is the same Donald Trump you've seen throughout this campaign," the Indiana governor told CNN's Jake Tapper before the presidential debate. "He's going to be a bold truth-teller, he's going to speak plainly." He added: "I think Donald Trump always speaks straight from his heart and straight from his mind." Defensive Sanders says he won primary debates 'online' Pence, on-site for the debate on Long Island at Hofstra University, said his own debate prep is more "traditional" than his running mate's. "My focus the last four years has been and continues to be leading the state of Indiana," he said. "So I've been brushing up on all those Washington issues ... but I'm looking forward to a good debate this week." "My only advice to him is be yourself," he said. "I've come to know him over the last several months ... This is a good man who I believe will make a great president of the United States." When asked about Trump releasing his tax returns, an issue that has been repeatedly brought up during the course of Trump's campaign, Pence reiterated the campaign's previous stance. "I think Donald Trump has made it very clear that he will release his tax returns when the routine audit is complete," he said. 
After a long night on Long Island on Monday, Donald Trump showed no signs of wavering at an evening rally inside an airport hangar in Melbourne, Florida in front of a friendly crowd. A day removed from the debate stage, Trump stuck close to his stump speech, repeating familiar refrains about himself, about Hillary Clinton, about his vision for his presidency and about the country he sees in front of him. The lone wrinkle to his stump speech was a new wave of claims about how he’d won the debate. Pointing to his wins in numerous, un-scientific online reader polls on websites like the Drudge Report, Trump was no more deterred by a broad sentiment among political observers that he’d lost than he was by an army of fact-checkers who’ve found many of his favorite claims are false. Story Continued Below Indeed, back in the familiar confines of a rally, Trump appeared more comfortable than the night before, leveling strong attacks against Clinton that, after repeating throughout the election, he often stayed away from Monday. Trump also cast the debate as a contrast between change and the status quo. “For 90 minutes on issue after issue Hillary Clinton defended the terrible status quo while I laid out our plan, all of us together, to bring jobs prosperity and security back to the American people,” he said. “For 90 minutes she argued against change while I called for dramatic change.” He also revealed how he dealt with his nerves in front of a television audience of 80 million people. “I knew I was going into a situation where you were going to have one of the largest audiences in the history of television. And I took a deep breath and I pretended I was talking to my family,” Trump said. “It was very interesting. You just block it out.” “Does everybody believe me? I was against going into Iraq,” said Trump, after the timeline of his opinions came under scrutiny once again on Monday night. (Before the invasion Trump expressed approval of it in a Howard Stern interview, and is only documented as firmly opposing it in an interview well after the American occupation of the country began.) Of the current state of the country, Trump lamented, “We have death and debt and unemployment. We have all bad things.” He called Clinton “a representative for globalists” and mocked last month’s consensus that he had only the narrowest electoral path to the presidency, remarking, “Oh wow, now they’re looking at all these paths.” Trump did steer clear of another post-debate controversy, an ongoing war of words with former Miss Universe Alicia Machado, who was the centerpiece of one of Clinton’s attacks on his character. Trump earlier Tuesday again criticized Machado's weight, echoing Clinton allegations that he’d earlier called her “Miss Piggy” — due to her body shape — and “Miss Housekeeping,” a racist reference to her Latino heritage. But on Tuesday evening, back in front of a large, boisterous, adoring crowd, Trump avoided the subject entirely. The rally followed a tumultuous 24 hours for Trump, starting with a panned debate performance Monday that morphed into a day of finger-pointing Tuesday, as he revived his brashest personal style to explain an erratic debate performance. The GOP nominee, beleaguered after an erratic performance in Monday’s debate — with viewership as high as 100 million — retreated to his Fox News and Twitter cocoon. There, he took potshots at debate moderator Lester Holt and cited unscientific Internet surveys to prove he’d outperformed Hillary Clinton. And his advisers hinted that he might consider skipping the next showdown between the candidates, set for Oct. 9 in St. Louis. It was a scarcely concealed defensive posture from the Trump camp, which found itself defending Trump against accusations of sexism (even as he redoubled his criticism of a former Miss Universe he had previously called “Miss Piggy,” saying on Tuesday she had gained “a massive amount of weight”). His surrogates, too, joined the pile-on against Holt, describing “hostile” questioning about his position on the Iraq War, his role in the birther controversy and his refusal to release his tax returns. Trump spent his post-debate morning in the friendly confines of Fox, calling in to “Fox & Friends” for a gentle interview, where the hosts agreed he had been asked too many tough questions. Trump couched his concerns about Holt around mild praise of his performance as moderator, but his allies correctly pointed out that Holt reserved his most probing and personal questions for the businessman and spared Clinton similarly tough questions about her handling of classified information or her untrustworthy persona. “You know, when you look at it, you watch the last four questions, he hit me on birther,” Trump said, “He hit me on a housing deal from many years ago that I settled with no recourse and no guilt. He asked me about that.” But actually, it was Clinton who raised the 1973 housing discrimination lawsuit against Trump’s company. She also grilled him about paying no income tax over the years. Trump’s “That makes me smart” reply has Democrats salivating. (Clinton at a rally on Tuesday afternoon asked the crowd, “if not paying taxes makes him smart, what does that make all the rest of us?”) Trump on Tuesday morning floated the idea that he “may hit her harder” next time around, and explained, “I really eased up because I didn't want to hurt anybody's feelings.” It was remarkable how many subjects Trump decided to skip in Monday’s debate. He made no mention of Clinton’s handling of the attack on an American compound in Benghazi. He scarcely alluded to his aggressive seal-the-borders stance on immigration, despite making it the hallmark of his campaign. Trump didn’t mention controversies about Clinton Foundation or her ties to Wall Street. (Clinton actually got in the only Wall Street-based attack, suggesting Trump was hundreds of millions of dollars in debt to big banks.) Trump also skipped any mention of Clinton’s decision to label some of his supporters “deplorable.” And even as she skewered him for misleading about his position on the war in Iraq, he made only a passing mention of the fact that Clinton voted to go to war in the first place. “Well, he didn't ask her about the emails at all. He didn't ask her about her scandals. He didn't ask her about the Benghazi deal that she destroyed,” he said about Holt. “He didn't ask her about a lot of things she should have been asked about. I mean, you know, there's no question about it. He didn't ask about her foundation.” Holt wasn’t the only target of Trump’s ire. He also peddled a conspiracy theory that his microphone had been tampered with, as he sought to explain why he may not have been at the top of his game, even as he claimed numerous online polls deemed him the night’s winner. “I don’t know if you saw that in the room, but my microphone was terrible. I wonder, was it set up that way on purpose?” Trump asked on Fox. Clinton reveled in Trump’s squirming. Buoyant from the prior night, the former secretary of state gaggled with reporters on her plane, offering a verbal shrug to the notion that Trump may not show up to the next two debates, and landing a zinger about Trump’s microphone theory. “Anybody who complains about the microphone is not having a good night,” Clinton quipped as she walked away from reporters. Trump’s surrogates sought to frame the debate as a win for the Republican nominee, largely because he didn’t bring up Bill Clinton’s extramarital affairs, even though Trump alluded to them later in the evening. Kellyanne Conway, Trump’s campaign manager, said on Tuesday morning that “as a woman” she was impressed that Trump pulled back from bringing up the affairs after Clinton attacked him for a long history of misogynistic comments. “To tell Hillary Clinton after she accused him of being terrible with women, to tell Hillary Clinton 'I was prepared to go rough tonight and I am not going to do it because your husband and daughter are here.' That is going to grow in importance in the next couple of days in a moment of great temperance and restraint,” Conway told MSNBC’s “Morning Joe.” Trump’s running mate, Mike Pence, parroted the talking points on CBS’s “This Morning,” also saying he was “so proud” that Trump didn’t bring up Bill Clinton’s indiscretions. “Ninety minutes in a row of one insult after another and then Donald Trump, just completely open and transparent with the American people, said, ‘There’s things I could bring up, we all know what they are, we all lived through the 1990’s,’ and he just said ‘I’m not going to do it.'” Pence said. “I think there you saw in him the restraint and temperament that would make for a good president.” While Trump’s allies argued that Trump had cleared an arguably low bar during his first primetime showdown, House Speaker Paul Ryan offered unusually effusive praise for the Republican nominee. Ryan has frequently clashed with Trump on style and substance, but he said the billionaire did what he needed to do on Monday night. For Republican lawmakers concerned about Trump’s effect on down-ballot races, the fact that Trump did not implode on stage was a relief. “I saw Donald Trump give a spirited voice to those of us who don’t like the status quo, and I see emerging in front of us the potential for what a unified Republican government can get you, which can be the solutions,” Ryan said at a news conference Tuesday. “I think he passed a number of thresholds... and showed that for 90 minutes he could go toe-to-toe with Hillary Clinton.” Most pundits agreed Trump’s strongest part of the debate was the first 20 to 30 minutes, when he parried Clinton’s barbs and painted her as a typical politician – the kind he certainly is not. In a discussion of the country’s international trade deals, Trump thrashed Clinton as taking a politically motivated tack. “In all fairness to Secretary Clinton, when she started talking about this, it was really very recently,” he said. “She's been doing this for 30 years. And why hasn't she made the agreements better? The NAFTA agreement is defective … Secretary Clinton and others, politicians, should have been doing this for years, not right now, because of the fact that we've created a movement.” Trump said he’d tax companies who send jobs and plants to other countries and sell their products back to the United States. “What you do is you say, fine, you want to go to Mexico or some other country, good luck. We wish you a lot of luck,” he said. “But if you think you're going to make your air conditioners or your cars or your cookies or whatever you make and bring them into our country without a tax, you're wrong.” Trump’s camp is already hinting he’s considering taking a pass on the next debate. Trump surrogate Rudy Giuliani told reporters Monday night that he’d advise Trump to drop out of the next meeting because the moderators wouldn’t be fair. “If I were Donald Trump I wouldn’t participate in another debate unless I was promised that the journalist would act like a journalist and not an incorrect, ignorant fact checker,” Giuliani said. “The moderator would have to promise that there would be a moderator and not a fact checker and in two particular cases an enormously ignorant, completely misinformed fact checker.” Clinton and her allies, on the other hand, are blanketing the airwaves. Priorities USA immediately launched an ad blasting Trump’s temperament. The Clinton campaign issued its own blistering video: an interview with Alicia Machado, the former Miss Universe winner who said Trump demeaned her when she gained weight. Campaign strategist Joel Benenson told CNN on Tuesday that Clinton was calm and collected under pressure while Trump became unhinged. “The reason why Hillary Clinton overwhelmingly won in this debate is because Donald Trump was a loose cannon throughout the debate,” Benenson said. “He was interrupting. He doesn't listen to anybody. He doesn't respect anybody. He was shouting.” In addition, Clinton, her running mate Tim Kaine and her husband, former President Bill Clinton hit the trail for her, hoping to capture some momentum from the debate. CNN's post-debate polling showed viewers largely found Clinton superior to Trump, though it’s unclear whether the debate will lead to movement in the swing-state polls, which have shown the two candidates in a dead heat. Louis Nelson, Nolan D. McCaskill, and Madeline Conway contributed to this report.
John Boehner has his first private-sector job in roughly a quarter century. The former speaker of the House is joining Squire Patton Boggs, the multinational law firm, as a strategic adviser based in Washington and Cincinnati. Story Continued Below The firm has a healthy lobbying practice, but Boehner will not become a lobbyist, according to the firm. He will "serve as a strategic advisor to clients in the U.S. and abroad, and will focus on global business development." Boehner's post-Congress livelihood is starting to take fuller shape. Last week, the tobacco giant Reynolds America announced he's joining its board of directors, a job that is likely to bring him north of $400,000 a year. Boehner will have plenty of friends and allies at Squire Patton Boggs, including former Senate Majority Leader Trent Lott (R-Miss.), former Rep. Jack Kingston (R-Ga.), and former Sen. John Breaux (D-La.). Boehner's former top aide, David Schnittger, is a senior policy adviser at Squire Patton Boggs, as is Natasha Hammond, who worked for Boehner for nine years. John Criscuolo and Amy Lozupone, both Boehner aides, will join him at the firm. Squire Patton Boggs has deep ties to Boehner's home state of Ohio. CEO Mark Reuhlmann's father, Gene, was the mayor of Cincinnati, and Squire Sanders, one of the firms that predated Squire Patton Boggs, was founded in Cleveland. “With Speaker Boehner joining our team, we're better positioned than ever to grow our brand throughout the world and to fully capitalize on our integrated global platform," Mark Ruehlmann said in a news release. **SUBSCRIBE to POLITICO Playbook: http://politi.co/1M75UbX
Donald Trump has taken the lead over Hillary Clinton in Iowa and narrowed the former secretary of state’s advantage in Colorado and Virginia, a new Quinnipiac University poll shows. The Quinnipiac poll of likely voters in the four swing states, released Thursday, asked respondents about a four-way presidential race that also includes Libertarian Gary Johnson and Green Party candidate Jill Stein. Story Continued Below Trump, who trailed Clinton by 2 points in Iowa in an August Quinnipiac poll, now leads by 7 points, 44 percent to 37 percent. He also leads in Georgia, where likely voters also preferred him by a 7-point margin, 47 percent to 40 percent. Stein earned the support of 2 percent of respondents in Iowa and did not register any support in Georgia, while Johnson polled at 10 percent and 9 percent, respectively. Both the Clinton campaign and Priorities USA, a super PAC backing the former secretary of state, stopped airing advertisements for her in both Virginia and Colorado over the summer amid a seemingly insurmountable polling advantage. But the fresh Quinnipiac poll shows that advantage narrowed in both states. In Colorado, Clinton’s lead has shrunk from 8 points in mid-August to just 2 points in the most recent poll, 44 percent to 42 percent, with Johnson polling at 10 percent and Stein at 2 percent. Clinton's lead in Colorado falls within the poll’s margin of error, putting the two candidates in a statistical tie in the state. In Virginia, the 9-point advantage Clinton held over Trump last month has shrunk to 6 points, 45 percent to 39 percent, in the poll released Thursday. Johnson earned the support of 8 percent of respondents from Virginia while Stein polled at 1 percent there. The new polls are the latest in an array of positive swing-state news for the Manhattan billionaire, who has polled well in purple states of late. A Fox News poll out Wednesday showed Trump with leads in Ohio, North Carolina and Nevada and a Suffolk University poll released earlier in the day Thursday put Trump narrowly ahead of Clinton. The news has been better for the former secretary of state in nationwide polls. An NBC News/Wall Street Journal poll released Wednesday afternoon put Clinton ahead of Trump by 6 points among likely voters across the country. But even if likely voters nationwide prefer Clinton, Trump could still carve a path to the White House with wins in key swing states. The Quinnipiac University poll was conducted from Sept. 13-21 via landlines and cellphones. It reached 644 likely Colorado voters and 638 Georgians likely to vote, both with a margin of error of plus-or-minus 3.9 points. The poll also reached 612 Iowans, with a margin of error of plus-or-minus 4 points, and 659 likely Virginia voters, with a with a margin of error of plus-or-minus 3.9 points.
The Islamic State and its supporters shocked North America and Europe over the past year with a series of attacks, sowing public fear and becoming the top security issue in the U.S. presidential election. Journalist Rukmini Callimachi has become an indispensable guide to understanding the group—and cutting through the fog of misinformation from politicians. We asked Graeme Wood, a journalist known for his own groundbreaking Atlantic cover story tracing the Islamic State’s intellectual roots, to talk with Callimachi about what it’s like to try to penetrate one of the world’s most dangerous and shadowy organizations—and what we’re still getting wrong. Graeme Wood: We’re still shocked and surprised by what ISIS does, even though this has been going on for years. The continued shock is partly due to their violence, but I wonder if it might be partly our fault, as journalists, for failing to help the public understand ISIS. What are we doing wrong? Rukmini Callimachi: The systemic failure in the media in covering ISIS is that the majority of reporters are doing it in a semaphore fashion. Their main entree to the group is what U.S. officials and analysts say, and they’re not contacting members of the terror group or really studying its propaganda. I can’t think of any other beat where we do that. If we cover a court case involving a murderer, we would still seek out the side of that murderer, even as we realize that what people say is going to be self-serving. Wood: You’ve now interacted with many ISIS people—including in person. What do they have in common? Callimachi: First, I would say, is ideology. I have never spoken to any member of these groups, not just ISIS, but also Al Qaeda, Shabab, etc., who wasn’t driven by the ideology. Beyond that, a lot of people are wounded in some way—they’ve fallen out of society in some manner. So the Sunday school teacher in Washington state, who in three months converted online and was planning for travel to the Islamic State, had been born with fetal alcohol syndrome, couldn’t hold down a job, had very few friends. You see an emptiness at the core of this person. All of the ones I’ve spoken to seem to have veered off course from lives we consider acceptable and successful. Of course, there are others like Osama bin Laden, who was a wealthy and successful businessperson. Wood: Why do they talk to you? Callimachi: It’s become extremely difficult to speak to active ISIS members now. I was speaking to them in 2015, and the last one was killed in a drone strike. So now, if I’m speaking to them, it’s after they’ve defected. Of course there is self-selection there, because these are people who became disaffected. Wood: Do you think it helps that you’re a woman? Callimachi: It’s a double-edged sword. I’ve had countless jihadis shut me down straightaway and say, “I’m not allowed to speak to any woman who is not my relative.” But among the few I’m able to get through to, I think that being female makes me more approachable, soft, all the stereotypes of what female means. Wood: What are the biggest remaining mysteries? What are the things we need to know that would really help us understand the group? Callimachi: I’m really curious as to the actual structure of the Emni [the intelligence unit that handles foreign attacks]. And Abu Muhammad al-Adnani, the head of it. There are so few pictures of him. We don’t even really know what he looks like. For somebody with this outsized influence projecting murder abroad, you’d think that we would know a lot more by now. And then the role of the hostages. One of ISIS’ biggest propaganda coups was the beheadings of the aid workers and journalists. Is [Emni], the group that is exporting fighters overseas, also the one that was holding James Foley and John Cantlie and Kayla Mueller? Wood: In one frightening quote, a jailed ISIS supporter tells you he thinks the number of ISIS operatives who have been sent to Europe is in the hundreds. Why haven’t we seen more attacks? Callimachi: You have to keep in mind that there’s a number of logistical hurdles that they have to jump through in Europe in order to get explosives or guns. So for example, the Villejuif shooter in April 2015 who planned to attack a church: According to French press reports, he was instructed by ISIS to go to a sandwich shop, and the weapons would be waiting for him in a car parked outside. He was just told the make of the car, told to go there, told to pick them up. Putting that kind of attack together, using encrypted communications or other means, is not easy. But during the height of Ramadan, I was covering one or two attacks a week. These are people willing to die. Wood: One change we’ve seen is a dramatic increase in body counts per attack. For a long time, they were very low, with many attacks killing no one but the attacker, but now with Paris, Orlando and Nice, the numbers are much higher. Do you think that ISIS is planning a spectacular attack, along the September 11 model—or would that be too risky for them, too likely to be detected? Callimachi: They’re implementing what was the strategy of Al Qaeda, which was to have attacks of different levels simultaneously. … So the idea is, on the one hand you have these spectacular attacks that take months to plan, and others like Reda Hame, a French national, who went to Syria and was there for about a week, given a couple of days of target practice and one day of encryption training, sent back and arrested almost immediately. And then there are the ones inspired solely through digital means, through the group reaching out through its propaganda and inciting them to attack. From what we are seeing, they are trying to do all three at the same time. It seems to me that a 9/11-style attack is impractical. They’d be putting in so many resources and so much time—but they can get the same horrific results from a guy with a truck. The death count is not the same, but the emotional impact for people in France was significant, and it took just a rental-car contract. Wood: We’ve both written about ISIS’ habit of justifying its actions with religious argument. What’s the best evidence for and against the view that a religious vision is at the core of what ISIS is doing? Callimachi: People who have left the group talk about how a religious inspiration took them to ISIS. It was their feeling of being marginalized as Muslims in the society where they were living, and then buying into the promise of a caliphate and of a Muslim land that is governed as in the time of the prophet. I have yet to meet anybody, or speak to anybody, who was not religiously motivated at some level. There are other things: the excitement of taking part in a war, a sense of belonging. Wood: When you talk to people who have removed themselves from ISIS, what do they say? Callimachi: They say that there comes a moment when the inconsistencies and apparent hypocrisies of their sheikh lets them down, and they begin rereading scripture and find ways that vouch for a nonliteralist reading of the Koran. We know that Muhammad waged war against the Qurayshi tribe, his own tribe, and it’s from that conflict that much of the concept of jihad and verses that ISIS now uses to justify beheadings come from. A young man just told me that he went back and read this carefully [and saw] the prophet and his people were fighting the Quraysh because they were not allowing the prophet and his people to practice their religion. We are now in a society, he said, where the Prophet Muhammad could practice his religion freely. So anyway, I find that interesting, you know: Scripture is also the way out. Our guide to the thinkers, doers and visionaries transforming American politics.
White, Working-Class and Worried is a CNN partnership with the Kaiser Family Foundation - an extensive survey of white, working-class Americans and voters, who form a backbone of the support for Donald Trump. Watch Anderson Cooper 360 and CNN.com for reports throughout the week. Washington (CNN)The white, working-class Americans who form a backbone of Donald Trump's political support have a split view of Muslim immigrants -- strong majorities believe both that immigrants from Muslim countries increase the threat of terrorism in the United States, but also that most immigrants from those countries are good people. The data is from a new survey from CNN and the Kaiser Family Foundation and is aimed at unveiling the political motivations of the voting bloc that has propelled the GOP nominee. Threats of terror, both abroad and at home, have repeatedly rolled the race for the White House and the candidates have sought to improve their standing with voters in their responses to the terror attacks in Paris, Brussels, San Bernardino, Calif., and most recently after the attacks in New York and New Jersey. Polls generally show that voters trust Trump more than Hillary Clinton to handle terrorism.  Trump's tough talk about combating terrorism and threats abroad, including a plan to erect a wall at the US-Mexico border and his repeated suggestion that profiling as a preventative tactic against terrorism has helped fueled his rise. While a majority (63%) of white, working-class Americans say immigrants from Muslim countries are generally good people, the same share say that immigrants from Muslim countries increase the risk of terrorist attacks. Members of this group, which exit polls had at around 44% of the US electorate in 2012 though the exact figure is difficult to quantify, also have a more negative view of immigration: nearly half (47%) of whites without a college degree view immigrants as a burden on the country. Even among those white, working-class voters who view immigrants as a burden, 50% say immigrants from Muslim countries are good people compared with 35% who say they are not.  There is also a partisan divide: White, working-class Democrats are more likely to hold positive views about immigrants from Muslim countries than their white, working-class Republican counterparts. 47% of white Democrats without college degrees say Muslim immigrants increase the risk of terrorist attacks in the US compared with 83% of white Republicans with no college degree. Trump has made his hard line against Muslims a key component of his campaign, and his white, working-class supporters have strong views about the impact of immigrants from Muslim countries. Fifty-three percent of white voters without college degrees who are considering supporting Trump say immigrants from Muslim countries are basically good, but 82% say they increase the risk of terrorist attacks in the US. 'Under attack' More than 6-in-10 white, working-class Americans also say that Christian values are under attack in the United States. That viewpoint is more widespread among older working-class whites than among younger ones. Seventy-three % of white, working class adults 65 and older said Christian values are under attack, while just 41% of working-class adults under the age of 30 said the same. Trump backers were more likely to say that Christian values were under attack than those who support Clinton. Eighty-one percent of white, working-class voters who would consider supporting him in November said Christian values were under attack, compared to 31% who support Clinton. Candidate positioning In the hours following the bombings in New York and New Jersey, Clinton and Trump tussled over who was better qualified to combat terrorism as well as its cause.  Clinton cast herself as the candidate best prepared to combat terrorism and said that her opponent's positions are "not grounded in fact" and "meant to make some kind of demagogic point." "I am prepared to, ready to actually take on those challenges," the former secretary of state told reporters on Monday, "not engage in a lot of irresponsible, reckless rhetoric." Trump blamed Clinton and President Barack Obama for failing to keep the country safe and called for profiling to beef up what he sees as currently lackluster anti-terrorism efforts. Instead of treading lightly, Trump said on Fox News Monday morning, the better approach would be to "knock the hell out of 'em." "Our local police, they know who a lot of these people are," Trump told Fox. "They are afraid to do anything about it, because they don't want to be accused of profiling. And they don't want to be accused of all sorts of things." The CNN/KFF Poll was conducted by telephone August 9 through September 5 among a nationally representative sample of 1,614 adults, including 701 people who were identified as working class whites -- white non-Hispanic adults who do not currently hold a four-year degree and, if under age 25, not currently enrolled in school. Results for the full sample have a margin of sampling error of plus or minus 3 percentage points, it is 5 points for results among members of the white working class, 6 points for whites with degrees, 10 points for black working class respondents and 9 points for the Hispanic working class. Full methodological details are available here. 
As Congress careens toward a potential government shutdown, Democrats are dragging the funding fight to the brink and hoping to squeeze the GOP. The smart bet is still that Congress will pass some sort of stopgap bill to keep the government running past Friday. Neither party wants to risk being blamed for a shutdown just weeks before the presidential election. Story Continued Below But Democrats are driving a hard bargain: They say any government funding bill must include federal aid to address the water crisis in Flint. It’s a potentially risky move, but Democrats are betting they can either force Republicans to bend, or paint the GOP as indifferent to the people of Flint and responsible for Capitol Hill’s deepening dysfunction. "This funding measure does not contain a single penny for Flint, Michigan," Senate Minority Leader Harry Reid said on the Senate floor Monday. "The people of Flint, Michigan have been waiting for emergency assistance to clean their poisoned water for more than a year." The Senate is scheduled to hold a key procedural vote Tuesday on a proposal introduced by Majority Leader Mitch McConnell. But that measure, which would fund the federal government through Dec. 9, is expected to fall short of the 60 vote threshold needed to advance. The biggest complaint from Democrats is that the bill includes $500 million to address flooding in Louisiana and natural disasters in other states, but no money for Flint, which is still dealing with the consequences of lead-contaminated drinking water. Top Democrats think it's a political miscalculation for Republicans to be excluding assistance to a largely African-American community with high rates of poverty. Reid said it was "callous" of Sen. Bill Cassidy (R-La.) to refer to the calamity in Flint as “other people’s grief.” One potential resolution to the impasse is for McConnell to remove the money for Louisiana. "Is their solution now to remove help for flood victims?" McConnell asked on the floor Monday. "If their solution is to remove help for flood victims, they should say so." But Democrats might accept that, reasoning that they could return in the lame duck and press for aid for both communities. In recent weeks, Democrats have insisted that any aid for floods be coupled with aid for Flint. McConnell and House Speaker Paul Ryan have been eager to show voters that Republicans can govern responsibly and have downplayed the latest skirmish. Ryan told CBS’ John Dickerson in an interview that aired Sunday that there would be no government shutdown. “I’m not worried about that,” he said. “This is the typical drama.” And top Democratic strategists argue that the public has blamed Republicans for past shutdown showdowns — giving them an advantage in this latest fight. “We see our leverage in getting Flint aid as being the fact that Republicans lose every shutdown fight,” said a senior Democratic Senate aide. “We know it. They know it.” White House press secretary Josh Earnest has said the president may not sign McConnell’s bill and urged Congress to act “without putting the American people and the American economy through another cliffhanger related to a government shutdown.” The White House Office of Management and Budget has begun the earliest stages of preparing for a shutdown, holding a planning call with agencies last Friday ahead of the end of the fiscal year. “The administration strongly believes that a lapse in appropriations should not occur,” said an OMB spokesperson. “However, at this time, prudent management requires that the government plan for the possibility of a lapse and OMB is working with agencies to take appropriate action.” A senior GOP Senate aide said Senate Democrats were intentionally trying to foment chaos. “They want to talk about shutdowns. They want to create chaos right before the election,” the aide said, adding that it was no coincidence the clash comes as Republican chances of holding on to the Senate majority have improved. Republicans note there is much in the legislation for Democrats to like. It includes $1.1 billion to combat the Zika virus without language that would exclude Planned Parenthood-affiliated clinics from accessing federal grant dollars — a key Democratic demand that had long snarled Congress’ effort to counter the mosquito-borne virus. The bill also funds veterans programs and provides some money to implement a popular law signed in July to curb prescription opioid addiction. And despite a strong push from conservatives like Texas Sen. Ted Cruz and the backing of GOP nominee Donald Trump, the bill does not include language to block the Obama administration from relinquishing oversight of the Internet domain system to an international body. It’s a “clean” bill, McConnell boasted, with no controversial policy riders. Democrats don’t fully agree. They are irritated that the legislation prohibits the Securities and Exchange Commission from requiring corporations to disclose political spending. That provision simply maintains current law, making it harder for Democrats to demand its removal since they permitted it in last year’s omnibus, but it offers them a chance to slam the GOP as beholden to corporate interests. Ahead of Tuesday’s procedural vote to end Senate debate on the package, aides were predicting the parties would remain largely united. Sen. Bill Nelson, a Florida Democrat, has said he would support the so-called continuing resolution since it provides money to take on Zika, which has spread quickly in the Sunshine State. Other Democrats from states that would receive disaster aid in the bill, like West Virginia Sen. Joe Manchin, might also buck party leaders. But McConnell can’t count on keeping all Republicans on his side; Sen. Lindsey Graham (R-S.C.) said he will oppose the bill because it would not lift financing restrictions on the Export-Import Bank. Cruz and other conservatives might also defect. Ryan and other Republicans argue that any debate on Flint aid should take place on water infrastructure legislation moving through Congress. The Senate passed that bill, which includes $220 million for Flint and other communities with failing infrastructure, on a 95-3 vote earlier this month. But the House version of the Water Resources Development Act, which is set for floor action this week, does not include any money for Flint. Senate Environment and Public Works Chairman Jim Inhofe (R-Okla.) has promised that any final negotiations on the bill, which would conclude in a December session, will end with Flint aid. But Democrats are skeptical after months of GOP resistance. “I’m not going to accept, on faith, that if we leave Flint behind in the CR, somehow there will be an epiphany between now and December, and what they oppose today, they will suddenly embrace then,” said Rep. Dan Kildee (D-Mich.). “Nobody would buy that. It doesn’t make sense.” Kildee noted that Democrats will be crucial to helping House GOP leadership carry any stop-gap spending bill approved by the Senate across the finish line; many conservative Republicans wanted a long-term CR to avoid a lame duck budget battle and are likely to oppose whatever the Senate passes. The conservative group Heritage Action is opposed to the CR and is warning lawmakers it will include a vote on the bill on its influential scorecard. “Harry Reid is playing dangerous and irresponsible games with military pay, national security and critical services as he aims to shut down the federal government,” said Rep. Bill Flores of Texas, chairman of the conservative Republican Study Committee. Flores added that McConnell was “caving in to this irresponsible behavior by surrendering important conservative policies.” Seung Min Kim and Anthony Adragna contributed to this report.
Donald Trump and his children have for years promoted themselves and their real estate opportunities in Russia and other former Soviet states, and ethics experts say if he is elected President the get-tough U.S. sanctions against Russia could be in direct conflict with his business interests. Trump has said he will not participate in decisions about his business if he is elected to the White House and that those decisions will be left to his children in what they have called a “blind trust.” But Richard Painter, a University of Minnesota law professor who served as ethics advisor to Republican President George W. Bush, said the arrangement would not fit his definition of a blind trust, and appeared ripe for potential conflicts. “I don’t see how you have a blind trust when you know what’s in the blind trust,” Painter told ABC News. “The appearance is that a foreign government or other foreign organization has influence over the president of the United States through financial dealings with his family and that would be unacceptable.” As questions have been raised about Trump’s business interests with Russians, the candidate has sought to distance himself from Moscow. “For the record, I have ZERO investments in Russia,” he wrote on Twitter in July. He later told ABC’s George Stephanopoulos, “Will I sell condos to Russians on occasion? Probably. I mean I do that. I have a lot of condos. I do that. But I have no relationship to Russia whatsoever." But an ABC News investigation found he has numerous connections to Russian interests both in the U.S. and abroad. “The level of business amounts to hundreds of millions of dollars -- what he received as a result of interaction with Russian businessmen,” said Sergei Millian, who heads a U.S.-Russia business group and who says he once helped market Trump’s U.S. condos in Russia and the former Soviet states. “They were happy to invest with him, and they were happy to work with Donald Trump. And they were happy to associate—[and] be associated with Donald Trump.” Questions about Trump’s posture towards Russia have been a recurring issue in the 2016 presidential campaign. They have come from Democrats and Republicans, many of whom expressed surprise at Trump’s flattering remarks about Russian President Vladimir Putin, even as the official U.S. stance has grown increasingly frosty. “I would treat Vladimir Putin firmly, but there’s nothing I can think of that I’d rather do than have Russia friendly as opposed to the way they are right now so that we can go and knock out ISIS together with other people and with other countries,” he said.   Sen. John McCain told a talk radio audience he was “astonished” after Trump praised Putin on the campaign trail. “I think [it] shows either profound ignorance or an attitude that contradicts everything about the United States of America and our relations with our adversaries,” McCain said.  Long before he ran for president, Trump displayed an ongoing interest in Russia and the former Soviet states. He negotiated projects in the Republic of Georgia and Azerbaijan, neither of which was completed. And he and his children at different times toured Moscow in search of a site for a Trump project there. “I know there were some drafts prepared for the [Moscow real estate] project when Donald Trump flew to Moscow. And he shared those drafts with some of the Russian businessmen,” Millian said, adding, “It didn't go any further at the moment.” Trump was involved in a range of deals with Russian-born business executives, including the developer of the Trump project in Toronto. One of his partners in Trump Soho recruited financing from investors in Russia and Kazakhstan, according to court filings. And in 2013, Trump earned a cut of the proceeds when a Russian oligarch paid to host the Miss Universe Pageant at his venue in Moscow.   At the same time, wealthy Russians accounted for significant profits at Trump projects in the U.S.. Throughout the 2000s, records show Russians were buying into Trump branded real estate. ABC News conducted a review of hundreds of pages of property records and found that Trump-branded developments catered to large numbers of Russian buyers. This was most notable at the Trump licensed condo towers in Hollywood and Sunny Isles, Florida. Local real estate agents credited the Russian migration for turning the coastal Miami community into what they called “Little Moscow.” Trump Organization General Counsel Alan Garten told ABC News the firm does not track the nationality of buyers, but he does not believe Russians spent any more money on Trump ventures than those from other regions. “This whole fascination with this connection is overblown and misleading,” Garten said. Garten said the Trump Organization played no part in determining which market to pursue – the strategy used to attract buyers was entirely the purview of the developer. “In a license deal we’re not selling the unit,” Garten added. “That is a contact between the developer of that project and the buyer. We’re not selling anyone anything.” In the case of the Trump towers along Florida’s coast, they were sold by two separate builders with Trump licensing his name to the projects. But the licensing agreements required Trump to participate in the marketing of the condos, and Trump received royalties for each unit sold, according to Gil Dezer, president of Dezer Development, which built six Trump buildings in Sunny Isles. “He [Trump] obviously benefits from each apartment sold,” Dezer said. “There was a licensing percentage there.” Dezer described Trump’s hands-on approach to the projects, with involvement in every detail of the construction. “He would come in and he knew exactly what he would want,” Dezer said.  There is ample evidence in Russian media from that period in the 2000s that brokers mounted a significant effort to attract buyers to Trump properties in Florida, Toronto and New York. And Trump and his children participated in those campaigns. During the marketing of the Trump SoHo project, in which Trump licensed his name to a group that included Russian investors, the Trump family met with a group of Russian journalists at their New York offices to help boost interest in the project, according to Russian media reports. During the meeting, Trump was quoted telling the gathering of Russian journalists: “I really like Vladimir Putin. I respect him. He does his work well. Much better than our Bush.” Eric Trump and Donald Jr. were also present, and were quoted praising the importance of Russian condo buyers, many of whom have purchased units in Trump buildings in seven-figure, cash-only deals. "As the experience of the past few years shows, the best property buyers now are Russian,” Eric Trump is quoted as saying. “They're different in that they can go around without a mortgage loan from American banks, that require income checks and they can buy apartments with cash.” Garten said the Trump Organization did not fly Russian journalists to New York to tout the SoHo project, or any other. “If such a trip took place it would have likely been arranged by the developer or the broker for the project - not us,” he said.  Victoria Shtainer, a New York real estate agent who specializes in the high-end market, said the interest from Russian buyers rose in the early 2000s as Russians started to accrue wealth and began looking for a safe place to move their money. “They felt that the United States is a place where they could park their money and have their children go to school and have a future here,” she said. “America has always been the dream.” Advertisements began appearing in Russian media. Real estate agents marketing Trump projects showed glossy photos of the Florida oceanfront properties, such as one licensed development called Trump Hollywood. “An exclusive location on the Gold Coast,” read the Russian subtitles on one online video. “Excellence is felt in every look and every touch.” Daniel Pansky, a Florida broker who specializes in Russian buyers, said the Trump branded was uniquely suited to Russian buyers, who equated his name with luxury. As sales piled up, “Sunny Isles developed into a Little Moscow,” he said. “A lot of local dry cleaners, restaurants, stores having menus and signs in Russian.” “The Trump brand basically started the branding game here in south Florida,” said Pansky. “The majority of clientele were from New York and Russian origin.” But Pansky and Shtainer told ABC News that purchases from Russian buyers in New York and Miami began to drop precipitously in 2014, when the U.S. imposed economic sanctions on Russia in response to the Russian military incursion into Crimea. To Russian buyers looking to move money out of their home country, Shtainer explained, the sanctions “basically cut off their oxygen.”  Should Trump come out on top in the elections in November, he has said he'll consider whether or not to lift sanctions on Russia. “We’ll be looking at that, yeah we’ll be looking,” Trump responded in July when asked if he would roll sanctions back. Hope Hicks, a spokesperson for the Trump campaign, said the Republican nominee has "never issued a position on the matter one way or another" and reiterated that he would be studying the issue. Trump's children said that if their father becomes president, they would abide by the "blind trust" and not talk business with him. “And we'll act incredibly responsibly and my father already said that he would put the company into a blind trust and it would be run by us,” Ivanka Trump told ABC News last week. Donald Trump Jr. said his father would not be told about their deals: “We're not going to discuss those things. We're just, it doesn't matter. Trust me.” Millian said he hopes Trump continues to pursue closer ties between the U.S. and Russia. He recently posted a Trump donation card on his Instagram feed. “He knows that a lot of Russians love his properties,” Millian said. “They buy his luxury residences. So it was a good, very good business for him.” ABC News' Randy Kreider, Cho Park, and Alex Hosenball contributed to this report.
Donald Trump’s threat to raise tariffs on China, Mexico and other countries to force them to negotiate better deals with the United States “could unleash a trade war that would plunge the U.S. economy into recession and cost more than 4 million private sector jobs,” says a new study by the Peterson Institute for International Economics. The nonpartisan think tank, which leans pro-free trade, outlines several scenarios that could result from the Republican nominee's plans to raise tariffs and withdraw from trade deals, including the sweeping Asia-Pacific pact that the Obama administration wrapped up last year. Its conclusion: Trump’s assault on NAFTA, China, the Trans-Pacific Partnership and other trade deals would harm average American households, worsen income stagnation, devastate businesses and erode national security — and he would have the statutory authority to do it. Story Continued Below "If implemented, these proposals would provoke retaliation by U.S. trading partners, unleashing a trade war that would send the U.S. economy into recession and cost millions of Americans their jobs," the study says. Trump’s top trade advisers dismissed the study as biased Monday, saying it comes from a corporate-funded think tank and “signifies nothing.” “They are the pimps of globalization for the corporate interests who have sent American jobs overseas and basically turned America into a stagnant economy,” said Peter Navarro, an economics professor at the University of California, Irvine who has helped Trump develop his trade policies. Nearly half of the Institute’s revenue comes from major export-oriented corporations like Caterpillar, Pepsi and United Technologies, according to its website. The study comes as Trump and Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton rail against past trade policies for inflicting job losses and economic pain among working-class voters. President Barack Obama, who is pressing Congress to ratify the massive Trans-Pacific Partnership before he leaves office, has pushed back against both candidates’ trade stances. While the Peterson Institute also faults Clinton’s proposals, which call mainly for tougher enforcement, as leading to “stasis” in the expansion of trade, it reserves the bulk of its criticism for Trump. His policies “are another matter altogether” and could have disastrous consequences for the economy and for national security, the study says. Its projections are built on an earlier Moody’s Analytics study that estimated the economic effects of Trump’s call for steep tariffs on Mexican and Chinese imports and the renegotiation of trade deals like NAFTA. Under the worst-case scenario, U.S. employment could drop by nearly 5 million jobs in 2019, with states like Washington, California, Massachusetts and Michigan suffering losses of nearly 5 percent of private-sector jobs, the think tank says. “Even if the statements are strategic, acting on them can, intentionally or not, produce escalating cycles of retaliation by trading partners,” the Peterson Institute says. “When planning a war, it is not advisable to assume that one’s adversary will surrender when the first shot is fired. For these reasons, Trump must be taken at his word.” But Navarro, Trump’s trade adviser, says his Trump’s threat of tariffs is not an endgame but “simply part of an overall negotiating tool which is designed to get better and fairer deals.” Another Trump adviser, Nucor steel company CEO Dan DiMicco, quipped that the study is designed to scare voters and “should have come out on Halloween.” But DiMicco said Trump’s threats are "very real, and our trading partners who are cheating should take it very seriously." Unchecked government subsidies and currency manipulation are just some of the ways other countries are gaining an unfair trade advantage, he said. Trump could execute his stated plans to stop countries like China from “cheating” through executive powers that allow the president to raise tariffs unilaterally, the study finds. The nominee even went so far as to lay out the statutes he would invoke to retaliate against China’s “illegal activities” in a June 28 speech. Many of the authorities allow the president to hike tariffs or restrict imports in other ways based on broad interpretations of national security. U.S. companies couldn’t count on lawmakers or the courts to act fast enough to head off any initial economic shocks caused by Trump’s policies, the Peterson study says. “At least for a few years, a President Trump would have the stronger legal hand and his actions would very likely survive challenges in the U.S. courts and Congress,” it says. Legal action challenging the statutory authority could take months or even years, and any efforts by major U.S. importers like Apple to seek rapid relief through preliminary injunctions to stop Customs and Border Protection from collecting those duties would face legal uncertainty, the authors write. Even if Trump threatened high tariffs only as a tactical maneuver, “foreign countries will soon retaliate,” they say. Countries "will not patiently wait for U.S court proceedings or litigation in the WTO to vindicate their claimed rights under international law — specifically the right to export to the U.S. market at low [bound] tariffs, or duty free,” the authors say. “Enormous economic damage to U.S. firms, workers and communities could ensue from a trade war long before the legal battlefield is cleared."
Soon after Donald Trump’s campaign manager, Kellyanne Conway, said the GOP nominee believes “global warming is naturally occurring,” Mike Pence declared “there’s no question” human activities impact the climate. “There’s no question that the activities that take place in this country and in countries around the world have some impact on the environment and some impact on climate,” Pence, Trump’s running mate, said Tuesday on CNN. Story Continued Below The confusion came on the heels of Monday’s presidential debate, in which Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton pointed out that Trump previously said climate change is a hoax perpetrated by the Chinese. “The concept of global warming was created by and for the Chinese in order to make U.S. manufacturing non-competitive,” Trump wrote on Twitter in 2012. Trump later said it was a joke. On Tuesday, Pence told CNN it was “a humorous tweet” and sought to turn the argument on the Democrats. “What Donald Trump said was a hoax is that bureaucrats in Washington, D.C., can control the climate of the earth,” Pence said. “And the reality is that this climate change agenda that Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton want to continue to expand is killing jobs in this country.” Pence has repeatedly pledged that he and Trump will end the so-called “war on coal,” a reference to Obama administration policies that have led to the closures of a number of coal-fired power plants.
(CNN)The Clinton Foundation will lay off dozens of Clinton Global Initiative staff at the end of 2016, according to officials with the group. All full-time CGI employees will have their jobs with benefits through the end of the year, according to the officials, who said those leaving at that point were provided with other jobs available within the Clinton Foundation that will continue. The Clinton Foundation, particularly the Clinton Global Initiative, is preparing to undergo wholesale changes at the end of the year given the chances that Hillary Clinton will be elected president in November. The annual Clinton Global Initiative event will end this year -- whether Clinton wins or not -- and Bill Clinton is preparing to leave the board of the Clinton Foundation should his wife win in November. The layoffs were first reported by Politico. The foundation also announced this year that if Clinton wins the presidency, it will stop taking new contributions from foreign or corporate donors. Some CGI staff will stay on within The Clinton Foundation, according to the officials. Those jobs will "provide advice with respect to commitment development and commitment improvement" and continue "to facilitate introductions and partnerships between members." 
(CNN)Hillary Clinton forced Donald Trump onto defense over his temperament, refusal to release his taxes and his past comments about race and women during a fiery debut presidential debate Monday -- a potentially pivotal moment in a tight election campaign. Clinton, who has seen her dominance of the presidential race fade in the weeks since the Democratic convention, delivered a strong performance in which she demonstrated a command of policy and a sense of humor, smiling through some of Trump's strongest attacks. She delivered the best zinger of the night in response to criticism from Trump for staying off the campaign trail recently. "I think Donald just criticized me for preparing for this debate," she said. "And yes, I did. And you know what else I prepared for? I prepared to be President. And that is a good thing." Trump came out swinging at the beginning of the debate, and made some effective points on the economy and jobs -- some of the aspects of his outsider presidential campaign that have struck a chord with many Americans. But the debate highlighted Trump's tendency to make false claims as he made inaccurate statements on everything from laws regarding policing, his support for the Iraq War and his contention that Clinton was behind the so-called birther conspiracy. CNN's Reality Check Team vets the claims at the first debate Appearing in the "spin room" after the debate to talk to journalists, Trump said he was happy with his performance. "It went better than I ever thought," he told CNN's Dana Bash. A CNN/ORC poll of debate watchers released after the event found 62% felt Clinton won compared to 27% for Trump. The poll suggests the debate audience was a bit more Democratic than the public as a whole, about on par with the Democratic tilt in the audience that watched the first debate in 2008 between Obama and John McCain. One of the most powerful moments of the debate came when the conversation focused on the so-called birther debate following Trump's recent acknowledgment that President Barack Obama was born in the US -- a fact that has been evident for years. With Trump standing just a few feet from her, Clinton blasted him for perpetuating a "racist lie." "He has a long record of engaging in racist behavior," Clinton said as Trump shook his head. Trump hit back, noting Clinton's tough critiques of Obama during their bitter 2008 primary battle. 'Holier than thou' "You treated him with terrible disrespect and I watch the way you talk now about how lovely everything is ... it doesn't work that way," he said. "When you try to act holier than thou, it really doesn't work." As the debate ended, Clinton hammered Trump over his treatment of women. "This is a man who has called women pigs, slobs and dogs," Clinton said. She accused Trump of calling a Latina contestant in a beauty contest "Miss Piggy" and a housekeeper because of her ethnicity, seemingly throwing Trump off as he twice asked "Where did you find this?" Who is Alicia Machado? Former Miss Universe said Trump called her Miss Piggy Clinton repeatedly sought to correct Trump's statements -- going so far as referring viewers to fact checks on her website -- as she aimed to portray him as out of touch with the complexities of the American economy. "I know you live in your own reality," she told Trump. Clinton and Trump opened the debate on a positive note by shaking hands before stationing themselves behind their podiums at Hofstra University on New York's Long Island. Their spouses, former President Bill Clinton and Melania Trump, also greeted each other before taking their seats in the debate hall. From there, the drama quickly unfolded. An increasingly angry Trump slammed Clinton for putting her plans to fight ISIS on her website -- and thereby tipping off America's enemy. "Well, at least I have a plan to fight ISIS," Clinton responded, referring to his previous statements that he has a "secret" plan to destroy the terrorist group. Battling over taxes Clinton also hit Trump over his refusal to release his tax returns. "Why won't he release his tax returns?" Clinton asked. "Maybe he is not as rich as he says he is," she went on. "Maybe he is not as charitable as he claims to be," "Maybe he doesn't want the American people to know that he has paid nothing in federal taxes." Clinton pressed Trump on the issue, saying "There is something he is hiding." Trump replied that he would release his taxes when Clinton made public 33,000 emails that were deleted from her private email server. When Clinton said that Trump had paid no federal income tax in some years, Trump replied "That makes me smart." Clinton also set about Trump's business record, pointing out that he had called himself "The King of Debt" and accusing him of "stiffing" thousand of contractors who did work for his business. When the debate turned to racial issues and crime, Clinton said that it was important for police to work together with local communities to restore trust. Trump accused Clinton of refusing to say the phrase "law and order" and bemoaned the state of inner cities. He said that African-Americans and Hispanics were "living in hell." "You walk down the street, you get shot," Trump said. Clinton rebuked Trump for painting "such a dire picture" of black communities. Campaign at a critical point Trump and Clinton are facing off with the campaign at a critical point, as the race is a dead heat just 43 days before Election Day. A CNN/ORC poll released Monday found Trump edging Clinton 42% to 41% in the crucial battleground state of Colorado among likely voters in a four-way race. In Pennsylvania, another key state, the poll found Clinton in a virtual tie against Trump among likely voters at 45% to 44%. The former secretary of state is relying on both states to help pave her way to the 270 electoral votes needed to win the White House. Nationally, CNN's Poll of Polls finds Clinton and Trump neck-and-neck 44%-42%. Debate prep The rivals spent the day preparing for their big battle. Clinton participated in mock debates with her tart-tongued former aide Philippe Reines playing Trump. In one practice debate, Reines assumed the character of the unpredictable nominee by praising Clinton for her role as a pioneer for women, campaign sources said. Reines even wore the kind of signature red tie that Trump favors and adopted his characteristic hand gestures in a bid to fully prepare Clinton for her unpredictable foe. The Republican nominee has watched videos of Clinton, but his preparation has been less intense than his opponent's, in keeping with his more freewheeling style. He did not hold mock debates, for instance, with someone standing in for Clinton. CNN's Dana Bash, Dylan Byers and Sara Murray contributed to this report
A federal magistrate has turned down a request from defense lawyers that the man accused of the weekend bombings in New York and New Jersey be immediately arraigned on a set of federal charges he is facing. Manhattan-based U.S. Magistrate Judge Gabriel Gorenstein agreed with federal prosecutors that suspect Ahmad Rahami need not have an initial federal court appearance until he is taken into federal custody. And, by all appearances, he's currently in the custody of local officials in New Jersey, the magistrate said. "The [federal] Government explicitly denies that it has arrested the defendant. There is no evidence to the contrary," Gorenstein wrote in a two-page order released Wednesday evening. Gorenstein noted that defense lawyers said "it is undisputed that federal law enforcement are involved in detaining and questioning" Rahami. "In fact, this question is very much in dispute," the magistrate wrote. "The Government asserts unequivocally that the defendant 'is not in federal custody ... Whether there are federal authorities questioning defendant does not address the issue of custody. At this point, the Court has no evidence whatsoever from anyone with personal knowledge that the defendant is being detained by any federal officer." The magistrate also rejected defense lawyers' claims that a federal court rule requires Rahami be promptly arraigned on the federal charges even if he is arrested by state authorities. Gorenstein not only declined to schedule a court appearance for Rahami, who's at a Newark hospital and could have been arraigned there, but said he lacks authority to appoint the court's indigent defense providers at the Federal Defenders of New York to formally represent Rahami. Attorney General Loretta Lynch said Wednesday morning that Rahami will be brought to New York City in the "near future" to face the federal complaint there, which is expected to take precedence over attempted murder charges filed in county court in New Jersey and another federal complaint in the Garden State. A spokesman for U.S. Attorney Preet Bharara’s office declined to comment on the decision, saying the ruling could speak for itself. The defense attorney who asked for the arraignment, James Patton, did not immediately respond to a request for comment on the magistrate’s decision.
(CNN)President Barack Obama and Vice President Joe Biden mourned the death of Arnold Palmer with tributes to the golfing legend on their Twitter accounts honoring him as both an athlete and philanthropist. Obama on Sunday tweeted a photo of himself receiving a putting lesson from Palmer, 87, in the Oval Office and wrote, "Here's to The King who was as extraordinary on the links as he was generous to others. Thanks for the memories, Arnold." Obama -- who has played more than 300 rounds of golf in office -- said in a statement that Palmer had "swagger before we had a name for it," crediting him for what he did on the course and off, including building the Arnold Palmer Hospital for Children and Latrobe Hospital. The Vice President, who hails from Scranton, Pennsylvania, also honored the golfer on Twitter Monday saying, "Arnie was what every great athlete should be. A great golfer, and a gentleman who treated everyone with dignity. That's why he was so loved." Palmer, also known as "The King," for his transformative legacy in golf, died Sunday evening at a Pittsburgh hospital while awaiting cardiac surgery, according to a statement from his company. 
Accused of a “pay to play” scheme with Donald Trump, a defiant Florida Attorney General Pam Bondi broke her silence with the state’s news media Tuesday to say that she had no regrets in accepting a $25,000 political contribution from the Republican at the same time her office said it was examining fraud allegations against Trump University that it ultimately didn’t pursue. “Donald Trump did not get a pass,” Bondi told reporters. Story Continued Below Bondi told reporters that the contribution, made to her political committee amid her 2014 reelection campaign, had no bearing on her office’s decision to not join a civil fraud lawsuit filed by New York Attorney General Eric Schneiderman against Trump University, which was defunct by the time she first took office in 2011. “There never was an investigation into Donald Trump by this office,” Bondi said. Bondi’s first political opponent in 2010, former state senator and federal prosecutor Dan Gelber, recently said she should at least have returned the check to Trump while the New York case was pending. But Bondi on Tuesday said she didn’t return the check because it would have looked as if it were a bribe. “If I had returned it you would have reported ‘Bondi accepted a bribe, got caught and returned it.’ That's how the reporting goes,” Bondi said. “And so, no, there was nothing improper about it. So there was no reason to return it.” Nonetheless, when controversy recently flared over the donation again, Bondi’s committee tried to return the check but Trump wouldn’t accept it. Scores of complaints against Trump University and he related Trump Institute were filed during the term of her predecessor, Bill McCollum, who did not investigate. At the time she collected the contribution, only one additional complaint against Trump University had been filed with her office and, Bondi said, she was unaware of the complaint when she solicited the contribution from Trump. The attorney general’s office fields tens of thousands of complaints yearly. Still, the timing of Bondi’s solicitation and acceptance of the check from Trump in 2013 have made the two Republicans an easy target for Democrats who have filed ethics complaints, accused her of participating in a “pay to play” scheme and called for independent investigations. Trump once said that he gives money to politicians "because when I want something, I get it. When I call, they kiss my ass.” But Trump said he never discussed Trump University with Bondi and backed her because she’s a friend. As for why her office didn’t take the case, Bondi said her office referred Florida-based complainants – many of whom were elderly people who claimed they were scammed out of tens of thousands of dollars – to New York because Trump University was based in that state. Bondi has bristled at the negative press coverage and said that it’s wrong to question her pro-consumer record. “We have returned billions of dollars to consumers since I have been in office,” she said. Bondi has been dogged by the timing of the Trump donation and her office’s inaction since her 2014 reelection campaign – only to see the issue roar back to life when she endorsed Trump in Florida the day before the March 15 Republican presidential primary that he handily won. The issue died down until last month, when Trump began calling out Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton by accusing her of using the Clinton Foundation as a pay-to-play scheme. Democrats hit back by pointing fingers at Bondi. "My charity helps people, his is used to pay off your attorney general," Bill Clinton said at a Florida event earlier this month. Trump’s charity, the Donald J. Trump Foundation, was ensnared in the Trump University controversy because it was used to donate the $25,000 check to Bondi’s committee. That broke IRS rules and Trump recently admitted to the Washington Post that he paid a fine over the error. The timing of the contribution was controversial from the start. On Aug. 24, Schneiderman announced his lawsuit against Trump University. Five days later, an Orlando Sentinel reporter called Bondi’s office to inquire about whether she would join the suit. “We are currently reviewing the allegations in the New York complaint,” a Bondi spokeswoman told the reporter. About this time – Bondi is unclear as to the details – she solicited the check from Trump. Though her upper-level staff discussed the Schneiderman complaint, she said she was unaware of it. On Sept. 14, the Orlando Sentinel reported the Trump University lawsuit and, the following day, Bondi began receiving regular updates about the New York-based case. On Sept. 17, Bondi's political committee And Justice for All deposited the Trump check. The contribution was spotted by Orlando Sentinel columnist Scott Maxwell on Oct. 15, who said the timing “looks awfully fishy.” But Bondi described the contribution, among the largest to her committee, as relatively routine. “I was calling friends and family and many, many people because I was running for reelection,” Bondi said.
Party People is a new podcast from CNN where a pair of conservative CNN contributors talk to influential voices about the future of conservatism and the Republican party. Washington (CNN)If Donald Trump thinks his dominance in the Republican primary debates will translate to success in next week's matchup against Hillary Clinton, Lanhee Chen thinks the GOP nominee is in for a surprise. "He can't fake his way through 90 minutes," Chen, a research fellow Hoover Institution and a CNN contributor, told CNN's Party People podcast hosts Kevin Madden and Mary Katherine Ham. Trump participated in debates throughout the Republican presidential primary schedule, emerging largely unscathed in the polls after fighting off more than a dozen GOP presidential primary opponents, and locking up the party's nomination by May. Clinton prepares for unpredictable Trump at debate Chen, a Republican policy wonk who worked for former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt Romney and Florida Sen. Marco Rubio on their respective presidential campaigns, said the general election debates present a different challenge -- in part because he'll have just one other opponent and an increased focus on substance. "The 90-minute general election format makes it a lot harder to one line your way through it," Chen said, adding, "I think it's going to be very, very hard for Donald Trump to spend 90 minutes bumper-stickering. I think he's got to have something." Chen said Clinton faces her own challenges in the general election debates -- the first of which is on Monday at Hofstra University in Hempstead, New York. "I think for Hillary Clinton the challenge is: How does she expose the deficiencies in what he said or proposed without sounding pedantic?" Chen said. "She's going to sound like the teacher that nobody likes. And nobody wants to hear the teacher they don't like lecturing them for 90 minutes." Chen, whose background is in developing conservative policy ideas, said that if Trump wins the presidency then the real estate mogul would likely outsource setting his policy agenda to his running mate Mike Pence or House Speaker Paul Ryan. "Either way, Paul Ryan plays a big role," Chen said. "Paul Ryan is like 'How many thankless jobs can one man take?'" Ham added. To hear what Chen predicts a Republican Congress would do under a would-be President Clinton, how he got involved with politics to begin with and what policy he thinks both sides of the aisle can agree on, listen to CNN's Party People. Party People is a new podcast from CNN where a pair of conservative CNN contributors talk to influential voices about the future of conservative politics and the Republican party. Get CNN's Party People podcast at CNN, on Stitcher, TuneInRadio, or iTunes. 
Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump quickly laid into each other over trade during the first presidential debate, with Clinton citing her husband’s work on NAFTA as evidence she’s thought a lot about trade deals and Trump calling NAFTA the worst deal “ever approved” in the U.S. “I think my husband did a pretty good job [on trade deals] in the 1990s. I think a lot about what worked and how we can make it work again,” Clinton said. Story Continued Below “He approved NAFTA, which is the single worst trade deal ever approved in this country,” Trump shot back.The GOP nominee has harnessed anger among working-class voters on trade this year — a strategy that garnered him massive support from blue-collar workers and even prompted other Republicans who have supported free trade to flip their positions. Clinton said that “we’re going to enforce the trade deals we have and we’re going to hold people accountable.” She continued by saying that the country “increased global exports 40 percent” during her time as Secretary of State. “You go to new England, Ohio, Pennsylvania, you go anywhere you want, Secretary Clinton, and you will see devastation where manufacturing is down 30, 40, sometimes 50 percent. NAFTA is the worst trade deal maybe ever,” Trump shot back. “Donald, you may live in your own reality but that is not the facts,” Clinton said to Trump.
Scratch one big economic worry off the list for Hillary Clinton. Federal Reserve policymakers on Wednesday kept their key interest rate steady, avoiding a potential stock market disruption and putting the central bank on the sidelines until after Election Day. Story Continued Below Fed Chair Janet Yellen also strongly rejected claims lobbed at her by GOP presidential nominee Donald Trump that she is keeping rates artificially low to boost stock prices and aid Democrats. “I can say emphatically that partisan politics plays no role in our decisions about the appropriate stance of monetary policy,” Yellen said at a news conference after the Fed announced its decision. “We do not discuss politics at our meetings and we do not take politics into account in our decisions.” Nonetheless, the Fed’s actions can have significant political consequences. The Federal Open Market Committee’s decision means voters are not likely to see big stock-price declines or a slowing economy before the Nov. 8 election. Clinton is counting on slowly improving views of the economy to hold off a late surge from Trump, who has made dissatisfaction with the sluggish pace of growth a centerpiece of his populist campaign. Stocks rose following the Fed’s announcement. “The Clinton campaign should absolutely breathe a sigh of relief, because the market was just not positioned at all for a rate increase; there would have been total chaos,” said Brett Ewing, chief market strategist at First Franklin Financial Services. “Less drama is clearly good for the incumbent party.” At her news conference, Yellen said she saw improvement in the U.S. economy but little evidence of risky inflation. And she said holding off on a hike could allow more people to come back into the labor force. “We are generally pleased with how the U.S. economy is doing,” she said. “The economy has a little more room to run than might have been previously thought, and that’s good news. And remember that inflation continues below 2 percent.” The move cheered investors who have driven stocks to fresh highs this year in large part fueled by the Fed’s continued easy money policy. Yellen and the Fed also offered reassuring words about the state of the economy while pointing to a possible rate hike in December. “[T]he labor market has continued to strengthen and growth of economic activity has picked up from the modest pace seen in the first half of this year,” the Fed said in its eagerly awaited statement Wednesday. “The Committee judges that the case for an increase in the federal funds rate has strengthened but decided, for the time being, to wait for further evidence of continued progress toward its objectives.” The Fed’s decision on Wednesday is not a complete victory for the Clinton campaign. By declining yet again to raise rates, the world’s most powerful central bank is signaling that it does not believe the U.S. economy is strong enough for even the slightest tightening of monetary policy. The Fed raised rates in December for the first time in nearly a decade. But it has been unwilling to do so again despite an unemployment rate of just 4.9 percent and warnings that inflation could spike in ways that would be difficult for the Fed to control. The Fed’s target rate is now just 0.25 percent to 0.50 percent, a remarkably low figure this late in an economic recovery that gives the central bank little room to maneuver should a new crisis or recession arise. So the Fed’s move avoids a market meltdown but offers fresh rhetorical evidence for Trump and other Republicans who argue that the economy is extraordinarily weak. “It’s certainly better for Clinton not to have a negative market reaction, but the story here is also that Fed does not have high confidence in continued improvement in the economy,” said Michael Obuchowski of Merlin Asset Management. “And that’s something Trump can talk about, that the economy is so weak the Fed can’t do anything even though it wants to.” The Fed also reduced its outlook for economic growth this year to 1.8 percent from 2 percent while keeping projections for 2 percent growth over the next two years unchanged. Trump has made bashing the Fed a central plank in his presidential campaign, repeatedly blasting Yellen as motivated by a desire to protect Democrats. “She’s obviously political and doing what Obama wants her to do,” Trump said on CNBC earlier this month. “I think she’s very political, and to a certain extent, I think she should be ashamed of herself.” Trump has also said that as president he would replace Yellen, whose term runs until February 2018. And he has ripped the Fed for creating what he has called a “false economy” with high stock prices but only modest wage gains and a very low labor-force participation rate. Yellen pushed back hard on the criticism on Wednesday. “The Federal Reserve is not politically compromised,” she said. “I can’t recall any meeting that I have ever attended where politics has been a matter of discussion. I think the public if they had been watching our meeting on TV today would have felt that we had a rich, deep, serious, intellectual debate about the risks and the forecasts for the economy.” Yellen added that the central bank “struggled mightily with trying to understand each other’s points of view and come out at a balanced place and act responsibly, and that’s my commitment to the American people.” Still, some Fed governors appear to agree with at least elements of Trump’s critique. Three members of the Fed’s policy-setting committee voted against the latest decision, the largest number in two years. These governors argued for a quarter-point increase. Some market observers note, however, that investors have already done some of the Fed’s work by pushing up borrowing costs and generally tightening financial conditions without the Fed having to make an official policy move. “Why does the Fed have to do anything if someone else is already doing the heavy lifting for them?” said David Kotok, chief investment officer at Cumberland Advisors. “Why break your back?” As for 2016, Kotok said the decision should be a bit of a boost for Clinton, more because it avoids a nightmare scenario than does much to strengthen the economy. “This at least doesn’t hurt her,” he said. “Whether it actually helps is another question.”
Republican vice presidential candidate Mike Pence said he was “so proud” of his running mate, Donald Trump, for “demonstrating restraint” during the first presidential debate Monday night by opting not to bring up former president Bill Clinton’s extramarital affairs. The vice presidential candidate told CBS This Morning that he was impressed that Trump held back after Clinton launched an “avalanche of personal insults” at him. Story Continued Below “Ninety minutes in a row of one insult after another and then Donald Trump, just completely open and transparent with the American people, said, ‘There’s things I could bring up, we all know what they are, we all lived through the 1990’s,’ and he just said ‘I’m not going to do it.'” Pence said. “I think there you saw in him the restraint and temperament that would make for a good president.” Trump hadn't always planned to refrain from using the former president’s scandals as a personal attack on Clinton, but after the debate told reporters he was glad he changed his mind. “I’m very happy that I was able to hold back on the indiscretions with respect to Bill Clinton,” Trump said. “Because I have a lot of respect for Chelsea Clinton and I just didn’t want to say what I was going to say.” He added that he was going to say “something extremely rough to Hillary and her family, and I said to myself, I couldn't do it. It's inappropriate. It's not nice.” Trump had also threatened last weekend to invite Gennifer Flowers, a woman Bill Clinton admitted to having an affair with decades ago, to the presidential debate.
(CNN)At a recent campaign event, Hillary Clinton climbed on a box to address a room packed with young people. But instead of facing the Democratic presidential nominee, the audience turned their backs on her en masse. Further evidence of Clinton's challenge in winning over millennials? No. As it turned out, the Orlando, Florida, crowd wasn't being disrespectful. With their smartphones and cameras held high, they were snapping selfies -- trying to capture a historic moment by sharing a photo frame with the presidential candidate. Clinton's full-time photographer, Barbara Kinney, snapped a photo of the scene, which apparently happened after Clinton invited the crowd to turn around and snap a group selfie. Kinney wasn't expecting her photo to get so much attention, but since designer and Clinton supporter Victor Ng posted it Sunday to Twitter, it's been shared more than 19,000 times. The image isn't the only one to show our recent obsession with selfies. Who can forget the moment when Ellen DeGeneres' selfie at the Oscars in 2014 nearly crashed the Internet? Or when Queen Elizabeth II accidentally photobombed a selfie taken at the 2014 Commonwealth Games in Glasgow? And remember the iconic selfie taken of the Pope inside St. Peter's Basilica at the Vatican in 2013? The pontiff had a private audience with 500 youths from the Diocese of Piacenza-Bobbio. And what of the controversy surrounding the selfie of the endangered monkey with the cheeky grin? After a wildlife photographer stepped away and the crested black macaque snapped a self-portrait with the unattended camera, animal-rights organization PETA filed a lawsuit for the monkey to win copyright of the image. 
Former President George H.W. Bush plans to vote for Hillary Clinton in the upcoming election, according to a report by Politico. The Republican 41st president and member of a conservative political dynasty that spans several generations will vote against his party, says the scion of another family at the center of American politics. Kathleen Hartington Kennedy Townsend, a former Maryland lieutenant governor and daughter of Robert F. Kennedy, posted to Facebook, "The President told me he’s voting for Hillary!!” Townsend told Politico she met with Bush, 92, in Maine on Monday, where he told her about his preference in this year’s ballot. “That’s what he said,” she told Politico. “The vote President Bush will cast as a private citizen in some 50 days will be just that: a private vote cast in some 50 days,” a spokesman for Bush told ABC News. “He is not commenting on the presidential race in the interim.” 
Washington (CNN)When Hillary Clinton said that her Republican rival Donald Trump had paid no federal income tax in some years, Trump didn't deny it. In fact, he said: "That makes me smart." After the debate, he told CNN's Jim Acosta: "Of course I've paid federal taxes." Clinton was pressing Trump for not releasing his tax returns for public scrutiny. Trump has said he won't release his tax returns until a routine audit is complete, though every major party presidential candidate over the past 40 years have released tax returns. "There is something he is hiding," Clinton said of Trump during the debate. "Or maybe he doesn't want the American people, all of you watching tonight, to know that he's paid nothing in federal taxes, because the only years that anybody's ever seen were a couple of years when he had to turn them over to state authorities when he was trying to get a casino license, and they showed he didn't pay any federal income tax," she said. "That makes me smart," Trump said. Trump also said he would release his tax returns when Clinton made public 33,000 emails that were deleted from her private email server. 
At last night’s debate, Donald Trump said he provided a “great service” for President Obama by getting him to produce his birth certificate. He said Hillary Clinton lacks the stamina to serve as president. When Clinton suggested he hasn’t released his tax returns because he doesn’t pay any taxes to the federal government, he did not respond with a denial: “It would be squandered, believe me.” And during a back-and-forth about his racial views, Trump said he deserves “great credit” for refusing to discriminate at one golf club he owns—when he owns seven U.S. golf clubs. It’s hard to think of another year when those jaw-dropping statements in front of a massive audience wouldn’t have been big news. Then again, Trump also suggested the hack of the Democratic National Committee, which security experts blame on Russia, might have been perpetrated by “somebody sitting on their bed who weighs 400 pounds.” He accused Clinton of having some kind of meltdown “at the AFL-CIO the other day, behind the blue screen, I don’t know who you were talking to, but you were totally out of control.” He insisted that blowing up an Iranian ship would not start a war. And when Clinton complained that he would soon blame her for everything that has ever happened, he responded: “Why not?” Story Continued Below The question, of course, is whether any of these he-said-what? moments on the world’s largest stage will hurt Trump. And after 15 months of his brazen assaults on political norms, the only honest answer is: Who the hell knows? The two candidates on stage last night basically inhabited two different rhetorical universes, just as they have on the campaign trail. Clinton stuck to her public persona as a politics-as-usual Democrat with five-point policy plans and canned talking points about “Trumped-up trickle-down economics.” And Trump continued to flout political customs—he tried to interrupt 25 times in the first 26 minutes of the debate, according to Vox—and say a lot of wild, perplexing and untrue things that may well overstimulate the national fact-checking economy. Clinton clearly seemed better prepared and more coherent last night, and moderator Lester Holt’s questions—nothing about immigration, Benghazi or the Clinton Foundation, and her deleted emails barely came up—may have played to her wonky strengths. Trump came off as an overconfident blowhard, the mouthy guy at the office meeting who never knew much about the topic, didn’t try to get himself up to speed in advance, interrupts all his female colleagues anyway, then tells them to wait until he’s done when they try to get a word in edgewise. Trump did put Clinton on the defensive over trade issues, and especially in the early minutes, he scored points portraying her as a tired politician who had stayed in the game too long. But he did seem a lot less comfortable and more agitated than he does at his rallies, as if mass adulation suits him better than one-on-one confrontation, and it did sound like the pundits—and the battleground focus groups—scored the contest as a victory for Clinton. She didn't seem like the candidate who was totally out of control. Beyond the style points, though, there does not seem to be a lot of recognition of just how remarkable some of Trump’s comments were. Some of those comments have become familiar through repetition, like his suggestion that in America’s minority neighborhoods, you can’t walk down the street without getting shot, or his claim that American jobs are “leaving in bigger numbers than ever,” when in fact unemployment has been cut in half since 2010. But as I’ve discovered after attending Trump rallies, many of us have become so desensitized to his outrageousness that it no longer sounds as abnormal as it is. After all, his political incorrectness has become central to his brand; his supporters love that he isn’t afraid to say publicly things other politicians wouldn’t dare say privately. And whenever he drops a bombshell, he usually drops several more before we’ve recognized just how explosive the last one was. For example, Federal Reserve chair Janet Yellen is widely considered one of the least political people in Washington, but it barely seemed to register last night when Trump accused her of keeping monetary policy loose for purely political reasons—even though the policy should presumably be even looser if the economy were really in the shambles Trump says it is. Trump also casually suggested that Obama will “spend the rest of his life on the golf course” after leaving office, a pretty disrespectful thing to say about a president, though obviously not as disrespectful as arguing that Trump did him a favor by spreading lies about his citizenship. Trump also tried to push the preposterous notion that Clinton was a fervent birther, but a less effective one than Trump, sounding like Mitt Romney would have if Romney had suggested Obama was a less effective governor of Massachusetts. And it was really odd to see a 70-year-old man whose latest doctor’s note revealed that he’s flirting with obesity attack the physical condition of his opponent. Modern presidential candidates just haven’t said things like that. Then again, modern presidential candidates have always released their tax returns, which Trump has steadfastly refused to do, citing an audit that, as Clinton and Holt both pointed out, is not a valid reason to avoid disclosure. Clinton then pointed out that Trump didn’t pay any federal income tax in the years he had to release his returns to casino regulators, a swipe that Trump could have easily ignored. Instead, he interrupted her to boast: “That makes me smart.” And when Clinton insinuated that maybe he still isn’t paying the federal taxes that support troops, schools and health care, he again took the bait, not to deny that he’s a free rider, but to scoff that his taxes would just be wasted if he did pay them. That was a pretty damning non-denial. But before that could sink in Clinton was attacking him for stiffing his workers—“dishwashers, painters, architects, glass installers, marble installers, drapery installers like my dad.” And Trump once again embraced the charge, explaining that he doesn’t pay when he isn’t satisfied, and recommending that the country take a similar approach to its debts. When Clinton pointed out that it would be a disaster if the country declared bankruptcy the way Trump’s companies have, he said he had just taken advantage of the laws for his own benefit, because “that’s what I do.” It’s hard to imagine another presidential candidate saying that, but then again, it’s hard to imagine another presidential candidate expecting brownie points for allowing blacks in his club. Trump also defended his sexist comments about Rosie O'Donnell, described the $14 million his father gave him at the outset of his career as "a very small loan," and undoubtedly made other incendiary comments I missed. Somehow, that kind of rhetoric seems to be baked into the Trump cake. He denied last night that he had ever called global warming a Chinese hoax, even though the evidence remains on his Twitter account. He also clung to his disproven claim that he always opposed the war in Iraq, citing Sean Hannity as his character witness. Trump just keeps blustering through, never admitting error, always assuming his confidence projects authority. And maybe it does. He’s in a tight race to be president of the United States. Trump’s appeal is not really about details, which makes it complicated for the media to cover him. Maybe it’s tendentious to fact-check his exaggerations and rehash his rhetorical flourishes when he’s really trying to convey a larger truth. Like when he hits her for being a career politician by claiming she’s been “fighting ISIS your entire adult life.” But when you look at the transcript of, say, last night’s contentious discussion about race, it’s hard not to think that he’s getting a bit of a pass. I couldn’t help but think last night about all the abuse and ridicule heaped on Vice President Al Gore during a fundraising scandal when he kept saying there was “no controlling legal authority” banning his actions. When Clinton pointed out that the Justice Department sued Trump’s company in the 1970s for refusing to rent to blacks, Trump pointed out that lots of companies were sued, and that his settled with “no admission of guilt.” And then he said it again, after complaining that Clinton mentioned the suit in ads. “Frankly, I look at that, and I say, isn’t that amazing?” Trump said. “Because I settled that lawsuit with no admission of guilt…It’s just one of those things.” It’s one of those things that won’t make the news tomorrow, even though “no admission of guilt” at least partially captures the Trump approach to politics. He’s going to keep saying things that normal politicians don’t. He won’t apologize for them. He’ll attack the media for even questioning them. And his supporters will continue to love him for them.
On the eve of the first presidential debate, Donald Trump’s campaign manager, Kellyanne Conway, described her candidate Sunday as “the Babe Ruth of debating,” a glowing assessment that’s unusual at a time when both camps typically work to rein in expectations. “He's a brilliant debater,” Conway said on ABC’s “This Week.” “Newt Gingrich put it best. The former speaker recently said Donald Trump is the best debater he's ever seen. He's like the Babe Ruth of debating. He really shows up and swings and does a great job.” Story Continued Below Trump has complained that the moderators of the debates may be unfair to him. But Conway said she’s not troubled by any of them, including Monday night’s moderator, NBC's Lester Holt. “He's certainly going to be a good debate moderator tomorrow in that I trust that all of these moderators … for all the debates, including the VP debate next week, will be asking questions that benefit the voter,” she said. And Conway threw cold water on the notion that Gennifer Flowers — who claimed a 12-year affair with Bill Clinton before his presidential bid — would be invited by the campaign to take a front-row seat, a suggestion Trump made on Twitter in response to the Hillary Clinton camp’s invitation of Mark Cuban, a billionaire Trump antagonist. (Flowers told reporters that she would attend the debate.) “She has not been invited by the campaign. She has a right to be there if somebody else gives her a ticket,” Conway said. “But you know, I do think also it shows the poor judgment, a lack of nimbleness of the Clinton campaign that they actually put a statement out last night about Gennifer Flowers being invited, that it shows how easily provoked Donald Trump is, no, you just put out a statement and reminded people who had no — taught people who had no idea who Gennifer Flowers is, that she's the woman who had — said she had a 12-year affair with your husband when he was governor.” Asked why Trump suggested he may invite Flowers, Conway said, “Because he wants to remind people that he's a great counterpuncher.” “They started this one by saying that they would give a front-row seat to Mark Cuban,” she said. GOP vice-presidential nominee Mike Pence, in an interview on "Fox News Sunday," also said Flowers would not be attending the debate.
Donald Trump Jr., a son of the Republican presidential nominee, took to Twitter on Monday to publish a graphic that likened Syrian refugees to Skittles. The graphic asked the question, “If I had a bowl of skittles and I told you just three would kill you. Would you take a handful?”  This image says it all. Let's end the politically correct agenda that doesn't put America first. #trump2016 pic.twitter.com/9fHwog7ssN “That’s our Syrian refugee problem,” it reads. Trump added, “This image says it all.”   The tweet drew both sharp criticism and support in the form of responses, retweets and online comments. The uproar led Mars Inc., the parent company of the manufacturer of Skittles, to issue a statement. Mars tweeted, “Skittles are candy; refugees are people.”  pic.twitter.com/VUwYKzqujc Hillary Clinton’s traveling spokesman, Nick Merrill, retweeted Trump, saying, “This is disgusting.”  This is disgusting. https://t.co/Qygl03Cnc1 The White House announced last week that it wants to increase to 110,000 the number of refugees the U.S. accepts in the next fiscal year. This year, the country has taken in more than 11,000 Syrian refugees. More than 11 million people — over half of Syria’s population — have fled their homes, according to the latest U.N. figures, with 6.6 million displaced in Syria and 4.8 million seeking refuge abroad. Donald Trump Sr. has proposed what he called “extreme vetting” of immigrants entering the country, suggesting ideological tests and screening based on religious background.
Washington (CNN)Sen. Joe Manchin strongly defended his daughter, Heather Bresch, over growing criticism that her company dramatically raised prices for its life-saving medicine in order to enrich her company -- and herself. In an exclusive interview with CNN, the West Virginia Democrat broke his silence and sharply criticized lawmakers from both parties who have seized on the rising cost of EpiPen to bash his daughter's stewardship of her company, Mylan. He said lawmakers were trying to be "sensational" by seizing on Bresch's multi-million-dollar compensation. And he slammed an article in USA Today for questioning whether his wife, Gayle, improperly used her position in an education group to boost the drug's prices, calling it a "cheap shot" and "tabloid" journalism. He praised Mylan as a West Virginia company that saved the country $180 billion. Bresch became a target of derision over the summer after a nearly 500% increase in the cost of the lifesaving allergy drug EpiPen, which is one of the company's signature products. The drug, which cost around $100 in 2009, shot up to as much as $600. The move sparked outrage from parents with children who rely on the drug, and even prompted comments from Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton on the need to rein in rising drug costs. One of those parents was actually a colleague of Manchin -- Minnesota Sen. Amy Klobuchar -- and multiple members of Congress called for hearings on the spiking cost. Above all else, Manchin said it was unfair to blame Mylan for the dramatic increase in EpiPen, saying it was a problem in a "convoluted" system and middlemen that helped raise the price. "Heather is the most caring, sharing, generous person I've ever met in my entire life - most accomplished and tougher than nails," he said. "Absolutely," Manchin said when asked if his daughter was forthright to House lawmakers during a contentious hearing Wednesday. "But people have to listen, too." He added: "We can criticize and beat the living crap out of anyone we want to, and that was proven yesterday. But does that solve the problem? Do they really want to solve the problem?" Bresch earned nearly $19 million last year. Manchin suggested that the attacks on his daughter's compensation, which he called "pretty sensational," were to be expected given her success. "You have to expect that, you know," he said. "I make $174,000. They haven't attacked me yet, but I'm sure that people who make less than 174 would attack us, too." Asked if his daughter performed well, Manchin said that while anyone can always improve, she succeeded given the circumstances. "That's a hostile environment," he said. "Do they really want to fix a problem or do they want to make a statement for the next campaign?" CNN's David Wright contributed reporting.
Donald Trump should skip the next two debates unless he gets special guarantees from the moderators, former New York mayor and top Trump adviser Rudy Giuliani told reporters after the debate. Lester Holt, the NBC News anchor who moderated the debate, should be “ashamed of himself,” Giuliani said after the debate. He said Holt was wrong to attempt to fact-check Trump on the constitutionality of stop-and-frisk and his claimed opposition to the Iraq War. Story Continued Below “If I were Donald Trump I wouldn’t participate in another debate unless I was promised that the journalist would act like a journalist and not an incorrect, ignorant fact checker,” Giuliani said. “The moderator would have to promise that there would be a moderator and not a fact checker and in two particular cases an enormously ignorant, completely misinformed fact checker.” “If you wonder why Donald Trump thinks that the press is a left-wing basically oriented group, Lester Holt proved it tonight," he added. He later clarified about future debates: “I didn’t say what I’m advising him, I said what I would do.” Trump himself had no problem with Holt's performance. The moderator did a "fine" job, Trump said. But Giuliani was especially piqued by Holt’s claim that “stop and frisk was ruled unconstitutional in New York.” “No, you're wrong. It went before a judge who was a very-against-police judge,” Trump responded. “It was taken away from her and our mayor, our new mayor, refused to go forward with the case. They would have won an appeal.” “Stop and frisk is completely constitutional and the American people have been given the false impression that it isn’t,” Giuliani said. A federal district court judge ruled in 2013 that New York City’s stop-and-frisk policy violated the Constitution. Mayor Bill de Blasio, who ran on a platform opposing stop-and-frisk, ended the policy soon after taking office.
(CNN)New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie was informed about the traffic problems at the George Washington Bridge in 2013 as they were happening, according to the testimony Tuesday from a former Port Authority executive. While at Ground Zero during a 9/11 memorial event on September 11, 2013, Bill Baroni, the former Port Authority deputy executive director, and David Wildstein, the Port Authority director of interstate capital projects, had a discussion with Christie about the traffic issues, Wildstein testified Tuesday in federal court. The testimony is part of the trial for Christie's former deputy chief of staff, Bridget Anne Kelly, and Baroni, who have both pleaded not guilty to conspiracy and fraud charges in connection to the lane closures that caused the traffic problems, an incident that has come to be known by some as "Bridgegate." Christie has repeatedly denied any wrongdoing or involvement with the lane closures, and he has never been charged with any crime related to the handling of the incident. At an unrelated event Tuesday, Christie publicly said his version of events has not changed and denied any wrong "I had no knowledge prior to or during these lane realignments," he said. "I had no role in authorizing it. I had no knowledge of it and there has been no evidence ever put forward that I did." At a lengthy news conference on January 9, 2014, a day after the revelation that an aide and adviser had a role in the lane closures, Christie said he "had no contact with David Wildstein in a long time, a long time, well before the election." RELATED: Bridgegate trial: What to know "You know, I could probably count on one hand the number of conversations I've had with David since he worked at the Port Authority," Christie said then. "I did not interact with David." Wildstein said in court that Baroni told Christie, "Governor, I have to tell you there's a tremendous amount of traffic in Fort Lee this morning, major traffic jams." Wilstein said Baroni had a sarcastic tone during the conversation. The lane closures began two days prior on September 9. "You'll be pleased to know that Mayor (Mark) Sokolich is having trouble getting his telephone calls returned," Baroni continued, according to Wildstein. Wildstein testified that Christie replied, "I imagine he wouldn't be getting his calls returned." Sokolich had not endorsed Chris Christie in his re-election bid. Previous testimony during this case illustrated an administration policy of "radio silence" the governor's office and the Port Authority implemented. Baroni then informed Christie that Wildstein was monitoring the traffic in Fort Lee. Later in the conversation, Christie reiterated that the Port Authority was to have no contact with Sokolich. The lane closures lasted four days. Editor's Note: The headline and text in this story have been updated to reflect language from the actual testimony about what the witness said Christie was told at the time of the lane closures. CNN's Tom Kludt and Tal Kopan contributed to this report.
(CNN)One of the big winners at the Emmys on Sunday night delivered some of the harshest criticism of Donald Trump offstage -- comparing the Republican presidential nominee to Adolf Hitler and warning against what she said were efforts to "otherize" groups of people. Jill Soloway, creator of Amazon's "Transparent" and winner in the comedy series directing category, spoke to "Variety" backstage during the awards show, where she lit into Trump. "Jews were other-ized in Nazi Germany to gain political power for Hitler, and right now Donald Trump is doing the same thing. He's other-izing people. He calls women pigs if they don't look like beauty pageant contestants. He blames Muslims and Mexicans for our problems. He makes fun of disabled people. This is other-izing with a capital 'O,'" Soloway said. She continued, "It has been used in our history before to start and win wars. He needs to be called out at every chance he gets for being one of the most dangerous monsters to ever approach our lifetimes. He's a complete dangerous monster, and at any moment that I have to call out Trump for being an inheritor to Hitler, I will." CNN has reached out to Trump campaign for comment and not yet received a response. With the criticism, Soloway delivered one of the sharpest Trump condemnations at the awards show -- but she was far from alone, as the program featured a series of actors, directors and producers who slammed the GOP nominee. "Transparent" lead actor Jeffrey Tambor, another winner who was backstage during the exchange, said he agreed, according to Variety. And he reportedly quoted the poet W.H. Auden, saying "Love one another or die." David Mandel -- the showrunner of HBO's "Veep," which also won multiple awards, and who was also present backstage -- joked that his show, which satirizes politics, couldn't keep up with Trump. "There are days when things we think of pale in comparison to that mad man threatening Hillary Clinton not once but twice," Mandel said, according to "Variety." "If I wrote that, I'd get fired by HBO. I find the level of discourse in this campaign horrific." He added, "A lot of people don't want to laugh about this stuff." 
The National Rifle Association’s new spot is aimed at people who are already afraid, and hammers Hillary Clinton for wanting to leave them defenseless. The gun rights group said it’s spending $5 million to run the spot on national cable and on regional stations in Pennsylvania, North Carolina, Nevada, Ohio and Virginia. The ad does not mention Donald Trump, who the group endorsed in May. But it does dovetail with messages that both he and the NRA have delivered before, casting Clinton as an elitist who would take away individuals’ guns while benefiting from armed protection herself. Story Continued Below The ad, called “Nightstand,” shows a woman, alone in bed, awakened in the night by an intruder. She dashes for a landline phone, and a gun stored in a safe. But it fades away before she can grab it. A narrator says the average 911 response time is 11 minutes. “Hillary Clinton would take away her right to self defense, and with Supreme Court justices, Hillary can,” the narrator says. “Don’t let Hillary leave you protected with nothing but a phone.” Self defense against other people has become the top reason for gun ownership in the United States, according to a new study from Harvard and Northeastern University researchers. About two-thirds listed that reason for owning guns in 2015, The Trace reported, and handgun ownership has risen proportionally compared with rifles. That’s despite drops in violent crime over recent decades. While Clinton has made tighter gun laws, including universal background checks, a centerpiece of her campaign, she has not said she wants to ban firearms or repeal the Second Amendment. However, the NRA points to comments she made at a fundraiser that the Supreme Court is “wrong on the Second Amendment,” an apparent reference to a 2008 case that affirmed an individual’s right to bear arms. With its latest buy, the NRA has spent more than $11 million to support Trump’s candidacy, adding to its status as the biggest outside spender. The group’s previous spot highlighted that Clinton has armed protection, even as she would restrict it for others. Trump recently seized on this line of argument as well, in a way that some interpreted as inciting violence. Speaking Friday in Miami, Trump called for her “bodyguards” — the U.S. Secret Service — to disarm. “Take their guns away. She doesn’t want guns … let’s see what happens to her. Take their guns away, OK? It’d be very dangerous,” Trump said. That followed an ad-lib in August when he said “Second Amendment people” could stop her from nominating Supreme Court justices if she wins the election.
Greensboro, North Carolina (CNN)Donald Trump declined Tuesday to answer reporters' questions about his sudden shift on the issue of President Barack Obama's birthplace. Trump ignored reporters' questions during a stop at a restaurant here, the first opportunity journalists covering his campaign have had to ask the Republican nominee about his reversal on the issue. In a brief statement on Friday, Trump asserted that he now believed Obama was born in the US and then refused to answer reporters' questions after the press event, which campaign aides told media members would be a press conference. For years, Trump was one of the most prominent and vocal pushers of the "birther" conspiracy theory that falsely claimed Obama was not born in the US. Obama produced his long-form birth certificate in 2011 that proved he was born in Hawaii. While Trump surrogates like New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie have falsely asserted in recent days that Trump dropped his birtherism in recent years, Trump declined numerous opportunities to disavow his previous support of the conspiracy theory. In the two weeks before his sudden statement on Friday, Trump was asked four times about his birther beliefs -- and Trump declined each opportunity to disavow the falsehood or his role in pushing that conspiracy theory. Trump spent Tuesday campaigning in the battleground state of North Carolina, where the latest polls show him in a dead heat with Hillary Clinton. 
ELIZABETH, N.J. — A suspicious device found in a trash can near a train station exploded early Monday as a bomb squad was attempting to disarm it with a robot, officials said. Elizabeth Mayor Christian Bollwage said the FBI was working to disarm one of five devices found in the same bag in a trash can by two men at around 8:30 p.m. Sunday near the Elizabeth train station. The men had reported seeing wires and a pipe coming out of the package, Bollwage said. Story Continued Below There was no immediate report of injuries or damage. The mayor warned that other explosions were expected. FBI agents and police converged on an apartment above a fried chicken restaurant near the train station before 6 a.m. Monday, but it was not clear whether their search of the dwelling was connected to the explosion. New Jersey Transit service trains resumed service on the Northeast Corridor and North Jersey Coast Line at 5:30 a.m. Monday, but they faced residual delays because service was suspended after the devices were found. Amtrak was operating on a modified schedule. Train passengers reported being stuck on Amtrak and NJ Transit trains for hours Sunday night, while some trains moved in reverse to let passengers off at other stations. Amtrak said 2,400 passengers were affected and trains were being brought in to other stations for people to get other transportation. It wasn't clear when the Elizabeth station would be open, a threat to cause major issues on the Monday morning commute into New York. The discovery of the suspicious package came a day after an explosion in Manhattan injured 29 people, and an unexploded pressure-cooker device was found four blocks away in New York City. Also Saturday, a pipe bomb exploded about an hour from the Elizabeth train station in Seaside Park, New Jersey, forcing the cancellation of a military charity 5K run. Officials said it didn't appear that those two incidents were connected, though they weren't ruling anything out. Investigators didn't immediately comment on whether they thought the Elizabeth incident was connected to either of the two blasts. Bollwage said that he wasn't willing to say that Elizabeth had become a target and that it was possible that someone worried about the authorities was trying to get rid of the package. "I'm extremely concerned for the residents of the community, but more importantly extremely concerned for everyone in the state and country where someone can just go and drop a backpack into a garbage can that has multiple explosives in it," Bollwage said. "You have to wonder how many people could have been hurt."
Donald Trump has unleashed an unprecedented deluge of small-dollar donations for the GOP, one that Republican Party elders have dreamed about finding for much of the past decade as they’ve watched a succession of Democrats — Barack Obama, Bernie Sanders and, to a lesser extent, Hillary Clinton — develop formidable fundraising operations $5, $10 and $20 at a time. Trump has been actively soliciting cash for only a few months, but when he reveals his campaign’s financials later this week they will show he has crushed the total haul from small-dollar donors to the past two Republican nominees, John McCain and Mitt Romney — during the entirety of their campaigns. Story Continued Below All told, Trump is approaching, or may have already passed, $100 million from donors who have given $200 or less, according to an analysis of available Federal Election Commission filings, the campaign’s public statements and people familiar with his fundraising operation. It is a threshold no other Republican has ever achieved in a single campaign. And Trump has done so less than three months after signing his first email solicitation for donors on June 21 — a staggering speed to collect such a vast sum. “I’ve never seen anything like this,” said a senior Republican operative who has worked closely with the campaign’s small-dollar fundraising operation. “He’s the Republican Obama in terms of online fundraising.” Clinton counted 2.3 million donors as of the end of August, the result of decades of campaigning, a previous presidential bid and allies who painstakingly built her an email file of supporters even before she formally announced her second run. But Trump had zoomed to 2.1 million donors in the past three months alone, his campaign has said. The question now is what the gusher means for the GOP. The Republican National Committee, through a deal struck with Trump in May, is getting 20 percent of the proceeds from its small-donor operation for Trump plus access to this invaluable new donor and email file. But can Trump’s candidacy help close the Republican Party’s small-donor divide in one fell swoop? Will these donors — 2.1 million and counting — give to other Republicans? Will they drag the Republican Party in Trump’s direction for years to come? Or, if he loses, will they simply vanish? “The challenge is that we still have a divided party,” said Mindy Finn, who led Romney’s digital team in 2008 and worked for George W. Bush’s reelection in 2004. Trump has found record-setting success as the first Republican nominee “in the Internet age” to have made empowering the grass roots and railing against the elite a core of his campaign message, Finn said. Going forward, the key will be whether his donors can be convinced to give to a candidate with just a bit less bombast. “Can you be a populist without being a barnburner?” she asked. “And thus still be able to raise this kind of money?” Or, as a second operative who has worked with Trump’s small-dollar fundraising operation, put it, “I don’t know how much these Trump donors — if he doesn’t win — want to give to the RNC.” Trump, a self-proclaimed billionaire who bragged during the primaries about how he didn’t need anyone else’s cash to run for president, would appear at first to be the unlikeliest of Republican fundraising heroes. But the combination of his celebrity, anti-establishment populism, and running against Clinton has led to a windfall, even as his skeletal campaign did little for more than a year to cultivate a donor list or build digital infrastructure to lure contributors. “People are pouring in, and we’re having to manage the inflow,” said one of the operatives familiar with the Trump operation. It is impossible to piece together a complete picture of Trump’s finances due to different reporting deadlines for Trump’s various committees. But as of the end of July, he had amassed $50 million in small contributions into his campaign, FEC records show. He has since announced he raised $90 million in August “mostly” from small donors both directly for his campaign and in joint committees shared with the Republican National Committee — suggesting at least $45 million raised last month came from small contributors. Additionally, there is some money from small contributors in those shared RNC accounts — Trump said they contained $37 million at the end of July — that he has helped raise. Trump’s success dwarfs those of his GOP predecessors. McCain and Romney, in 2008 and 2012, respectively, raised just less than $64 million in contributions of $200 or less, according to FEC records (McCain, notably, accepted public funds in the 2008 general election). Trump still lags far behind the pace-setting Democrats. President Obama raised an enormous $483.6 million in contributions of $200 or less in 2012, FEC records show. Sanders raised almost $202 million in small donations just during the 2016 primary. And Clinton raised almost $156 million in such contributions through the end of July, according to the FEC. Democrats seem to vacillate between comforting themselves with all that Trump continues to do wrong — botching Mike Pence’s announcement, the high spam rate on their first email, the volume of ads targeting Democrats — and concern about his successes in spite of that. “I would just put it in the perspective of they’re still not doing as well as they should be doing, and they’re doing too little too late,” said Kenneth Pennington, who served as digital director for Sanders. “Once they start copying some of the things Democrats are doing, then I’ll get worried.” Trump is certainly spending big to raise small money. In July, he poured $8.4 million into his San Antonio-based digital firm, Giles-Parscale, most of which was spent on online advertising and prospecting for donors. People familiar with the Trump operation say that the campaign has essentially told digital vendors that it will run as many Facebook and Google ads as possible, so long as investing in the particular ad is generating positive cash flow, or return on investment. “We’ve had a positive ROI on everything,” said one Trump campaign official. Brad Parscale, who runs the Trump digital operation and began working for the Trump family before it entered politics, has increasingly begun traveling to New York and accumulating power within the campaign. Last week, Donald Trump Jr. visited Parscale’s operation in San Antonio to thank the employees, and RNC officials, dispatched there. “Every time there’s been a change in leadership, he’s gotten significantly more authority,” an operative who has worked with the campaign said of Parscale. Of course, the ever-increasing flow of money to Trump Tower has certainly helped. On Aug. 31, the day Trump went to Mexico and the last day of the reporting period that will be revealed this week, Trump raised an enormous $5 million. The campaign ran a dizzying 107,000 different ad combinations on Facebook on that day alone, according to Lindsay Walters, a Republican National Committee spokeswoman, swapping out different text, graphics and videos to determine what performed strongest. A typical day involves 40,000 to 50,000 such combinations, Walters said. Another person familiar with the Trump and RNC digital operation said there has been some strain simply creating content fast enough to fill all the ad slots that are making them money. In an atypical arrangement for a presidential campaign, the RNC is actually taking a cut of all the small-dollar fundraising done through its joint committee with Trump (Romney received 100 percent of the joint committee’s small donations, in contrast). The agreement was struck back in May, when Trump emerged as the nominee with little infrastructure or experience to execute a large-scale digital operation. As a result, the RNC will end 2016 will access to a far larger email and donor file than ever before. “A lot of them probably don’t realize that 20 percent of the money goes to the RNC; otherwise they probably wouldn’t give,” said one of the operatives who has worked with Trump and the RNC. “People are giving money to the joint fundraising committee because Donald Trump’s name is on it.” Indeed, almost all of the ads prominently incorporate Trump’s image or name — offering dinner with Trump, coffee with Ivanka Trump, lunch with Eric Trump. And the appeals aren’t just for petty cash. Trump has run an extensive email campaign asking for $184 for signed copies of “The Art of the Deal” — an unusually large sum to seek online. “We wouldn’t be running all that stuff if it wasn’t working,” said a person who has worked with the campaign. In a sign of the potency of Trump’s name, others are trying to capitalize as well. The National Republican Senatorial Committee, the campaign arm of Senate Republicans, has been blitzing its own email list with Trump-themed missives. So far in September, the NRSC has offered Trump-Pence yard signs, bumper stickers, bracelets, magnets and T-shirts, even as strategists have urged Senate candidates themselves to distance themselves from Trump on the trail. Other, insurgent-style Republicans have found success among small donors in the past. Ben Carson’s primary campaign floundered but he still raised $48 million among those who gave $200 or less. Ted Cruz raised more than $60 million from such givers before he dropped out. That is the catch-22 for a Republican establishment that, thanks to Trump, is now awash in a potentially powerful list of new givers — the energy and money is for the anti-establishment candidates. Fred Malek, a top Republican presidential fundraiser for decades, said Trump’s singular appeal to small donors could be just that. “It seems to me that it is not necessarily transferrable,” he said.
A day after autocratic Egyptian leader Abdel Fattah al-Sisi said he had “no doubt” Donald Trump would make a strong leader, the Republican nominee returned the favor, praising Sisi as a “fantastic guy.” Sitting down with Fox Business’ Lou Dobbs, Trump touted the “chemistry” the two politicians shared during a special meeting on the sidelines of the United Nations General Assembly Monday. Story Continued Below “I thought it was very productive. He’s a fantastic guy,” Trump said of Sisi. “I thought it was a great meeting. We met for a long time, actually. There was a good chemistry there. You know when you have good chemistry with people. There was a good feeling between us.” Trump also praised the foreign leader’s handling of the Egyptian coup d’etat of 2013 that removed former President Mohamed Morsi from power, a bloody transition that saw thousands of dissidents and protesters killed. “He took control of Egypt. And he really took control of it,” Trump said. Days prior, Trump lavished Sisi with praise, expressing support for the leader’s “strong support for Egypt’s war on terrorism, and how under a Trump administration, the United States of America will be a loyal friend, not simply an ally, that Egypt can count on in the days and years ahead." Trump has faced heavy criticism for praising authoritarian leaders like Russia’s Vladimir Putin. In an interview with CNN Thursday, Sisi expressed confidence in Trump’s leadership in light of their recent meeting. Asked by host Erin Burnett whether he shared a similar positive outlook of Trump’s opponent, Hillary Clinton, Sisi showed similar confidence. “Political parties in the United States would not allow candidates to reach that level unless they are qualified to lead a country the size of the United States of America,” Sisi replied.
Over the course of his 75 years on and off the basketball court, Bobby Knight said Wednesday that he has never met anyone who can fix mistakes quite like Donald Trump. "There’s nobody that I’ve met in my lifetime that has a better grasp of how to correct mistakes and how to look at what’s wrong and how to correct what’s wrong and how to get it going right," Knight told an audience in Toledo, Ohio, his home state. "And I think that is the most important thing that can be brought to the next president of the United States. And there’s nobody who has a better background in correcting things that are going wrong and getting things going in the right direction and developing those things — the best person ever has been Donald Trump." Story Continued Below Back on the campaign trail with Trump after several months, Knight extolled the Republican nominee as "not just an American; he’s a world figure." "He’s known all over the world. Donald Trump put a lot of businesses together," the coach continued. "United States around the world. A lot of businesses. Created a lot of jobs, thousands of jobs for people around the world." And Trump, Knight later indicated, is the person for the White House. "Believe me when I tell you, I think you’re all gonna agree on this: Our next president is gonna inherit a hell of a lot of problems, and it’s gonna take a problem solver to get us back where we want to be and where we should be, and there is no one that even comes close to being smart, tough and dedicated completely to the United States of America," Knight said. He noted that the next president would have to deal with the national debt, "immigration problems and on and on." Remarking on his study of history, Knight said that he had come to the conclusion that "when I need somebody on my side to help us with problems, he's the first man I want to choose and the first man I want to see." Knight, clad in a red, white and blue gingham shirt, acknowledged to the crowd that he doesn't "dress as well as politicians dress, but I want you to know, and it’s for all of you folks, I wore my red, white and blue shirt today." "And I think that when you leave, I hope you all go out and buy a red, white and blue shirt, because it’s indicative of your love for the greatest country in the world, the United States," Knight said.
(CNN)Secretary of State John Kerry launched a blistering attack on Russia Wednesday for its actions in Syria, pointing to the bombing of a UN aid convoy that left more than 20 dead and its inability to stop continued Syrian air attacks. Kerry spoke immediately after Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov at a United Nations Security Council meeting in New York about the five-year Syrian war. "I listened to my colleague from Russia and I sort of felt like we're in a parallel universe here," Kerry said of their differing accounts of the conflict. He called for all planes in key areas of Syria to be immediately grounded and for countries to stop supporting those who sabotage ceasefire efforts.  Kerry also questioned how the US-supported opposition can engage in political talks to resolve the conflict when the Syrian regime, backed by Russia, doesn't halt its attacks. Russia was tasked with restraining Syria during this latest attempt at a ceasefire, undertaken last week. RELATED: US blames Russia for Syria convoy attack; Moscow points to terrorists  "How can people go sit at a table with a regime that bombs hospitals and drops chlorine gas again and again and again and again and again and acts with impunity," Kerry asked. "You're supposed to sit there and have happy talk in Geneva while the regime drops bombs?" Russian denial The diplomatic clashing of swords highlights just how hard it has been to take even the first steps toward calming the Syrian conflict enough to begin political talks. The ongoing civil war has given terror groups like ISIS and al-Qaeda fertile recruiting ground, has sucked in regional powers seeking influence over the outcome and has sent ripples through Europe and its allies. As diplomats sparred at the Security Council, Russian Minister of Defense Sergei Shoigu said that Moscow was sending an aircraft cruiser to the Mediterranean to strengthen its capabilities there.   The Russians have denied that they were behind the attack on the UN convoy and instead have offered a series of explanations that Kerry detailed at the Security Council meeting.. Russia initially said that the strike was a necessary response to an alleged offensive by an al-Qaeda-linked terror group, Kerry said. Then Russia claimed they were bombing elsewhere, then that the aid convoy had been followed by militants with mortars, and then that the trucks caught fire. "The trucks and the food and the medicine just spontaneously combusted," Kerry said. "Anybody here believe that?" he asked. The bombing attacks on hospitals and children are "flagrant violations of international law," he added. And attacks on civilians and humanitarian workers continue, Kerry noted. He cited separate air strikes on Monday that killed four aid workers near Aleppo. "There are only two countries that have planes that are flying during the night or flying in that particular area at all," Kerry said. "They are Russia and Syria."   'Thorough and impartial' investigation At the Security Council Wednesday, Lavrov said Russia always put as a top priority the resumption of the inter-Syrian political dialogue without any preconditions. And he called for a "thorough and impartial" investigation into Monday's bombing, which left the convoy of trucks in a twisted wreck of smoking metal. And he urged his counterparts at the meeting to "refrain from emotional comments." US officials have fingered Russia as the perpetrator of the attack based on intelligence and reports from the ground. Kerry cited eyewitnesses who said that "all of a sudden, the place became hell and the fighter jets were in the sky." The White House said publicly Tuesday night that it held Russians responsible, regardless of whether it or the Syrian government had launched the strikes, since they have responsibility for the airspace. "We have not seen good faith. This was an outrageous action," said Deputy National Security Adviser Ben Rhodes. Syrian Ambassador to the UN Bashaar Jaafari hit back, saying it was "laughable" for Kerry to cite eyewitness accounts when, he claimed, "thousands of people" in the area hadn't seen any jets. He also took the US to task for an airstrike on Satruday that killed 62 Syrian soldiers, calling it a "deliberate and unacceptable aggression." The US has said it was an accident. Kerry's scathing 28-minute speech to the Security Council also pressed the need to return to a 2012 plan to create a political transition in Syria. He pointed to repeated Syrian attacks on civilians, detailed shifting Russian explanations about the aid convoy attack and ridiculed Moscow's argument that political talks shouldn't be burdened with preconditions. The US has said that Russia bears responsibility for the attack on the convoy because they were the only two countries flying planes over the area at that time and Russia had pledged to restrain Syria. "The primary question is no longer what do we know," Kerry said. "The primary question is, collectively, what are we going to do about it? In other words, this is a moment of truth." Washington, Moscow clash Lavrov needled the US over opposition groups during his address. Washington and Moscow have clashed over Russian targeting of moderate Syrian opposition groups backed by the US. The Russians have claimed that some of these groups are not particularly moderate and have accused opposition groups of violating the ceasefire.  On Wednesday, Lavrov called for all members of the International Syrian Support Group to ensure that the opposition groups over which they have influence will comply with the cessation of hostilities. Otherwise, he added, "We can't preserve Syria as a single, united state."  And he alluded to "geopolitical engineering," a reference to Russian concerns about US attempts at "regime change." Syria's Jaafari echoed the argument, telling the meeting that the International Syrian Support Group was "formed outside international legitimacy" and was "reminiscent of other destructive coalitions that only brought disasters to countries like Iraq and Libya and Yemen." The only success the US has managed to achieve, Jaafari said, is to level "false accusations" about the "suffering of Syrians to demonize the Syrian government and its allies." Four failed ceasefires Kerry had left the meeting before the Syrian ambassador spoke, but when Jaafari had finished speaking, Ambassador Michele Sison, the US deputy representative to the UN, asked to address the council. "My colleagues are entitled to their own opinions but not to their own facts," Sison said. "Let's just keep in mind just who is prolonging the suffering of the people of Syria." Jaafari's remarks had been "so full of untruths that I feel no need to say anything further," she said. For his part, earlier in the meeting, Kerry mocked Lavrov's argument that there should be no preconditions before political negotiations start. Citing four international-level agreements calling for a cessation of hostilities that could then lead to peace talks, Kerry said, "that's not a precondition. That's an international agreement, four times arrived at." RELATED: Obama at UN warns Americans against walls and nationalism "Four times, it's been shredded by independent actors," Kerry said, "by spoilers who don't want a cease-fire." Half of Syria's population has been uprooted, many of them fleeing to Europe, and well over 300,000 men, women and children have been killed, UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon told the meeting.   "Those who believe the crisis in Syria cannot become even worse are dead wrong," Kerry said, "as are those who believe there's a military solution." 
North Carolina Gov. Pat McCrory has withdrawn his lawsuit against the Obama administration over the state’s law that curbs legal protections for transgender people. Lawyers for McCrory said in a court filing on Friday that North Carolina was dropping the lawsuit, citing “substantial costs” to the state. They wrote that continuing the litigation is unnecessary since North Carolina will have the chance to defend its transgender law, known as HB2, as part of a separate lawsuit that the Justice Department has brought against the state. Story Continued Below McCrory initially filed the lawsuit in May after the Obama administration threatened to withhold federal funding to the state because of the law, which requires transgender people to use public restrooms that match the sex listed on their birth certificate, rather than their gender identity. The Justice Department countered with its own lawsuit against North Carolina, filed hours later. That case remains ongoing. The voluntary dismissal of the lawsuit on Friday won’t bring the debate over the legality of North Carolina’s law to an end anytime soon. And the question of transgender bathroom access continues to spark lawsuits around the country. Federal judges have ruled in different directions on the issue, which may ultimately end up before the U.S. Supreme Court. A federal judge last month ordered the University of North Carolina to let two transgender students and one employee use bathrooms that align with their gender identities. But a federal judge in Texas has temporarily blocked the Obama administration from enforcing its directive that schools allow transgender students to use bathrooms and locker rooms that match with their gender identity.
"I thought Lester did a great job. Honestly, I thought Lester did a great job," Trump told CNNMoney shortly after the debate was over. When asked if the questions had been fair, Trump replied: "Yeah, I thought it was very fair." Trump's positive assessment of the moderator was matched by his own campaign manager, who said Holt "did a great job as a moderator under tough circumstances," as well as many media critics and observers on social media. Related: Monday night ranks as the 'most tweeted debate ever' But even as the candidate said that, an opposite consensus was building among his supporters, surrogates and members of the conservative media. "Lester Holt clearly heard the cries of his colleagues in the liberal media to be tough on Trump and ease up on Hillary loud and clear," Brent Bozell, the president of the right-wing watchdog Media Research Center, said in a statement. "Lester Holt failed in his role as a moderator. Period." Drudge Report, the influential conservative aggregator, led its site with stories from Heat Street and Washington Examiner that claimed Holt had been "the third debater," and that his fact-checking was "opinion journalism." To be sure, Holt interrupted Trump more often than Clinton and fact-checked Trump more often than Clinton -- though it should be noted that Trump went over his allotted time more often and said more statements that were factually inaccurate. Related: Donald Trump's reality TV background doesn't help him in debate For most of the debate, however, Holt held back, allowing the two candidates to debate -- a move that was in line with the expectations of the Commission on Presidential Debates. "Points to Lester Holt for standing aside and letting Trump and Clinton go at it," Adam Nagourney, the New York Times' Los Angeles bureau chief, wrote on Twitter. Others questioned his absence: "Apparently Lester Holt went to the bathroom, way down the hall, and only one urinal is available and there is a line," National Review columnists Jim Geraghty tweeted. As the debate wore on, however, Holt stepped up to fact-check Trump on claims about his refusal to release his tax returns, his claim that he opposed the Iraq War and his history of questioning President Barack Obama's citizenship.
ALBANY — While Donald Trump and his supporters have recently expressed optimism the Republican presidential nominee can carry New York in November, he still has a lot of ground to make up for that to happen. A poll conducted by the Siena College Research Institute last week found Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton leading Trump 51 percent to 30 percent in New York with third-party candidates included, a modest change from the 50 percent to 25 lead she enjoyed in August. Story Continued Below While the two most recent Siena polls aren’t perfectly comparable — last month’s looked at registered voters, while the one released Tuesday deals with likely voters — there were some demographic groups among which Trump showed improvement. In particular, voters in New York City’s suburbs seem to have warmed to him. Clinton led there, 42 percent to 31 percent in August; the gap has since narrowed to 39 percent to 38 percent. Trump also appears to be doing slightly better among young voters (those between 18 and 34 years old backed Clinton 51 percent to 18 in August; now they back her 53 percent to 27 percent) and Jewish voters (Clinton’s lead slid from 51 percent to 25 percent in August to 45 percent to 31 percent this month). But Trump’s support plummeted among low-income earners. In August, people earning less than $50,000 a year backed Clinton 46 percent to 29; her lead among that group now stands at 64 percent to 23 percent, the poll found. Additionally, Clinton’s lead among African Americans increased from 79 percent to 5 percent last month to 85 percent to 1 percent in the latest poll. Trump is now running fourth among the state’s black electorate, with his 1percent falling short of Libertarian Gary Johnson’s 4 percent and the Green Party’s Jill Stein’s 3 percent. The new poll also found that U.S. Sen. Charles Schumer’s lead over Republican challenger Wendy Long has grown from 63 percent to 24 percent in August to 69 percent to 23 percent this month. If undecided voters break the same way as those who have already made up their minds, Schumer is on pace to received 75 percent of the vote in November, passing the modern record of 72.2 percent Sen. Kirsten Gillibrand received when she defeated Long in 2012. In other findings, Gov. Andrew Cuomo’s favorability stands at 57 percent, up slightly from the 53 percent favorability rating he enjoyed in August. But voters said they “prefer someone else” to Cuomo in the 2018 gubernatorial race by a margin of 49 percent to 45 percent, up slightly from 47 percent to 46 percent last month. The Siena poll has a margin of error of plus or minus five percentage points. Siena predicts that this year’s electorate will be 50 percent Democratic, 25 percent Republican, and 21 percent “independent/ other.” View the poll’s crosstabs here: http://bit.ly/2cXG8e0
NEW YORK — An Afghan immigrant wanted for questioning in the bombings that rocked a New York City neighborhood and a New Jersey shore town was captured Monday after being wounded in a shootout with police that erupted when he was discovered asleep in the doorway of a New Jersey bar, authorities said. WABC-TV footage showed a man believed to be 28-year-old Ahmad Khan Rahami being loaded into an ambulance on a stretcher in Linden, New Jersey. He appeared to be conscious and looking around. Story Continued Below Two officers were wounded in the gun battle but were not believed to have been seriously hurt, authorities said. Linden Mayor Derek Armstead said that the owner of a bar reported someone asleep in the doorway of his business. A police officer went to investigate and recognized the man as Rahami, police and the mayor said. Rahami pulled a gun and shot the officer — who was wearing a bulletproof vest — in the torso, and more officers joined in a running gun battle down the street and brought Rahami down, police Capt. James Sarnicki said. The arrest came just hours after police issued a bulletin and photo of Rahami, a naturalized U.S. citizen from Afghanistan with an address in Elizabeth, New Jersey. Authorities said the blasts were looking increasingly like an act of terrorism with a foreign connection. Police did not disclose how they zeroed in on Rahami as a person of interest in the bombing investigation but were known to be poring over surveillance video. At the same time, five people who were pulled over in a vehicle Sunday night were being questioned by the FBI, officials said. The shootout came after a weekend of fear and dread in New York and New Jersey. In addition to the blast that injured 29 people in Manhattan's Chelsea neighborhood on Saturday, an unexploded pressure cooker bomb was found blocks away, and a pipe bomb exploded in a New Jersey shore town before a charity race. No one was injured there. On Sunday, five explosive devices were discovered in a trash can at an Elizabeth train station. Also on Saturday, a man who authorities say referred to Allah wounded nine people in a stabbing rampage at a Minnesota mall before being shot to death by an off-duty police officer. The Islamic State group claimed responsibility. Authorities have not drawn any connection between the violence in Minnesota and the bombings in the New York area. Citing the FBI, New Jersey State Police said Monday that the bombings in Chelsea and the New Jersey shore town Seaside Park were connected. New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo said as investigators gathered information, they learned there were "certain commonalities among the bombs," leading authorities to believe "that there was a common group behind the bombs." Before Rahami's capture, Cuomo said investigators have no reason to believe there are further threats, but the public should "be on constant guard." Around the time Rahami was taken into custody, President Barack Obama was in New York on a previously scheduled visit for a meeting of the U.N. General Assembly, and said it was "extremely fortunate" nobody was killed in the bombings. He called on Americans to show the world "we will never give in to fear." "We all have a role to play as citizens to make sure we don't succumb to that fear. And there's no better example of that than the people of New York and New Jersey," the president said. "Folks around here, they don't get scared." Rahami lived with his family in Elizabeth in an apartment above a fried-chicken restaurant owned by his father, on a busy street a few miles from the Newark airport. Early Monday, FBI agents swarmed the apartment. Elizabeth Mayor Christian Bollwage said Rahami's father, Mohammad Rahami, and two brothers sued the city after it passed an ordinance requiring the First American Fried Chicken restaurant to close early because of complaints from neighbors that it was a late-night nuisance. Ryan McCann, of Elizabeth, said that he often ate at the restaurant and recently began seeing the younger Rahami working there more. "He's always in there. He's a very friendly guy, that's what's so scary. It's hard when it's home," McCann said. In the immediate aftermath of the New York bombing, de New York Mayor Bill de Blasio and Cuomo were careful to say there was no evidence of a link to international terrorism. Both said Monday that appeared to be changing. "The more we learn with each passing hour is it looks more like terrorism," de Blasio said in an interview on NY1 News. Cuomo said on MSNBC: "Today's information suggests it may be foreign-related, but we'll see where it goes." On Sunday night, FBI agents in Brooklyn stopped "a vehicle of interest" in the investigation of the Manhattan explosion, according to FBI spokeswoman Kelly Langmesser. She wouldn't provide further details, but a government official and a law enforcement official who were briefed on the investigation told The Associated Press that five people in the car were being questioned at an FBI building in Manhattan. The officials spoke on condition of anonymity because they were not authorized to talk about the investigation. On Sunday, a federal law enforcement official said the Chelsea bomb contained a residue of Tannerite, an explosive often used for target practice that can be picked up in many sporting goods stores. Cellphones were discovered at the site of both the New York and New Jersey bombings, but no Tannerite residue was identified in the New Jersey bomb remnants, in which a black powder was detected, said the official, who wasn't authorized to comment on the investigation and spoke to the AP on condition of anonymity. The pipe bomb that exploded Saturday in Seaside Park went off before a charity 5K race to benefit Marines and sailors. The race was canceled. One of the five devices found at the Elizabeth train station exploded while a bomb squad robot tried to disarm it. No one was hurt.
11/19/16, 3:14 PM CET BY Chris Spillane So is anti-establishment message of Nigel Farage, the Labour leader said. 11/19/16, 1:55 PM CET BY Sarah Wheaton Alumni of the Obama White House spent days mourning Trump’s win. Now they’re ready to fight. 11/19/16, 11:37 AM CET BY Chris Spillane Dick Schoof: ‘Chance of attack in the Netherlands is real.’ 11/19/16, 10:38 AM CET BY Chris Spillane Government could focus on starting the process of leaving the bloc sooner. 11/19/16, 10:13 AM CET BY Benjamin Oreskes Diplomats say the president-elect already has a playbook to undermine the global body. 11/19/16, 10:01 AM CET BY Michael Crowley and Nahal Toosi Flynn, Bannon represent ‘Islamophobic’ thinking of the type rejected by Bush and Obama, critics say. 11/19/16, 5:25 AM CET BY Michael Kruse The blue-collar workers who put Donald Trump in the White House are ready for him to deliver. How much time will they give him? 11/19/16, 5:20 AM CET BY Ryan Heath, Tara Palmeri, Harry Cooper and Quentin Ariès  11/18/16, 9:09 PM CET BY Harry Cooper A Polish political party’s links to a pan-European group raise questions about funding. 11/18/16, 6:31 PM CET BY Tom McTague Signs that Britain’s political class is coming to terms with June’s EU referendum. 11/18/16, 6:26 PM CET BY Hortense Goulard Conservative MEP denounced Juncker’s efforts to drum up support for Schulz as ‘outrageous.’ 11/18/16, 5:31 PM CET BY Ivo Oliveira Drawing the top stories around the globe. 11/18/16, 4:55 PM CET BY Cynthia Kroet Italians are likely to reject prime minister’s reform package in next month’s vote. 11/18/16, 4:48 PM CET BY Elana Schor, Kyle Cheney and Louis Nelson The president-elect starts building out his administration with loyalists. 11/18/16, 4:01 PM CET BY Nicholas Vinocur Left-wingers hope that by backing Alain Juppé, they will see off two political enemies. 11/18/16, 3:15 PM CET BY Cynthia Kroet Jens Stoltenberg did not mention the total number or reasons for the requests. 11/18/16, 3:02 PM CET BY Florian Eder and Janosch Delcker Wird Martin Schulz die SPD in den Bundestagswahlkampf führen? Oder schafft er es, doch noch einmal EU-Parlamentspräsident zu werden? Er muss sich bald entscheiden. 11/18/16, 2:34 PM CET BY Anthony Skinner Syrian refugees are pawns in Turkish president’s pursuit of power. 11/18/16, 2:33 PM CET BY Charlie Cooper Shadow Brexit secretary ‘seriously pissed off’ at colleague’s comments. 11/18/16, 2:33 PM CET BY Cynthia Kroet German chancellor is ‘championing the interests of Europe,’ Witold Waszczykowski said. 11/18/16, 12:58 PM CET BY Cynthia Kroet Nikola Gruevski stepped down in January over a wire tapping scandal. 11/18/16, 12:48 PM CET BY Barbara Surk Jens Stoltenberg said he had a ‘good talk’ with the president-elect. 11/18/16, 12:35 PM CET BY Esther King Majority of those who failed to gain international asylum come from the Balkan states. 11/18/16, 11:48 AM CET BY Esther King Immigration is what keeps the country running, says pro-EU Lord. 11/18/16, 10:57 AM CET BY Esther King Conditions at offshore detention center for refugees are ‘cruel, inhuman and degrading,’ said François Crépeau. 11/18/16, 9:36 AM CET BY Esther King Foreign Minister Linas Linkevičius warned that Vladimir Putin could use transition period in Baltics, Syria. 11/18/16, 8:55 AM CET BY MADELINE CONWAY Former ambassador to the UN says there are ways of supporting the opposition that does not involve the use of American military force. 11/18/16, 8:39 AM CET BY Cristiano Lima Her presence is likely to raise fresh concerns about potential conflicts of interest. 11/18/16, 8:35 AM CET BY Bryan Bender The retired lieutenant general’s hardline views on Islam — as well as laudatory statements about Russia — have made him a lightning rod, as did his strident attacks on Hillary Clinton during the campaign. 11/18/16, 5:33 AM CET BY Nicholas Vinocur The center-right’s first ever presidential primary looked all over. Now it’s wide open. 11/18/16, 5:25 AM CET BY Tim King The Günther Oettinger controversies are tainting this European Commission by intimate association. 11/18/16, 12:17 AM CET BY Nahal Toosi Much of Europe is alarmed over what Trump’s presidency could augur. 11/17/16, 11:52 PM CET BY Shane Goldmacher and Andrew Restuccia ‘We feel way ahead of schedule and never in a rush to do the wrong thing,’ said campaign manager Kellyanne Conway. 11/17/16, 9:42 PM CET BY Jacopo Barigazzi Maltese interior minister not impressed with Bratislava’s migration plan. 11/17/16, 9:33 PM CET BY Edward-Isaac Dovere In Berlin, the president warned his successor that his divisive campaign style won’t wear well in the Oval Office. 11/17/16, 8:24 PM CET BY Janosch Delcker US President hopes Trump won’t ‘simply take a Realpolitik approach.’ 11/17/16, 8:21 PM CET BY Hortense Goulard European Parliament president will only accept foreign minister role if he is also the SPD candidate for the top job. 11/17/16, 8:18 PM CET BY Konstantin Richter Germans, of all people, are now called on to be bulwarks of democracy. 11/17/16, 8:06 PM CET BY Paul Dallison and Esther King Euroskeptic party stands accused of breaking rules on spending EU funds. 11/17/16, 7:16 PM CET BY Brent Griffiths  11/17/16, 6:31 PM CET BY Maïa de La Baume Brussels faults Ankara for ‘neglecting and undermining’ democracy and the rule of law. 11/17/16, 6:27 PM CET BY Louis Nelson  11/17/16, 5:47 PM CET BY Cynthia Kroet Jean-Marie Le Pen should receive €15,000 because he was prevented from carrying out his duties. 11/17/16, 4:57 PM CET BY Carter Stoddard Net debt has ballooned to £338 million, and currency fluctuations are partly to blame. 11/17/16, 4:34 PM CET BY Laurens Cerulus In finally passing her surveillance bill, Britain’s PM just made Brexit even more complicated. 11/17/16, 4:13 PM CET BY Hortense Goulard French prime minister called for more European integration amid rising nationalism. 11/17/16, 3:23 PM CET BY Cynthia Kroet Former European Council president joins forces with Flemish singer. 11/17/16, 2:53 PM CET BY Paul Dallison Corey Lewandowski said president-elect will work closely with Theresa May, with no need for UKIP leader as a go-between. 11/17/16, 2:37 PM CET BY Cynthia Kroet Freedom Party leader’s comments on Moroccans living in the Netherlands were ‘unnecessarily offensive.’ 11/17/16, 2:11 PM CET BY Esther King Nigel Farage’s party stands accused of breaking rules on spending EU funds. By Zia Weise 9/26/16, 5:33 AM CET Updated 9/27/16, 7:24 AM CET Children sit in a classroom in the refugee camp of Lagadikia | Sakis Mitrolidis/AFP via Getty Images LESBOS, Greece — Ten-year-old Foual from Gaza is an aspiring polyglot. At the entrance to Kara Tepe, the second-largest refugee camp on Lesbos, he greets visitors in English, German, and Spanish. He knows some Turkish, too, and can almost count to twenty in Greek. “I’m learning by myself,” Foual says proudly. He has no alternative: there are no formal schools in Greek camps. As a refugee in Lebanon, he attended three years of primary education, but since he arrived in Europe six months ago, he’s been out of school. Ask parents why they decided to make the journey across the Mediterranean, and most will tell you that they took the risk to ensure a better future for their children. But since the Balkan states closed their borders in March, the thousands of refugee children marooned in Greece have had little or no access to education, despite having reached Europe. They join an estimated 3.5 million refugee children across the globe who are missing out on school. Starting this month, the Greek government is hoping to change that by enrolling refugees in public schools — but for the past seven months, children in camps have only had access to casual volunteer-run classes. The [Greek] ministry of education hopes to enrol thousands of refugee children in Greek schools, starting by the end of the month. Of the 27,000 children stranded in Greece, at least 18,000 are thought to be of school age. “It’s not really a school, just a class,” Foual says of the education project in Kara Tepe. His elder sister, 11-year-old Melek, interrupts: “It’s not like in Lebanon where we had a system and a curriculum. Here, it’s a little Greek, a little English, just one class for an hour a day.” Rights organisations have long warned of a “lost generation” of refugee children missing out on education. The crisis is particularly dire among Syrians: 1.5 million children who have fled to neighbouring Turkey, Jordan or Lebanon are not in school, creating a surge in child labour and early marriage. In Greece, the average refugee child has been out of school for a year and a half, according to the NGO Save the Children. Initially, education was not a priority for the Greek government, which has struggled to provide even basic services to the 60,000 asylum-seekers now marooned in the country. Yet with registration and relocation programmes moving at a snail’s pace, there is a growing realisation that the tens of thousands of asylum-seekers will remain in Greece for some time. “Things change every week, but we assume they are going to be stuck for a while,” says Naoko Imoto, an education specialist for UNICEF in Greece. “We’re thinking about years, really.” Accordingly, the Greek government has begun planning for the long term. The ministry of education hopes to enrol thousands of refugee children in Greek schools, starting by the end of the month. Of the 27,000 children stranded in Greece, at least 18,000 are thought to be of school age. For the current school year, refugee children will be taught separately from Greek students. These so-called “reception classes” will take place in the afternoon, four hours a day, focusing on Greek and English, mathematics and IT. The aim, the government says, is to prepare the refugee students to join normal classes in the coming year — either in Greece or elsewhere in Europe. For younger children, kindergartens are planned to be opened in camps. Even though asylum seekers will initially be taught separately from Greek children, the move has been met with opposition. On Tuesday, a parents’ association in the northern Greek town of Filippiada complained about the plan, voicing fears about diseases and arguing that their children would be unable to “coexist with migrant children”. Refugee children, the parents’ association states, had “different perceptions on the role of family, the place of women and religion to Greek children whose parents have made sacrifices to offer their children the best education.” The Greek education ministry earlier this month dismissed a complaint from a parents’ association in Oresteiada, another town on the northern mainland, which had threatened a sit-in protest if children from camps were admitted into their school. Also On Politico Timor Sharan Also On Politico Lili Bayer Also On Politico Florian Eder and Janosch Delcker Nikos Filis, the education minister, says the integration of refugee children would be “gradual,” and that pupils would be vaccinated before attending public schools. “Hence, there is no serious justification” for the parents’ protests but “only prejudice,” Filis says. Until the official programme comes into effect, however, volunteers and refugee teachers continue to plug the gap. Makeshift schools have popped up in most camps, but attendance is voluntary, and teaching refugee children come with challenges. “Some of them never went to school,” says Corien Tiemersma, a Dutch volunteer who has taught English in the Malakasa camp north of Athens, home to nearly a thousand mostly Afghan refugees. “And at the beginning, they weren’t used to sitting down.” UNICEF’s Imoto hopes that formal education will introduce stability to the lives of children living in limbo in Greece. “It’s urgent that we get these children into school, so that they have an education but also a sense of normalcy and hope,” she says. Imoto said they were also planning to train refugees who were teachers in their home countries to give classes in the children’s mother tongues, something Greek schools cannot provide. “They are the biggest resource we have,” she says. Education for her children was her prime motivation for making the perilous crossing to Greece, [Amal Ismail] explains, pouring the tea into glass jars that serve as cups. In Nea Kavala, a military-run tent camp north of Thessaloniki, refugees and volunteers work side-by-side in the camp’s community centre. Mahmoud Mohammad, a former tailor from Syria’s Kurdish-majority Afrin area, is using his English skills to teach children in the camp. The school, he says, “is the most important achievement in the camp.” He works alongside five others, including Ragda, a Syrian teacher from Idlib, who has been giving Arabic classes for four months. “I began volunteering because there are a lot of kids here and they should go to school,” Ragda says. There have been some difficulties, she admits. “There are some Yazidi and Kurdish children who don’t speak Arabic, so I had to teach them Arabic first.” But with limited resources and few trained teachers, the Nea Kavala school is unable to provide formal education. Classes run for only two hours a day. “I want to study. I dropped out at eighth grade in Syria,” says Rewan, a 15-year-old refugee from Afrin who has been in Nea Kavala for six months. “But there’s no real school. It’s an hour a day plus language classes, and the first level includes everyone from first to eighth grade.” A few tent rows away, Amal Ismail, a Kurdish woman from Aleppo, boils water for tea in a rusty tin. Her children, three girls and a boy, have missed out on years of school; her 11-year-old son worked with her husband in a clothing factory in Turkey’s Izmir for two years to support the family. Education for her children was her prime motivation for making the perilous crossing to Greece, she explains, pouring the tea into glass jars that serve as cups. They had been in Nea Kavala for seven months. “We lived in fear in Syria,” she says. “We thought we’d be free of fear in Europe. But here, we’re afraid our children will never go to school and learn.”  © 2016 POLITICO SPRL Log in to access content and manage your profile. If you do not have a login you can register here.
CLEVELAND — Donald Trump campaigned Wednesday morning in a church in a historically African-American community and sold himself as the candidate who could fix the problems of urban America. Within hours, Trump was proposing a vast expansion of “stop-and-frisk” policing policies that have proved explosively controversial in black communities for encouraging racial profiling. It was just another day in Trump’s up-and-down black outreach campaign undertaken to wash away the stain of racism charges lobbed at him by Hillary Clinton and the Democrats. Story Continued Below The effort has taken Trump from a black church in inner-city Detroit earlier this month to addressing largely white audiences in rural North Carolina where, on Tuesday evening, he proclaimed in a small town named after a slaveholder that black communities "are absolutely in the worst shape that they’ve ever been in before, ever, ever, ever." On Wednesday, Trump hit the campaign trail with former boxing promoter Don King — who dropped the N-word before a group of pastors at a Cleveland church while extolling Trump as a “gladiator.” King hailed Trump as the rare candidate who would overthrow the existing political system under which minorities have suffered. “The system is the problem, and he’s the only gladiator that will take on the system,” King said. After the church event, Trump sat for a “town hall” with Fox News host and unabashed supporter Sean Hannity. Asked by an audience member what he would do to address “violence in the black community,” Trump embraced stop-and-frisk. “We did it in New York, it worked incredibly well,” Trump said. Fierce opposition to that policy in minority communities was among the issues that Bill de Blasio rode to prominence and, ultimately, the mayor’s office. But even before Trump’s stop-and-frisk comments, he was taking heat for his “ever, ever, ever” remark Tuesday night. “I don't know what Mr. Trump is talking about to say that the situation for African-Americans is worse than it's ever been,” Rep. John Lewis, the Democratic civil rights icon, said Wednesday on MSNBC. “Is he talking about worse than slavery? Worse than the system of segregation and racial discrimination — when we couldn't take a seat at the lunch counter and be served? Worse than being denied the right to register to vote, to participate in the democratic process and live in certain neighborhoods and communities?” Trump’s polling numbers among African-American voters have been dismal — in the low single digits — and some believe his outreach to black voters is as much about convincing moderate white voters, particularly women and those in the suburbs, that he is not racist. Trump regularly brings up his outreach to blacks — “What do you have to lose?” he says — to largely white audiences. At the New Spirit Revival Center in Cleveland, Trump assembled an eclectic kitchen cabinet of some of his closest advisers to attest to his beliefs before a diverse crowd. Seated to Trump’s right was Mike Pence, his soft-spoken running mate. To his left, outspoken longtime attorney Michael Cohen. Behind him: King (“there’s only one,” Trump said), former presidential rival Ben Carson (“tough”), retired Lt. Gen. Michael Flynn (“a tough general”) and former "Apprentice" star Omarosa Manigault (“a wonderful woman”), who has helped with Trump’s black outreach. “I’m different from a lot of Republicans, frankly,” Trump said from the pulpit. Trump, who has called himself the “law and order” candidate, criticized the police officer who shot an unarmed black man in Oklahoma last week. Trump said he had watched the video and that the officer may have been “choking” in the fatal shooting. Trump has mostly defended the police in such incidents. "Now, did she get scared? Was she choking? What happened? But maybe people like that, people that choke, people that do that, maybe they can't be doing what they're doing, OK?” King, whom top GOP officials had pushed not to speak at the Republican National Convention due to a past manslaughter conviction, was given the prime slot of introducing Trump at a forum billed as a pastors leadership conference. King, clothed in a sparkling jacket and clutching the flags of Israel and the United States, argued repeatedly that “the system” had oppressed minorities and women and only Trump can upend it entirely. “Every white woman should cast a vote for Donald Trump,” said King, who also went on an extended riff about the struggles of African-Americans. “I told Michael Jackson, I said if you're poor, you're a poor Negro — I would use the N-word — but if you rich, you are a rich Negro; if you are intelligent, intellectual, you're an intellectual Negro; if you're a dancing and sliding and gliding n-----, I mean, Negro,” King said. When Trump took his turn at the pulpit minutes later, he grinned, “Ah, there’s only one Don King.” Before King, Cohen, Trump’s attorney, used his time at the church to slash at the “disgusting, liberal, mainstream media” and its casting of Trump as a “racist.” “The word of the 2016 election has somehow become ‘racist,’” Cohen complained. “I’ve lost count as to how many times the disgusting, liberal, mainstream media have attempted to label Mr. Donald Trump as racist, a xenophobe and a bigot. And let’s not forget, sexist, misogynist, narcissist, Islamophobe, anti-Hispanic, anti-Semite demagogue. And countless others. It’s disgraceful.” Cohen said, “Not only is Donald Trump not a racist, he believes that all people are part of one race: the human race.” Trump insisted that Democrats had abandoned black voters, and that he wouldn’t. “They come and they take your vote,” Trump said, “and they say they’ll see you in four years.”
(CNN)Hillary Clinton's campaign manager said Wednesday that the Democratic nominee would implement a set of best practices to prevent police-involved shootings like the ones this week in Charlotte, North Carolina and Tulsa, Oklahoma. "There are two prongs to her approach," Robby Mook, Hillary for America campaign manager told CNN's Alisyn Camerota on "New Day." "The first is to have a set of national standards around how to manage the situations that doesn't exist right now and that could help through training to prevent situations like this." RELATED: Charlotte police shoot and kill man, sparking growing protest "There are no set of national best practices on how to manage situations," he continued. "These situations are handled by local policies currently. And what she is proposing is that we actually set up national standards so that localities have better policies to work with and train towards." Clinton spoke out Tuesday against "systematic racism" following the recent shooting of Terence Crutcher in Tulsa, Oklahoma. Crutcher was shot and killed last week after his car broke down. The 40-year-old black man raised his hands above his head just before Officer Betty Shelby fatally shot him. Crutcher was unarmed at the time. The Charlotte-Mecklenburg Police Department said Wednesday that "approximately 12 officers" were injured during protests after the fatal shooting of Keith Lamont Scott Tuesday by a police officer. Mook said the other part of Clinton's plans involves working to improve the relationship between police and minorities. "The second piece is to restore bonds between communities and law enforcement, so investing in community policing and making sure that local police have the resources to build the resources in the community to prevent something like this from happening," he said. Clinton told radio host Steve Harvey on Tuesday's "The Steve Harvey Morning Show" that she plans to speak "directly to white people" about implicit bias. Mook said Wednesday Clinton meant she would explain that different ethnic groups are often treated differently in America. "What she's saying is our entire country needs to do some real soul-searching here. It is clear that the criminal justice system is not treating everybody the same way," he said. "If you are African-American or from a minority group, you may not be being treated the same as a white person. And that's a problem." RELATED: YG seizes mantle of rap's most outspoken Donald Trump critic Clinton said Tuesday that while there are "good, honorable, cool-headed police officers" working across the country, "we can do better." "We have got to tackle systemic racism," Clinton said. "This horrible shooting again. How many times do we have to see this in our country?" "This is just unbearable," Clinton said. "And it needs to be intolerable." Clinton later tweeted on the shooting, writing, "Another unarmed Black man was shot in a police incident. This should be intolerable. We have so much work to do. #TerenceCrutcher -H." RELATED: Road to 270 In response to the Crutcher shooting, both the Department of Justice and state authorities have launched investigations into the officer-involved shooting. Danny C. Williams, US Attorney of the Northern District of Oklahoma, said prosecutors will attempt to determine whether a federal civil rights violation had occurred. Authorities refused to immediately answer additional questions due to the ongoing investigation. CNN's Max Blau and Jason Morris contributed to this report.
Incumbent senators have healthy leads over their challengers in Iowa, Colorado and Georgia, according to a trio of Quinnipiac University polls of likely voters released Friday afternoon. Iowa Sen. Chuck Grassley has an 11-point advantage over former Lt. Gov. Patty Judge, 55 percent to 43 percent. Colorado Sen. Michael Bennet leads El Paso County Commissioner Darryl Glenn by 9 points, 52 percent to 43 percent. And Georgia Sen. Johnny Isakson tops his opponent, Jim Barksdale, 55 percent to 34 percent. The polling results mirror the current presidential standing. Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton holds a narrow advantage over Donald Trump in Colorado, where Bennet, a Democrat, also leads. Trump, however, has 6- and 7-point leads over Clinton in Iowa and Georgia, respectively. The surveys were conducted Sept. 13-21. The Iowa poll of 612 likely voters has a margin of error of plus or minus 4 percentage points, while the Colorado and Georgia surveys of 644 and 638 likely voters, respectively, both have a margin of error of 3.9 percentage points.
(CNN)Jeb(!) Bush is back. The former Republican presidential candidate had a cameo in the Emmys opening sequence Sunday night, appearing as a limo driver who's "in between jobs right now." In the sketch, host Jimmy Kimmel hitched various rides from celebrities to the Emmys, before running into the motorcade for Julia Louis Dreyfus' character in "Veep." She flatly refused to let him in her limo, but a voice from the driver's seat told the comedian there was plenty of room up front. Kimmel opened up the passenger seat door only to find the former Florida governor in a full-blown limo-driver suit, hat included. "You know you can make $12 an hour driving for Uber?" Bush asks. (Bush was a big Uber fan who frequently praised the company in his stump speech.) When Kimmel told him he was going to the Emmy's and that he was nominated, Bush offered a self-deprecating line. "Wow, what's that like?" He then gave Kimmel some advice on his Emmy candidacy. "If you run a positive campaign, the voters ultimately will make the right choice, Jimmy," Bush said, alluding to his unsuccessful primary fights with Donald Trump, the Republican nominee. But when Kimmel began to reflect on the comment, Bush shut it down. "That was a joke. Get out of the car," he said, calling Kimmel a "godless Hollywood hippie." In a nod to his famous logo, Bush then yelled "Jeb Exclamation Point!" as he drove off, leaving Kimmel standing his dust. The scene was taped last Sunday at the Biltmore Hotel in Coral Gables, Florida, where Bush has his office. After the segment aired Sunday, Bush was still good-humored about his on-screen role as an Uber driver. "Hey, @jimmykimmel, I'm giving you 5 stars! How about a little something, you know, for the effort, you know?" Bush tweeted. 
Orlando, Florida (CNN)Hillary Clinton's aides wanted their candidate to start talking more about policy and less about Trump. On Wednesday, Clinton did just that. The Democratic presidential nominee forcefully argued in favor of giving people with disabilities an equal chance at success during an event here, saying defending the disabled would be "a vital aspect of my presidency." The speech offered implicit contrast with Trump -- who last year memorably mocked New York Times reporter Serge Kovaleski, whose arthrogryposis impairs the movements in his arms. But Clinton entirely ignored the Republican nominee during the event, never using his name in the roughly 30-minute speech. Wednesday's speech was Clinton's fourth in a series of addresses where the former first lady is attempting to talk more about her values and proposals and less about Trump. Clinton's past "Stronger Together" speeches on faith, community service and children and families have been far more focused on Trump. Wednesday's address, instead, lived up to what Clinton's aides had hoped the series of speeches would be: More policy than politics. Clinton said people with disabilities are "invisible, overlooked and undervalued" and that the United States is "falling short" in protecting their rights. "We've got to face that and do better -- for everyone's sake," Clinton said. "Because this really does go to the heart of who we are as Americans." Clinton added that as president, she would do away with the subminimum wage, urge Congress to ratify the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and launch a program to help with autism in the workplace. "People with disabilities shouldn't be isolated. They should be given the chance to work with everyone else. And we're going to eliminate the subminimum wage, which is a vestige from an ugly, ignorant past," Clinton said of laws that allow employers to pay people with disabilities less than the minimum wage. Some advocates for the disabled, however, have feared that the elimination of the subminimum wage would diminish hiring of disabled workers. Jennifer Mizrahi, the president of Respect Ability, an advocacy organization for people with disabilities, said the speech was the first time a presidential candidate has dedicated an entire campaign event to the disabled. People with disabilities are usually the "poorest of the poor," Mizrahi said, noting that around 400,000 disabled people work in "sheltered work shops where they can pay subminimum wages, as little as 20 cents an hour." The activist also suggested the Clinton's struggles would be helped by focusing on people with disabilities. "We span every demographic," she said. "A lot of white people with disabilities." Clinton is beating Trump with Latino and African-American voters, but lagging behind the Republicans with white voters, especially those without a college degree. CNN's Jeanne Sahadi contributed to this report.
When Donald Trump looks out at the crowd during his upcoming presidential debate with Hillary Clinton, Mark Cuban plans to make sure he sees at least one unfriendly face. The bombastic billionaire who's been an outspoken critic of the Republican nominee will be sitting front-row when the two opponents square off for their first televised debate at Hofstra University Monday, Cuban revealed in a tweet Thursday night. Story Continued Below Billing it as the "Humbling at Hofstra," Cuban says he plans to watch closely as Clinton tries to "overwhelm" Trump. Just got a front row seat to watch @HillaryClinton overwhelm @realDonaldTrump at the "Humbling at Hofstra" on Monday. It Is On ! — Mark Cuban (@mcuban) September 23, 2016  Cuban's decision to attend the debate was lauded by Clinton press secretary Brian Fallon, who wrote on social media early Friday: "If you have ever seen [Cuban] courtside at a Mavs game, you know he'll be fired up for Monday's debate." If you have ever seen @mcuban courtside at a Mavs game, you know he'll be fired up for Monday's debate. #ImwithHer — Brian Fallon (@brianefallon) September 23, 2016  Cuban has blasted Trump repeatedly over the course of the campaign, calling him a "jagoff" and praising him for getting "stupider before your eyes." The billionaire businessman and sports owner has also questioned Trump's self-reported net-worth and mused that the real estate mogul isn't truly capable of self-funding an entire presidential campaign. The Dallas Mavericks owner is part of an increasingly long list of billionaires, including Hewlett Packard executive Meg Whitman and former New York City Mayor Michael Bloomberg, who've opted to back Clinton over Trump.
New York (CNN)US Secretary of State John Kerry met once again with Russian counterpart Sergei Lavrov on Friday, as the two countries face a potential turning point in their engagement in Syria. "We exchanged some ideas and we had a little bit of progress," Kerry said of the meeting. "We're evaluating some mutual ideas in a constructive way." A senior State Department official characterized the conversation, which took place on the sidelines of a meeting of the Middle East Quartet, as brief and informal, but added that it was a "constructive discussion." "We have no proposals to read out," the official said. A frustrated Kerry called on Thursday for "immediate" and "significant" action from Russia and Syria to prove their commitment to a ceasefire agreement reached this month. "We can't be the only ones trying to hold this door open," the US secretary of state said. "Russia and the (Bashar al-Assad) regime must do their part." Otherwise, Kerry said, there's "no chance" for the process to continue. Addressing the media from a podium at the Palace hotel in New York, where he is attending the United Nations General Assembly, Kerry opened by noting reports of a regime offensive in Aleppo, which he said is "exactly the kind of regime action that has done so much damage to this process and to the credibility of the concept of restraint or cease fire." "Obviously no one can possibly be satisfied with the events that have unfolded in the last few days," Kerry said. "Far, far from it." "Absent a major gesture, we don't believe there is a point in making more promises," he insisted, suggesting the US was on the verge of scrapping the agreement if it didn't see a cessation of air activities by the Russian and Syrian militaries, or similarly concrete action. But Kerry insisted the US is committed to seeking a resumption of the ceasefire and would be meeting with Lavrov and member nations of the International Syria Support Group in the coming days. "We remain absolutely convinced there is no such thing as a military solution," Kerry said. A senior administration official told reporters in a conference call that Russia would need to take "extraordinary steps" to get the process back on track. "We are not sure at this point whether they are ready and willing to take those kinds of steps." After the meeting with Kerry on Friday, Lavrov addressed the United Nations General Assembly, saying diplomatic discussions on Syria must be restarted "without any preconditions." But Lavrov blamed the disruption of the agreement on "sabotage" by "specific people from abroad with their mentors and supporters," seemingly a rebuke of the United States and its coalition partners. Russia believes "the reason lies in an attempt to try to change the regime," Lavrov added. CNN's Ryan Browne contributed to this report.
11/19/16, 3:14 PM CET BY Chris Spillane So is anti-establishment message of Nigel Farage, the Labour leader said. 11/19/16, 1:55 PM CET BY Sarah Wheaton Alumni of the Obama White House spent days mourning Trump’s win. Now they’re ready to fight. 11/19/16, 11:37 AM CET BY Chris Spillane Dick Schoof: ‘Chance of attack in the Netherlands is real.’ 11/19/16, 10:38 AM CET BY Chris Spillane Government could focus on starting the process of leaving the bloc sooner. 11/19/16, 10:13 AM CET BY Benjamin Oreskes Diplomats say the president-elect already has a playbook to undermine the global body. 11/19/16, 10:01 AM CET BY Michael Crowley and Nahal Toosi Flynn, Bannon represent ‘Islamophobic’ thinking of the type rejected by Bush and Obama, critics say. 11/19/16, 5:25 AM CET BY Michael Kruse The blue-collar workers who put Donald Trump in the White House are ready for him to deliver. How much time will they give him? 11/19/16, 5:20 AM CET BY Ryan Heath, Tara Palmeri, Harry Cooper and Quentin Ariès  11/18/16, 9:09 PM CET BY Harry Cooper A Polish political party’s links to a pan-European group raise questions about funding. 11/18/16, 6:31 PM CET BY Tom McTague Signs that Britain’s political class is coming to terms with June’s EU referendum. 11/18/16, 6:26 PM CET BY Hortense Goulard Conservative MEP denounced Juncker’s efforts to drum up support for Schulz as ‘outrageous.’ 11/18/16, 5:31 PM CET BY Ivo Oliveira Drawing the top stories around the globe. 11/18/16, 4:55 PM CET BY Cynthia Kroet Italians are likely to reject prime minister’s reform package in next month’s vote. 11/18/16, 4:48 PM CET BY Elana Schor, Kyle Cheney and Louis Nelson The president-elect starts building out his administration with loyalists. 11/18/16, 4:01 PM CET BY Nicholas Vinocur Left-wingers hope that by backing Alain Juppé, they will see off two political enemies. 11/18/16, 3:15 PM CET BY Cynthia Kroet Jens Stoltenberg did not mention the total number or reasons for the requests. 11/18/16, 3:02 PM CET BY Florian Eder and Janosch Delcker Wird Martin Schulz die SPD in den Bundestagswahlkampf führen? Oder schafft er es, doch noch einmal EU-Parlamentspräsident zu werden? Er muss sich bald entscheiden. 11/18/16, 2:34 PM CET BY Anthony Skinner Syrian refugees are pawns in Turkish president’s pursuit of power. 11/18/16, 2:33 PM CET BY Charlie Cooper Shadow Brexit secretary ‘seriously pissed off’ at colleague’s comments. 11/18/16, 2:33 PM CET BY Cynthia Kroet German chancellor is ‘championing the interests of Europe,’ Witold Waszczykowski said. 11/18/16, 12:58 PM CET BY Cynthia Kroet Nikola Gruevski stepped down in January over a wire tapping scandal. 11/18/16, 12:48 PM CET BY Barbara Surk Jens Stoltenberg said he had a ‘good talk’ with the president-elect. 11/18/16, 12:35 PM CET BY Esther King Majority of those who failed to gain international asylum come from the Balkan states. 11/18/16, 11:48 AM CET BY Esther King Immigration is what keeps the country running, says pro-EU Lord. 11/18/16, 10:57 AM CET BY Esther King Conditions at offshore detention center for refugees are ‘cruel, inhuman and degrading,’ said François Crépeau. 11/18/16, 9:36 AM CET BY Esther King Foreign Minister Linas Linkevičius warned that Vladimir Putin could use transition period in Baltics, Syria. 11/18/16, 8:55 AM CET BY MADELINE CONWAY Former ambassador to the UN says there are ways of supporting the opposition that does not involve the use of American military force. 11/18/16, 8:39 AM CET BY Cristiano Lima Her presence is likely to raise fresh concerns about potential conflicts of interest. 11/18/16, 8:35 AM CET BY Bryan Bender The retired lieutenant general’s hardline views on Islam — as well as laudatory statements about Russia — have made him a lightning rod, as did his strident attacks on Hillary Clinton during the campaign. 11/18/16, 5:33 AM CET BY Nicholas Vinocur The center-right’s first ever presidential primary looked all over. Now it’s wide open. 11/18/16, 5:25 AM CET BY Tim King The Günther Oettinger controversies are tainting this European Commission by intimate association. 11/18/16, 12:17 AM CET BY Nahal Toosi Much of Europe is alarmed over what Trump’s presidency could augur. 11/17/16, 11:52 PM CET BY Shane Goldmacher and Andrew Restuccia ‘We feel way ahead of schedule and never in a rush to do the wrong thing,’ said campaign manager Kellyanne Conway. 11/17/16, 9:42 PM CET BY Jacopo Barigazzi Maltese interior minister not impressed with Bratislava’s migration plan. 11/17/16, 9:33 PM CET BY Edward-Isaac Dovere In Berlin, the president warned his successor that his divisive campaign style won’t wear well in the Oval Office. 11/17/16, 8:24 PM CET BY Janosch Delcker US President hopes Trump won’t ‘simply take a Realpolitik approach.’ 11/17/16, 8:21 PM CET BY Hortense Goulard European Parliament president will only accept foreign minister role if he is also the SPD candidate for the top job. 11/17/16, 8:18 PM CET BY Konstantin Richter Germans, of all people, are now called on to be bulwarks of democracy. 11/17/16, 8:06 PM CET BY Paul Dallison and Esther King Euroskeptic party stands accused of breaking rules on spending EU funds. 11/17/16, 7:16 PM CET BY Brent Griffiths  11/17/16, 6:31 PM CET BY Maïa de La Baume Brussels faults Ankara for ‘neglecting and undermining’ democracy and the rule of law. 11/17/16, 6:27 PM CET BY Louis Nelson  11/17/16, 5:47 PM CET BY Cynthia Kroet Jean-Marie Le Pen should receive €15,000 because he was prevented from carrying out his duties. 11/17/16, 4:57 PM CET BY Carter Stoddard Net debt has ballooned to £338 million, and currency fluctuations are partly to blame. 11/17/16, 4:34 PM CET BY Laurens Cerulus In finally passing her surveillance bill, Britain’s PM just made Brexit even more complicated. 11/17/16, 4:13 PM CET BY Hortense Goulard French prime minister called for more European integration amid rising nationalism. 11/17/16, 3:23 PM CET BY Cynthia Kroet Former European Council president joins forces with Flemish singer. 11/17/16, 2:53 PM CET BY Paul Dallison Corey Lewandowski said president-elect will work closely with Theresa May, with no need for UKIP leader as a go-between. 11/17/16, 2:37 PM CET BY Cynthia Kroet Freedom Party leader’s comments on Moroccans living in the Netherlands were ‘unnecessarily offensive.’ 11/17/16, 2:11 PM CET BY Esther King Nigel Farage’s party stands accused of breaking rules on spending EU funds. Special report: US election By Janosch Delcker 9/23/16, 5:30 AM CET Updated 9/28/16, 7:30 AM CET Illustration by Tim McDonagh for POLITICO KALLSTADT, Germany — Few places in Germany are as representative of the country’s heartland as Kallstadt, the village in which U.S. Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump’s grandfather was born — and from which he was later deported. The hamlet of 1,200 people lies nestled among vineyard-covered hills, about an hour-and-a-half’s drive southwest of Frankfurt. It has one bakery and one butcher. Every year, Kallstadt holds the Saumagenkerwe in celebration of the eponymous local delicacy: pig’s stomach filled with pork, herbs, bratwurst and diced potatoes. Trump may have captured a large swath of the American electorate with his signature blend of populism, nativism and brazenness. And yet, in the hometown of his forefather, he remains distinctly unpopular. In fact, few politicians are less popular in Germany than Trump. A study by the Pew Research Center found out that only 6 percent of the country finds him trustworthy. Since a local newspaper discovered that Johannes Steiniger, a member of the German parliament, was distantly related to Trump, the 29-year-old has done all he can to distance himself from the presidential candidate. “With his statements about gay people and foreigners, or with the language he uses, and with his derogative statements about Hillary Clinton, Trump seems to do everything he can so that we get a negative image of him,” Steiniger tells POLITICO. Trump’s rhetoric regarding immigrants and racial minorities is especially unpopular in Kallstadt. “He stands for everything that’s bad,” says Sarah Bühler, yelling to be heard over the 20-person brass band celebrating the Saumagenkerwe in the town’s main square. Bühler is a former local “wine princess,” the 2009 victor of a beauty pageant to promote the local wine industry. This year, a new dish appeared in the town’s annual festival: Saumagen-Döner, a fusion of the local specialty with a Turkish kebab. “Everyone is welcome to join us here, no matter what color they are,” says Bühler. “Pink, purple, doesn’t matter.” Tanja Huber, the 24-year-old incumbent regional wine princess, nods her head in agreement. Since the prospect of a Trump presidency first became evident late last year, reporters have descended on Kallstadt, seeking a bit of local color, a quote or two, and perhaps some hometown pride. “They don’t get that we really don’t give a damn about Trump,” says Huber. “He’s never been here, and he apparently doesn’t care about us, either.” *   *   * Donald’s grandfather, Friedrich Trump, was born in Kallstadt into a vintner’s family on March 14, 1869. Previous generations of the Trump family used variant spellings of the name, including “Trump,” “Dromb” and “Trumpff,” according to local historians, or even “Drumpf,” according to a 2000 family history by Gwenda Blair; but by the time Friedrich was born they had settled on “Trump.” Germany did not yet exist as a nation; Kallstadt was part of the province of Palatinate in the Bavarian Kingdom. The region was going though rough times. Unemployment was high. Those who had the courage, left. Friedrich’s father died when he was eight years old, and his mother struggled to make ends meet. At 16 years old, Friedrich decided to follow his sister Katharina, who had emigrated to the United States two years earlier. He arrived in New York on board the Eider on October 19, 1885. He entered the U.S. through official channels, but he had left Bavaria illegally. “Both he and his mother must have known that he would not have been granted official permission to leave the country unless he had paid a bail guaranteeing that he would later return to do his mandatory military service,” said Roland Paul, the recently-retired director of the Institute for Palatinate Regional History and Folklife Studies in the city of Kaiserslautern. According to documents uncovered by Paul, Friedrich was stripped of his Bavarian citizenship “as his own request” four years after arriving in the U.S. But Friedrich was not done with Palatinate. Seven years after his citizenship was withdrawn, he visited the land of his birth to attend the wedding of his sister, according to the 2000 family history by Blair. Five years after that, he returned once more to Kallstadt, where he met 20-year-old Elisabeth Christ; they were engaged, and Friedrich came back a third time to marry her in August 1902. But while the couple moved back to New York soon after the marriage and had a daughter, Friedrich had promised his wife that he would sell his property in the U.S. and return to the land of their birth. “My grandmother said, I will marry you, but I will not go back to America with you,” Donald Trump’s American-born cousin John Walter told German filmmaker Simone Wendel in 2012. Friedrich seemed intent on keeping his promise. In 1904, he applied for permission to travel to Kallstadt. And although he claimed in his application that he intended “to return to the United States within a year with the purpose of residing and performing the duties of citizenship therein,” he took all his savings from the U.S. with him, according to Blair’s family history. Back in Kallstadt, Friedrich attempted to get his citizenship back. But though he secured the support of local authorities, the district government put a halt to his plans. On February 27, 1905, a deportation notice was sent to the town office of Kallstadt declaring that Friedrich was “to be told he has to leave Bavarian state territory by May 1 of this year, at the latest.” Also On Politico Matthew Karnitschnig Friedrich was able to obtain a three-month grace period because his daughter had fallen ill. But eventually, he and his wife — pregnant once more — had no choice but to board the ship Pennsylvania on July 1, 1905, and return to New York. Shortly after that, Donald’s father, Fred Trump Junior, was born. “[The authorities] said, ‘You are not a German citizen, you gave up your citizenship, you have to leave,” says Walter. “So they left and they went back to America, and that’s why Donald and I are here.” Friedrich — now named Frederick — died in May 1918 of the Spanish flu. His widow survived her first husband by 48 years and visited Kallstadt many times during her life. *   *   * In February 2012, Simone Wendel, the German filmmaker from Kallstadt, was given an audience with Donald Trump. Roughly two years earlier, she had begun work on “Kings of Kallstadt,” a documentary about the two most famous sons of her tiny hometown: Donald Trump and Henry John Heinz, the inventor of Heinz Ketchup. For months, Wendel had tried to arrange a meeting with Trump, but his office had not replied to her letters. She was only able to secure a visit with the help of Walter, Trump’s cousin, who had visited Kallstadt and seemed happy with the attention she was paying to the family history. On the day of her visit, Wendel stood nervously next to Walter in a conference room on one of Trump Tower’s top floors. She had brought a Linzer torte and two bottles of wine with screw-on tops. Her plan was to sit down with Walter and Trump for coffee and cake, the traditional afternoon snack in her home region. But when she asked Trump’s staff to make some coffee, the only reaction she got was irritated faces. “His assistant just couldn’t be bothered,” she says. “Hello, John,” Trump said, when he entered the room, shaking his cousin’s hand and looking confused at Wendel in her loose turtle neck and the lonely cake on the huge table in front of her. Trump sat down in front of a one-meter-long model of his Boeing 757-200 airliner and a panoramic window overlooking New York’s Central Park. Wendel, trying to remedy the situation, pushed the cake in his direction and asked him to smell it. “Afterwards, I just kept on thinking, ‘What on earth did I do?’” she says. “The cake looks really good,” Trump said, and he and Wendel ended up talking for almost an hour. Until 1990, Trump still claimed his family was Swedish, a version of his family history first introduced by his father in reaction to the anti-German sentiment in the U.S. during the two World Wars. But by the time Wendel visited, he had become proud of his German roots. “They grow them well in Kallstadt,” he told her during their meeting. “They grow them very well. Believe me. It’s good stock.” “Wow, it’s beautiful,” Trump said when she handed him a picture of the house where his grandfather was born, an inconspicuous one-story building with a gable roof. “That’s fantastic. See how well-maintained it is? Everything is perfectly maintained. It’s great.” When their interview was over, Walter took Wendel on a tour of Trump Tower. On one of the floors, they ran into Trump’s son, Eric Trump. “Have you ever heard the word Kallstadt?” Wendel asked him. “Kallstadt?” Trump Junior replied, “No, what is it?”    © 2016 POLITICO SPRL Log in to access content and manage your profile. If you do not have a login you can register here.
Raleigh, North Carolina (CNN)As soon as the first debate of the 2016 presidential election was over, both Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton were quick to claim victory. But by the next morning, one of them had become far less cheerful. Just hours after Clinton and Trump clashed on stage at Hofstra University in one of the most highly anticipated political events in modern history, the two presidential nominees took markedly different tones as they reflected on the previous night's debate. Clinton and her aides showed all of the outward signs of a team riding high. The Democratic nominee boarded her plane at Westchester County Airport to applause and cheers from her staff. Before taking off to Raleigh, North Carolina, for a campaign rally, a smiling candidate walked to the back of the plane to gloat to reporters about a "great, great" evening. "One of my favorite baseball players growing up, Ernie Banks, used to get so excited about going to play that he would say, 'Lets play two,'" Clinton said. "So I am looking forward to the next debate and the one after that." How Clinton found her stride on gender And taking a dig at Trump's complaint after the debate that he was given a "defective" microphone, Clinton quipped: "Anybody who complains about the microphone is not having a good night." And in fact, the Republican nominee did not appear to be having a good morning. Calling into Fox News' "Fox & Friends" early Tuesday, Trump rattled off more than one complaint about the debate. His first target was NBC News' Lester Holt, the moderator of Monday night's debate. Just hours before, Trump had praised Holt in the spin room to CNN, saying the newscaster had done a "great job" and was "very fair." Those compliments were long gone. "I had some hostile questions," Trump said on Fox News. "He didn't ask her about the emails at all. He didn't ask her about her scandals. He didn't ask her about the Benghazi deal that she destroyed. He didn't ask her about a lot of things she should have been asked about. There's no question about it." Trump was still irritated -- and even conspiratorial -- about his microphone. "My microphone was terrible," Trump complained. "I wonder: was it set up that way on purpose?" To top things off, Trump unloaded on former Miss Universe Alicia Machado, who has alleged that the businessman's disparaging treatment of her had led to eating disorders and depression. With no apparent consideration for the political recklessness of his crude comments, Trump once again went after Machado's physical appearance, bringing her up on his own. "That person was a Miss Universe person, and she was the worst we ever had. The worst. The absolute worst," Trump said. "She gained a massive amount of weight and it was a real problem. We had a real problem." Those remarks could prove to be detrimental for a candidate already struggling with women voters and with the perception that he lacks the temperament to be president. Late Monday, the Clinton campaign released a new video featuring Machado. "He'd tell me, 'You look ugly,' or, 'You look fat,'" Machado says in the video. "Sometimes he'd 'play' with me and say: 'Hello, Miss Piggy,' 'Hello, Miss Housekeeping.'" Machado also held a press call Tuesday afternoon to respond to Trump's comments and express her support for Clinton. She told reporters that watching the 2016 election was like a "really bad dream." "I never imagined in 20 years later I will be in this position," she said. "Watching this guy again doing stupid things and stupid comments." Speaking in Raleigh Tuesday afternoon, Clinton continued to make digs at Trump's debate performance, saying it was "very clear that he didn't prepare." "What we hear from my opponent is dangerously incoherent," she said. "It's unclear exactly what he is saying, but words matter." Marguerite Scott, a retired 68-year-old woman from Cary, North Carolina, who attended the Raleigh campaign event, said she was struck by Trump appearing to lose his composure during the debate. Scott lso chastised the GOP nominee for his comments Tuesday about Machado. "Men in general should stop objectifying women. If she is fat, that is her business," Scott said. "And to put her on blast like that shows what a misogynist person he is." Asked what she thought of Trump's complaints about a defective microphone, Scott responded: "We heard him loudly and clearly, and bigly!" CNN's David Wright and Dylan Byers contributed to this report.
Less than a day after protests over the police killing of an African-American man turned violent in North Carolina, Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump placed some of the blame for the turmoil on the impact of drugs. "If you're not aware, drugs are a very, very big factor in what you're watching on television at night," said Trump in a speech to the Shale Insight 2016 Conference in Pittsburgh today. On Wednesday night, Charlotte experienced its second night of protests after the death of Keith Lamont Scott on Tuesday afternoon. Officers in riot gear confronted demonstrators in a downtown commercial area and employed tear gas to control crowds. One person is in critical condition after suffering an apparent gunshot wound. The Republican nominee condemned the violence, calling for unity. "Our country looks bad to the world, especially when we are supposed to be the world's leader. How can we lead when we can't even control our own cities? We honor and recognize the right of all Americans to peacefully assemble, protest and demonstrate, but there is no right to engage in violent disruption or to threaten the public safety and peace of others." He continued to praise law enforcement officers, citing the challenges they face and calling for better training. "It's tough being a police officer," Trump said. "Police are entrusted with immense responsibility, and we must do everything we can to ensure that they are properly trained, that they respect all members of the public and that any wrongdoing is always — and it will be by them — vigorously addressed."     But aside from that one reference, amid his heavy-handed praise for law enforcement and condemnation of protesters, Trump never acknowledged any pattern of violence against African-Americans at the hands of police, which is precisely why so many protesters say they have taken to the streets. They cite the shooting deaths of dozens of other black Americans by police as cause to protest a system they say is dangerous and discriminatory and fails to prosecute far too many officers who kill African-Americans, in many instances unarmed. Trump in recent days has appealed to black Americans, asking them what they have to lose by voting for him, even as he paints an exceptionally grim portrait of black poverty and crime. During a rally earlier this week in North Carolina, Trump said, "We're going to rebuild our inner cities because our African-American communities are absolutely in the worst shape they've ever been in before. Ever, ever, ever," Many African-Americans have bristled at that broad assertion. While many inner cities are plagued by crime and poverty, according to census data from 2015, 52.9 percent of black Americans age 25 or older hold some sort of college degree. A Pew report released in December shows that black adults experienced the largest income increase from 1971 to 2015 and were the only racial group to see a decrease in the percentage of low-income earners. And according to the Census Bureau, almost 73 percent of black Americans do not live in poverty. Trump, in an effort to reach out to the black community, visited Cleveland earlier this week, appearing at a black church. And during a town hall on the Fox News Channel Wednesday night, he was asked about the threat of violence. "I would do stop and frisk. I think you have to," said Trump. "We did it in New York. It worked incredibly well. And you have to be proactive and, you know, you really help people sort of change their mind automatically." But this morning in an interview on "Fox & Friends" he stepped back from the statement, claiming he was referring to a strategy only for Chicago. In Pittsburgh, Trump delineated a difference between what he called the "violent disruptor" and the rest of the black community. He said it was the country"s job "to make life more comfortable for the African-American parent trying to raise their kids in peace, to walk their children to school and to get their children great educations."
The State Department has found about 5,600 work-related emails relevant to Hillary Clinton in a set turned over by the FBI at the end of its investigation into her private server setup, but it appears only about 10 percent of those will be processed for release to the public in advance of the November election. The pace of release ordered by a federal judge Friday is far slower than the State Department managed last year when it was disclosing as much as 7,000 pages per month from the roughly 54,000 pages of email records Clinton provided to her former agency at the end of 2014. Story Continued Below After a hearing in U.S. District Court, Judge James Boasberg issued an order requiring State to process 1,050 pages of the FBI-discovered email records by the election. They are to emerge publicly in three batches, on Oct. 7 and 21 and Nov. 4. After that, State will continue to produce the emails . At the hearing, Boasberg initially said he would order the processing of 1,050 documents in the case by early November, but he later revised his direction to require only that many pages. State initially proposed processing 250 pages every two weeks, or about 750 pages by the election. The conservative watchdog group Judicial Watch urged the judge to put all 5,600 emails out before the election. "What we are looking for is as much quick turnaround as possible," Judicial Watch attorney Lauren Burke said. However, the judge suggested it was "unrealistic" to expect all 5,600 messages to be processed in the next six weeks. The judge acknowledged a public interest in getting the records out before voters go to the polls Nov. 8, but he repeatedly expressed sympathy for the challenges State has faced in responding to dozens of Freedom of Information Act lawsuits relating to the emails of Clinton and her top aides. He also said he was reluctant to disrupt processing of records in those other cases. “I think we all need to bear in mind the State Department has other duties beyond FOIA requests,” said Boasberg, who was appointed by President Barack Obama. “I know the State Department has been working very hard. ... The court can’t jump to the head of the queue.” After the hearing, Judicial Watch President Tom Fitton said he disagreed with the judge’s ruling. However, Fitton saved his real firepower for the State Department, saying the agency is overseeing “an absolutely corrupt process.” “The State Department is being obstructionist. They have had these records since July and they’ve only released five records,” Fitton said, referring to a smattering of messages released in other cases seeking information on specific topics. “It’s an obvious slow-walking.” A State Department spokeswoman declined to comment, but referred to a statement in which spokesman John Kirby said State “voluntarily agreed” to turn the messages over to Judicial Watch even though they were not in State’s possession at the time of the group’s request. He said the records will be posted on State’s website when they’ve been processed. Justice Department lawyers at Friday’s hearing provided more insight into what the FBI turned over to State. Attorney Lisa Olson said the main disk of recovered Clinton emails contained 15,171 documents, of which more than 60 percent, or over 9,400, were “deemed purely personal” during a recent “appraisal.” That left about 5,600 considered work-related at least in part, she said, although Kirby’s statement said some of those may also be deemed entirely personal after further review. Just how much new information will emerge by the election or thereafter remains unclear, for a variety of reasons. Many of the 5,600 emails are likely to be duplicates or what State calls “near-duplicates” of the ones Clinton already turned over. (State says a “near-duplicate” is an already-processed message with a nonsubstantive notation, like a request to print it out.) Olson said at Friday’s hearing that the duplicates appear to be a “significant” and “substantial” number of the overall set. Another Justice lawyer, Marcia Berman, said she believed a sampling of the 5,600 found “almost half” were duplicates or nearly so. In addition, State could decide to withhold some of the messages in their entirety, in which case they would still count as processed pages even though the public wouldn’t see them. Classified emails are being treated separately. Olson said a set of those records FBI turned over to State appears to be almost entirely duplicative of material State already processed. State could exceed the judge’s order but seems unlikely to proceed much faster given the litany of statements the agency has made about being under-staffed and overburdened by FOIA requests and lawsuits relating to emails exchanged by Clinton and her close aides. There also the possibility another judge handling a related case could order faster production, but the chance of that also seems remote. During Friday’s hearing, Berman said the State Department no longer has the level of staffing in the FOIA section that it did when the agency was cranking out thousands of pages a month from the main set of Clinton emails. “Many of those folks have returned to their regular duties,” Berman said. “There’s been a lot of attrition. It’s a very difficult and demanding job these days ... and not a lot of fun.”
In an exchange that began about trade and economic growth and ended with Donald Trump’s claim that Clinton has been fighting the Islamic State for decades, Trump repeatedly peppered Clinton – running through polished responses – with interjections, a study in miniature of his disruptive challenge to her practiced presidential run. The action began when Trump said Clinton had taken 30 years in public service to begin thinking about productive solutions to the nation’s problems. “Well, not quite that long,” Clinton responded. “I think my husband did a pretty good job in the 1990s. I think a lot about what worked and how we can make it work again.” Story Continued Below Trump interjected, “He approved NAFTA which is the single worst trade deal ever approved in this country.” Clinton continued with an extended, number-filled defense of her record on trade, touting her ability to create jobs and boost exports. Trump responded, “Well you haven't done it in 30 years or 26 years or ...“ “I've been a senator and I have,” Clinton edged in. “You haven’t done it,” Trump retorted. Clinton tried to regain her train of speech, but Trump wouldn’t have it. “Excuse me,” he shot back. “Your husband signed NAFTA, which was one of the worst things that ever happened to the manufacturing industry.” “Well, that's your opinion,” Clinton said. Then Trump unloaded on the decline of manufacturing, channeling the same anxiety and outrage over decay of the former backbone of the American economy that has fueled his insurgent campaign. “You go to New England, Ohio, Pennsylvania, you go anywhere you want, Secretary Clinton,” he said. “And you will see devastation where manufacturing is down 30, 40, sometimes 50 percent.” The exchange rumbled on, Trump peppering Clinton all along the way. The former secretary of state touted the virtues of her economic plan. “But you have no plan,” Trump interjected. “Oh, I do.” “Secretary, you have no plan.” “In fact, I have written a book about it. It's called ‘Stronger Together.’" “That’s about all you’ve done,” Trump ribbed her. Clinton plowed through it: “You can pick it up tomorrow at the bookstore or at an airport near you.” After Clinton urged viewers to go to her website for a real-time fact-check of Trump’s claims, Trump ribbed her for publishing her plan to combat the Islamic State online. “You go to her website — she tells you how to fight ISIS on her website. I don't think General Douglas MacArthur would like that too much,” he said. “At least I have a plan to fight ISIS,” retorted Clinton, a reference to her opponent’s stance that discussing his plan to combat the Islamic State would only tip off the enemy and his subsequent promise to order military leaders to draw up a plan to defeat the group on his first day in office. “No, you're telling the enemy everything you want to do. No wonder you've been fighting ISIS your entire adult life.” Moderator Lester Holt tried in vain to wrestle control of the exchange. “Folks, let me --,” he began “Go to — please, the fact checkers, get to work,” said Clinton.
Hillary Clinton’s recent reference to many of Donald Trump’s supporters as a “basket of deplorables” comprised of racists and homophobes only made explicit what her advertisements and other public statements have insinuated. Three weeks ago, she released a video that confronts Trump with the support he has received from white supremacists. In it, Jared Taylor, editor and founder of the white-supremacist magazine American Renaissance, is quoted from an interview with CNN: “Sending out all the illegals, building a wall, add a moratorium on Islamic immigration—that’s very appealing to a lot of ordinary white people.” Story Continued Below It’s pretty obvious what Clinton hopes to get from this line of campaigning: Underscoring Trump’s endorsements from white supremacists might deter moderates, independents and mainstream Republicans who are loath to be associated with the right-wing fringe. However, her mudslinging also condemns Trump voters—half of them, at least—who may support Trump’s social platform, but not in the interest of institutionalizing the supremacy of white people. These white working-class voters support Trump because he articulates their complicated discomfort with immigration and demographic change. Some observers are quick to call them racist—and certainly some are. But over the past six months, I’ve interviewed more than 100 white working-class people both here and in the United Kingdom, where a similar nationalist surge has triggered accusations of racism. My interviews suggest that there is a complexity to Trump’s supporters that is not as simplistic as a yes-no binary about whether they’re racist. Millions of Trump’s supporters exist in the vast space between Wall Street and Breitbart. Is it racist to associate immigration with the greater globalization of commerce that has altered the economic prospects of outmoded people? Is it racist to be frustrated that members of ethnic minorities are rendered new advantages unavailable to white people, such as affirmative action policies and ethnicity-specific advocacy? Is it racist to believe that white working-class people are underrepresented in political leadership or vilified in popular media? Clinton’s decision to lump all voters with these concerns into the sweeping category of “racist” might motivate her base, and might even be correct as a short-term political calculation: She probably won’t win over these voters. But there’s a long-term societal risk here: Shunning them as racists pushes them only deeper into pockets of private discomfort, where their perceptions go unexposed and unchallenged—entrenching their views and further polarizing the American public. Ultimately, Clinton’s statements will worsen a long-term social dilemma among the voters she broad-brushes—how Americans understand racism itself. *** “Racism” is a powerful word in American culture, and an important one to talk about. It’s the right way to describe the long history of prejudice and discrimination against people on the basis of their looks and ancestry. It’s also important to identify in modern society, linking contemporary expressions and ideas to earlier injustices, such as the enslavement of blacks or the genocide of native people. While they may not be equivalent, housing discrimination and police violence against African-Americans—enduring forms of racism—are thus rightly seen as legacies of past oppression. This is valuable because it contextualizes the choices and policies of contemporary Americans in our troubled history of race. However, allegations of racism are now viewed by many white people as a means of wielding their ancestors’ misdeeds to unfairly disqualify their dissenting viewpoints in the present. In the view of many of the voters Trump is speaking to—not just the “alt-right,” but disaffected white voters across the board—it’s crucial to talk frankly, even critically, about the perils of Islam, immigration and Black Lives Matter, even if it means offending some listeners. And on the more politically activated end of that spectrum, such voters see suppression of their ideas is part of a broader conspiracy to impose a liberal worldview. It’s a perception that has been seized by Trump—“We cannot afford to be so politically correct anymore,” he said in his July GOP convention speech—but also by far-right leaders in Europe, like Britain’s Nigel Farage, the former head of the UK Independence Party and one of the leaders behind the UK's departure from the European Union. Both Trump and Farage have heralded the power of their countries’ “silent majority”—a hushed constituency of predominantly white voters whose views have long been ignored. Many of these purportedly ignored views scapegoat minority groups for broader social problems—often based on stereotypes, myths and prejudice. But even well-meaning conservative critiques of social policies have been tarnished by far less valid accusations of racism. From the time I’ve spent interviewing white working-class people in the United States and the UK, I’ve seen how many people find Trump’s and Farage’s unfiltered statements refreshing. The two men elevate hearsay to podiums and shout the very ideas that supporters have been too intimidated to mutter under their breath. In Britain, dozens of my respondents would often preface their most candid thoughts to me by stating “I’m not a racist, but … ” “I’m not racist, but this country’s covered by blacks and Bosnians.” “I’m not racist at all. I’ve got black cousins and nieces. But the Polish have been taking all of the work and running prostitution and drug rings.” “I’m not a racist. I fucking love goat curry, pardon my language. But the principle of English families not coming first is just not right.” These individuals had not endured hours of sensitivity training; they were concerned that their ideas would be disqualified, when they are, in fact, sincere expressions about how their societies are being transformed. Racism is perceived to be a “mute button” pressed on someone while they are still crying out about a sense of lost status—from a position of historic advantage, frequently in terms they have difficulty articulating. Therefore, the preface “I’m not racist” is not a disclaimer, but rather an exhortation to listen and not dismiss or invalidate the claims of a group that feels marginalized. Interestingly, those respondents who were able to more specifically articulate their frustration framed it in the civil rights themes of equality and justice. An unemployed 18-year-old Londoner said, “You go for an interview and most of the employers are Asians. Basically, they’re discriminating against us, and we were here first. I have some training as a retail sales assistant. But when I’ve submitted my CV, I’ve been told that I can’t apply because I’m not Asian. … I feel like I’m beneath them.” Back in the United States, an electrician from Youngstown, Ohio, told me that “white people have become the minority itself. … People have freaked out on me for things I’ve said because I can’t say anything [about black people] because of slavery and their historical oppression. People aren’t looking for equality; they’re looking for retaliation.” These two were not members of any white-supremacist group. Many white working-class individuals simply view the broader struggle against racism as one that demotes white people, rather than promotes others to equal ground. They feel estranged from minority groups, who they believe have access to new privileges that compensate for historic advantages that today’s white working-class people do not recall exploiting. They feel alienated from an urban white bourgeoisie, which has divorced their less skilled or geographically isolated co-ethnics and look down upon them. And they feel blamed for neither empathizing with the plight of minorities, nor mobilizing to overcome structural poverty and embrace global cosmopolitanism. *** To govern effectively, Hillary Clinton needs white people to buy into the social change she heralds. So instead of casting them as outmoded bigots, she could point to how the very social forces that entrench white working-class people into poverty also entrench minority groups—that there are no white problems or minority problems; there are just problems. She can assert that the status quo for white (and nonwhite) working-class people is reinforced not by the pursuit of political correctness, but instead by the propagation of racial divisions between us. By dismissing Trump’s supporters as racist—however rightfully in many cases—Clinton further numbs many white people to the sensitivity with which racism was once regarded. It erects a barrier between Clinton’s pursuit of equal justice and the defensive holdouts with whom she must ultimately cooperate to achieve her vision of social progress. Silencing and demonizing Trump’s supporters as racists simplistically shuns them into the ideological silos that segregate our society. We will never find common ground if we don’t share space.
(CNN)Former President Bill Clinton sought to address concerns about his family's namesake foundation in an interview Monday, admitting that while "it was natural" for donors to seek favors from the Clintons, he'd "trusted" that the State Department under Hillary Clinton would appropriately handle potential conflicts of interest. "It was natural for people who've been our political allies and personal friends to call and ask for things. And I trusted the State Department wouldn't do anything they shouldn't do," Clinton told NPR in an interview that aired Monday morning. He also maintained that he would sever his connection to the Clinton Foundation if Hillary Clinton is elected president to remove any conflict-of-interest concerns, though he acknowledged the move would be "hard." "It is hard, but you know, if Hillary is elected, I'm looking forward to it," Clinton said. He noted that he's worked for the foundation "longer than I've ever had any job -- and I loved it." "And you know, we always say in response to our critics that nobody in my family ever took a penny out of this foundation and put millions of dollars in. But I would have paid more to do this job. It was the most fun thing I've ever done," Clinton added. The former president pushed back on criticism that donors to the Clintons Foundation engaged in a "pay-to-play" scheme, whereby donations to the foundation bought influence with Hillary Clinton during her term as Secretary of State. He pointed to the lack of evidence of any such quid-pro-quos, and accused critics of "smearing" him and his wife, according to NPR. "In real life, if somebody tells a lie about you, and I find out it is, I like you more and them less. In political life, they just keep on smearing you -- even if it all comes to nothing -- people will like you less and won't hold anybody accountable for what they say." Clinton also praised his wife for weathering criticism during her presidential campaign. "I wonder if there's a man in America that could have taken what she's been through in the last year and a half." 
FBI Director James Comey warned Tuesday that the increasing success of the military campaign against the Islamic State in Syria and Iraq carries an ominous downside: a wave of terrorist fighters who will spread across the globe as the group loses control of its territory on the ground. "The so-called caliphate will be crushed. The challenge will be: through the fingers of that crush are going to come hundreds of very, very dangerous people," Comey said at a Senate Homeland Security Committee hearing on the global terror threat. "They will not all die on the battlefield in Syria and Iraq. There will be a terrorist diaspora sometime in the next two to five years like we've never seen before." Story Continued Below "We must prepare ourselves and our allies particularly in western Europe to confront that threat because when ISIL is reduced to an insurgency and those killers flow out they will try to come to western Europe and try to come here to kill innocent people," the FBI director said. He said the wave of fighters will be larger than the one that came out of Afghanistan after the war there in the 1980s. Committee Chairman Sen. Ron Johnson (R-Wis.) acknowledged that the territory governed by ISIL has decreased, but he said the campaign against the group has been so slow that the group is reconstituting elsewhere. "We haven’t reduced their capability. The diaspora has already begun," Johnson said. "We're poking the hive. We've done some damage to it but the killer bees are leaving the hive. They’re setting up new hives." National Counterterrorism Center Director Nicholas Rasmussen said intelligence officials had long predicted the threat would metastasize as ISIL was squeezed. "It’s not surprising. It puts us in a period of sustained vulnerability that I don’t think any of us are comfortable with. But I think it’s a reality," he said. Despite the fears of terrorist fighters flowing out of Iraq and Syria, some senators said a more urgent worry is that the FBI is missing opportunities to head off home-grown terrorist attacks like the shooting at an Orlando nightclub in June where 49 people were killed and the bombings earlier this month in New York and New Jersey. Sens. Rand Paul (R-Ky.) and Kelly Ayotte (R-N.H.) noted that FBI investigators looked at the suspects in those attacks long before the violence, but closed those inquiries without bringing charges. "I'm also troubled the FBI is not even willing to admit they made some mistakes," Paul complained. "These are judgment calls and the judgment calls were incorrect and I think we should just admit that and look at some of the facts." Paul said the FBI failed to get video from a gun shop that could have shown shooter Omar Mateen buying a weapon shortly before the attack, but Comey said the FBI wasn't told about that visit promptly and by the time it was notified the video was already erased. However, Paul said the FBI should have kept an investigation into Mateen open longer because it might have exposed his plan to attack the Pulse nightclub. Comey said the FBI can keep such probes open indefinitely and repeatedly extended the one in Florida. "We should keep them open longer...as long as the facts warrant," the FBI director said. "We have the policies and the tools we need to do this well." He added that agents have to make a "judgement every day" about whether specific cases merit further investigation. Ayotte questioned why agents handling the pre-shooting investigation of Mateen never looked at his social media or internet activity, even the publicly available information. Comey said the FBI had two people interacting directly with Mateen, leading the case agent to think he had "a pretty good vector into [Mateen's] state of mind." Ayotte said it still seemed odd that the FBI wouldn't also check his public online activity, especially as the FBI presses for more access to encrypted communications. "It just seems surprising to me that there wasn’t some kind of online work done in something so significant," the New Hampshire Republican said. Comey said a review of the Florida probe is nearly done and another is in the works. He also said an assessment will be done of the handling of earlier inquiries into New York and New Jersey bombing suspect Ahmad Rahami, but that inquiry will be complicated by the pending prosecutions of the suspect who is currently in a Newark hospital being treated for a gunshot wound. "We are going to go back," the FBI director said. "You will find us being very candid about our shortcomings and our strengths."
Lester Holt was on an island on Monday night. And for most of the first presidential debate, he stayed there, letting the battleships of Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump shoot their missiles at one another. It made for some memorable exchanges between Trump and Clinton, matched in close-up on most networks. For some debate watchers, that’s what they want their moderators to do: say "go" and let them run. But it also left some gaps where viewers probably expected sharp questions. Story Continued Below There was no probing of Trump’s wall with Mexico, and vow to get the Mexicans to pay for it, or the Republican nominee’s ban on Muslims entering the country. And he barely prodded Clinton to explain her private email server in a question so gently worded that she was able to dispatch the issue with a few taut sentences. The Clinton Foundation? Wasn’t discussed; neither was the Benghazi attack. Few moderators have faced such intense scrutiny in the days leading up to the debate as Holt did, with Clinton’s allies demanding he serve as a fact-checker and Trump’s backers insisting that he allow the candidates to have their say. Before the network broadcasts began, Holt seemed to reveal his choice, telling the audience he wanted to “facilitate” the conversation between “just the two of them.” Holt is often seen as understated. His arrival on the national stage was under the radar, as he quietly assumed the NBC anchor chair while Brian Williams’ career was careening to a halt, removed as anchor of “Nightly News” over allegations he exaggerated his experience covering the Iraq war. But during the debate, that understated approach sometimes led to the candidates, especially Trump, rolling over his questions, with Holt at one point admitting that they were far behind schedule. It started early, during the first segment about the economy. Holt asked Trump how he specifically will help put money back in the pocket of Americans. Trump offered few specifics, veering into criticism of Clinton’s decades of public service without improving trade agreements. Holt tried to interrupt but Trump kept rolling. He managed, a few seconds later, to follow up, pressing for specifics. But the end of the first segment would lead some critics on Twitter to ask “Where’s Lester?" "Apparently Lester Holt went to the bathroom, way down the hall, and only one urinal is available and there is a line,” joked National Review writer Jim Geraghty in a tweet. As Clinton and Trump sparred over debate and taxes, jabbing one another over and over again, Holt kept trying to jump in. "Let me get you to pause right there,” he said as Trump was claiming Clinton was going to “approve one of the biggest tax increases." "Lester, that can't be left to stand,” Clinton shot back, one of several times she asked Holt to “turn back the clock” or step in as Trump steamrolled through questions. When Trump continuously interrupted Clinton during her answers, Holt would at most offer a pleading,"This is Secretary Clinton's two minutes, please." But Holt’s understatement didn’t mean he was completely walked over. At different points, Holt pushed back against both candidates. "Last week you said we have to do everything possible to improve policing to go right at implicit bias. Do you believe police are implicitly biassed against black people?” Holt asked Clinton. And as the debate went on, he became more engaged and pushed back harder against Trump, on his birtherism, Iraq War support and his taxes. When Trump tried to assert again, falsely, that he was always against the Iraq war, Holt was sure to not step into the same problems his colleague Matt Lauer, who let Trump’s claim he didn’t support the Iraq war slide. Initially, Holt did not interrupt when Trump barked “Wrong” as Clinton said he supported the war. But a few moments later, he came back. “The record shows otherwise,” Holt said, later referring to Trump’s 2002 interview with Howard Stern, which Trump himself then later said that in the interview with Stern said he said "who knows." The reaction from the media and pundits was mixed, though mostly positive. “[Holt] provided some realtime fact checking but let Trump go off on tangents and repeat too many proven lies,” said Washingotn Post Media columnist Margaret Sullivan, giving holt a “B-minus” grade. "[Holt] didn't make himself the story, and was dignified, if medium-weak and sometimes absent." Former CNN Washington Bureau Chief Frank Sesno offered: "I think Holt has done an excellent job. Has been firm and fair, called Trump on statements more than Hillary but spent most of his efforts steering the conversation / debate to the two candidates.” Not everyone was not as happy with how Holt treated Trump. "Has the moderator challenged Clinton on anything?” tweeted the tax-cut activist Grover Norquist. “Lester Holt interrupted Mr. Trump more, he followed up with Mr. Trump more, he was much hard on Mr. Trump,” complained Trump senior advisor Boris Epshteyn. "Lester Holt, to a degree, succumbed to the pressure form the left wing media and the Democrats after Matt Lauer moderated the forum." Hugh Hewitt, the conservative talk show host, didn’t seem to agree. "Conservatives should agree @LesterHoltNBC did a very fine job moderating. He pushed on birther issue and Iraq war but gave plenty of time,” he tweeted. Trump himself seemed perfectly happy with Holt’s performance. "I thought Lester Holt did a great job. ... I thought the questions were very fair,” Trump told reporters in the spin room after the debate.
Donald Trump on Tuesday morning denied he was suffering from a case of the "sniffles" during his primetime debate showdown on Monday night, when he could frequently be heard sharply inhaling through his nose. "No, no sniffles. You know, the mic was very bad, but maybe it was good enough to hear breathing," Trump told "Fox & Friends." "But no sniffles. No cold." Story Continued Below Trump's sniffling became a viral sensation during the evening, with Hillary Clinton supporter Howard Dean raising a sensational theory about why Trump seemed to be having some trouble. "Notice Trump sniffing all the time. Coke user?" Dean, a physician and former Vermont governor, tweeted. Some Clinton supporters took pleasure in what appeared to be a minor ailment, especially after Trump and his allies have floated conspiracy theories that the former secretary of state is suffering from chronic health conditions. Clinton was diagnosed with pneumonia earlier this month, and almost collapsed after becoming "overheated" during a Sept. 11 memorial service in New York.
White Plains, New York (CNN)In Hillary Clinton's eyes, Donald Trump knows he lost Monday night. Clinton, speaking with reporters on her plane, threw serious shade at Trump hours after the two met for the first presidential debate at Hofstra Univeristy. The former secretary of state gloated that she had a great night and said Trump, who complained about his microphone after the debate, knew he lost. As she walked away from reporters, Clinton was asked about Trump's complaints. Unable to resist, she turned around and said glibly, "Anybody who complains about the microphone is not having a good night." After Monday's debate, Trump said that his microphone on the stage was "defective." "My mic was defective within the room," he told reporters. "I wonder, was that on purpose?" In the eyes of most political experts and post-debate polls, Clinton got the best of Trump at Monday night's debate, using the 90-minute contest to drop considerable opposition research on the Republican nominee. Clinton looked at times gleeful on the debate stage as Trump repeatedly interrupted her and often took the bait on her attack lines. Afterward, her top aides were using words like "unhinged" and "deranged" to describe Trump's performance. "We had a great, great time last night," Clinton said. "So I am looking forward to the next debate and the one after that." Clinton, though, left the door open about whether Trump would show up. "Well, I'm going to show up," Clinton said. "He gets to decide what he wants to do. ... If I'm the only person on stage, well, you know, I'm the only person on stage." 
Politico POLITICO's must-read briefing on what's driving the day in Washington GOVT FUNDING UPDATE -- POTOMAC FEVER SETTING IN -- Earlier this month, Republicans and Democrats on Capitol Hill had a rosy prediction: They would be able to wrap up the fight over government funding this week and head home until after Election Day. But the optimistic outlook has collided with reality over the last few days. Senior aides on Capitol Hill now say the funding battle can easily stretch into next week because of disagreements over ancillary spending requests. Big deal? No, not really. They were always scheduled to be in session next week. But Congress would just prefer to get the hell out of D.C. and in front of their constituents. 49 DAYS until Election Day. Six days until the first presidential debate at Hofstra University on Long Island. Big thanks to Carleton College and POLITICO publisher and editor in chief John Harris for organizing a political discussion last night in Northfield, Minnesota. Harris moderated a conversation on Clinton, Trump and the media in 2016 before a packed house with Anna (a St. Olaf alum) and POLITICO alums and friends of Playbook, NYT’s JMart and WaPo’s James Hohmann. Story Continued Below **SUBSCRIBE to Playbook: http://politi.co/1M75UbX ATTN BROOKLYN -- TRUMP DISCUSSES DEBATE STRATEGY ON FOX NEWS -- Speaking with Bill O’Reilly last night, Trump gave a taste of his debate prep. How he plans to go after Clinton in the debates: “I can talk about her deleting emails after she gets a subpoena from Congress and lots of other things. I mean I can talk about her record which is a disaster. I can talk about all she’s done to help ISIS become the terror that they’ve become and I will be doing that. So I mean we’re going to go back and forth and she’s got a lot of baggage. I’ll tell you what.” On going after Bill Clinton’s infidelities: “I don’t think I’m looking to do that Bill. I don’t know what I’m going to do that exactly. It depends on what level she hits you with, if she’s fair, if it’s unfair, but certainly I’m not looking to do that.” His view of Lester Holt: “Lester is a professional, but we’ll see what happens … By the way, Lester is a Democrat. It’s a phony system. They are all Democrats. It’s a very unfair system. I’ve worked pretty well within the system.” Video of full interview http://bit.ly/2cNUAVf --CLINTON on “The Tonight Show” with Jimmy Fallon: Hillary Clinton on her health http://bit.ly/2cFmFCe … On “breaking barriers, fighting bigotry and debating Trump” http://bit.ly/2czVUKc … On “balancing seriousness with positivity as a woman” http://bit.ly/2cPZqQm PLAYBOOKING AND FOOD TRUCKING -- Want free breakfast? Nice. We want to give you some. Anna, Daniel and Jake have taken over a food truck for the week, and will be popping up at central locations Wednesday, Thursday and Friday to feed and caffeinate you. Why? Why not. Stay tuned for exact locations. #playbookEATS FROM BROOKLYN -- HOW ROBBY MOOK SAYS CLINTON CAN WIN -- by Gabe Debenedetti in New York: “‘Here’s the story that no poll can tell: Hillary Clinton has many paths to 270 electoral votes, while Donald Trump has very few. Hillary is nearly certain to win 16 ‘ blue' states, including Washington D.C., which will garner her 191 electoral votes,” writes Mook in the nearly 2,000-word memo that was blasted out [to donors, supporters and volunteers] in the early evening, and which was obtained by POLITICO. ‘If we add the five states that FiveThirtyEight.com gives Hillary a 70% or greater chance of winning (Michigan, Minnesota, Pennsylvania, Virginia, and Wisconsin), Hillary only needs 10 more electoral votes.’ ... “‘Put a different way, of these battleground states, Hillary can win just one (Florida, Ohio, or North Carolina) and win the presidency, which means the six additional states would only add more electoral votes to her total,” he writes. “Donald Trump, on the other hand, must win six of these seven states, including Florida, North Carolina, and Ohio — none of which he can lose.’” http://politi.co/2cjjFVC ADELSON PONIES UP -- “Adelson to spend at least $45 million on 2016 races in boost for GOP,” by CNN’s Teddy Schleifer: “The billionaire on Tuesday will disclose having given $20 million to the Senate Leadership Fund, a super PAC linked to George W. Bush hand Karl Rove and Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell. A check of a similar size is expected to go to the Congressional Leadership Fund, a similar super PAC focused on the House of Representatives. And to back Trump, a donation of at least $5 million is likely headed to the political operation helmed by the Ricketts family, who are expected to finally spend their fortunes on Trump as well. Other cash may be routed to Ricketts-led nonprofit groups that are not required to disclose the funders.” http://cnn.it/2czQezN -- “Schumer transfers millions to Dems in bid for Senate takeover,” by Burgess Everett and John Bresnahan: “The New York senator is transferring $1 million to Senate Democrats’ campaign arm on Tuesday. He’s also given $3.2 million to state parties over the past week, Democratic sources said. Earlier this month, Schumer shifted an additional $2 million from his campaign war chest to the [DSCC]. Altogether in September, Schumer has transferred $6.2 million of the $27 million he has on hand to help Democratic hopefuls.” http://politi.co/2cVJhfO **** A message from BP: Over the past 10 years, no energy company has invested more in the U.S. than BP – $90 billion in total. Take 90 seconds to see what else we’re doing to help keep America moving forward. ****** H.W. FOR HRC -- FROM DARREN SAMUELSOHN: “[Former President George H.W.] Bush, 92, had intended to stay silent on the White House race between Clinton and Donald Trump, a sign in and of itself of his distaste for the GOP nominee. But his preference for the wife of his own successor, President Bill Clinton, nonetheless became known to a wider audience thanks to Kathleen Hartington Kennedy Townsend, the former Maryland lieutenant governor and daughter of the late Robert F. Kennedy. In a telephone interview, Townsend said she met with the former president in Maine earlier today, where she said he made his preference known that he was voting for a Democrat. ‘That’s what he said,’ she told POLITICO. “Asked about Townsend’s [Facebook] post, George H.W. Bush spokesman Jim McGrath in an email replied, ‘The vote President Bush will cast as a private citizen in some 50 days will be just that: a private vote cast in some 50 days. He is not commenting on the presidential race in the interim.’” http://politi.co/2cjhwJX --QUICK THOUGHT: This is a man who is not only a former president, but a former Republican member of Congress, former chairman of the RNC, former ambassador under Gerald Ford and Richard Nixon, former CIA director under Ford and Ronald Reagan’s vice president. This should resonate with many on-the-fence Republicans. YOU’RE INVITED! -- Join us for Playbook Cocktails TOMORROW evening with civil rights icon, Rep. John Lewis (D-Ga.)! Our conversation comes during the opening week of the Smithsonian’s National Museum of African American History and Culture. We’ll talk about civil rights and explore Lewis’s extraordinary life. Doors open at 5:30 p.m. The W Hotel, 515 15th Street, NW. RSVP here http://bit.ly/2cvXEEd TERROR WATCH -- “Ahmad Rahami: Fixture in Family’s Business and, Lately, a ‘Completely Different Person,’” by NYT’s N.R. Kleinfeld: “He presided behind the counter of a storefront New Jersey fried chicken restaurant, making his home with his family in an apartment above it. To some of his friends, Ahmad Khan Rahami was known as Mad, an abridgment of his name rather than a suggestion of his manner, and they liked that he gave them free food when they were short on money. Beyond that, his other known obsession was souped-up Honda Civics that he liked to race. In recent years, though, some friends noticed a marked change in his personality and religious devotion after what they believed was a trip to Afghanistan, where he and his relatives are from. In fact ... Mr. Rahami had actually traveled to Pakistan, for three months in 2011 and, most recently, to Quetta, for nearly a year, where he stayed with family, returning to the United States in March 2014. While there, he is believed to have married.” http://nyti.ms/2clEhSa DRUDGE banner, “ISIS AMONG US” ... TAB COVERS -- N.Y. POST: “HE HATES AMERICA -- Bomber ‘hates gays, hates military, hates culture’” http://nyp.st/2algwpl … N.Y. DAILY NEWS: “MARTYR DUMB” http://nydn.us/2b6YE1k POLLS DU JOUR -- HILLARY CLINTON 50, DONALD TRUMP 45 in NBC News/Survey Monkey Weekly Election Tracking Poll (online) http://nbcnews.to/2czVXp6 … MONMOUTH: GEORGIA -- Donald Trump 43, Hillary Clinton 41. http://bit.ly/2cqVvvX SIREN -- AP: “524k Ohio absentee ballots requested, 40k more than 2012”: “State officials say more than 524,000 absentee ballots have been requested in Ohio this year -- an increase of 40,000 compared to the same period during the 2012 presidential election. Secretary of State Jon Husted says nearly 12,000 of the absentee ballot applications are from military and overseas voters. The rest are from in-state residents.” http://apne.ws/2cNET0i This image says it all. Let's end the politically correct agenda that doesn't put America first. #trump2016 pic.twitter.com/9fHwog7ssN — Donald Trump Jr. (@DonaldJTrumpJr) September 19, 2016 SKITTLES RESPONDS -- via the Hollywood Reporter’s Seth Abramovitch -- “Skittles are candy. Refugees are people. We don’t feel it’s an appropriate analogy. We will respectfully refrain from further commentary as anything we say could be misinterpreted as marketing.” PELOSI’S CASH DASH -- House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi is continuing her quest to fill the DCCC’s coffers with a luncheon Tuesday in New York City with Vice President Joe Biden. The push follows a bicoastal swing over the weekend that began with a trip to New York City followed by visits to Hartford, San Francisco, Sacramento and then Las Vegas. The aggressive dollar dash comes as the DCCC announced Monday it had outraised the NRCC by nearly $4 million in August, pulling in $11 million. --GABE FLEISHER, the 14-year-old proprietor of “Wake Up To Politics” (http://bit.ly/2d7Iav5), sends over an image of the “dramatic subject lines” he’s gotten from the DCCC in the last few days. http://bit.ly/2clJ7Pn HAPPENING TODAY -- Donald Trump is in High Point, North Carolina, at noon, and Kenansville, North Carolina, at the Duplin County Events Center for a 5 p.m. rally. Tim Kaine is in Reno, Nevada. BARACK OBAMA is addressing the U.N. General Assembly in the morning. He’ll then hold a meeting with Nigerian President Muhammadu Buhari, and calls with UN General Assembly President Peter Thomson of Fiji and UN Secretary General Ban Ki-Moon. Moon hosts Obama for lunch, and then Obama will attend a CEO roundtable, and a refugee summit. In the evening, Obama will speak at a reception for foreign heads of delegations to the U.N. He’s sleeping in New York. POTUS on the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette op-ed page, “Self-driving, yes, but also safe”: “[M]y administration is rolling out new rules of the road for automated vehicles – guidance that the manufacturers developing self-driving cars should follow to keep us safe. ... [T]echnology isn’t just about the latest gadget or app – it’s about making people’s lives better. That’s going to be the focus of the first-ever White House Frontiers Conference on Oct. 13. And what better place to hold it than Pittsburgh – a city that has harnessed innovation to redefine itself as a center for technology, health care and education.” http://bit.ly/2cNFsqO COMING TODAY -- “The Obama administration Tuesday will unveil its long-awaited guidance update for self-driving vehicles, outlining its expectations for automakers and tech companies, some of which are already bringing those cars to the road.” http://politi.co/2cElVgE BEING THERE -- “Millennials Go Mild For Hillary,” by Michael Grunwald in Philly: “In interviews at the event, many of her millennial supporters, especially the former Sanders revolutionaries, talked about her in the could-be-worse tone they might use to describe a boring but socially appropriate romantic partner. They used words like ‘capable,’ ‘well-informed,’ ‘responsible,’ and ‘qualified.’ They dutifully praised her positions on issues like abortion, student debt, mass incarceration, and climate change, while emphasizing the importance of stopping Trump and his inflammatory rhetoric. But most of them did not sound particularly inspired.” http://politi.co/2cUY0Yl TRUMP’S MONEY PLAY -- “Gold cards and red hats: A Trumpian approach to fundraising,” by AP’s Julie Bykowicz and Jeff Horwitz: “Donald Trump is underwriting his presidential bid by selling the Donald Trump lifestyle — and campaign finance records show it is working. For the low price of $25, you can snag a Trump Gold Card emblazoned with your name or join a campaign ‘Board of Directors’ that comes with a personalized certificate. For $30, there’s Trump’s signature hats — billed as ‘the most popular product in America.’ Supporters can elevate themselves to ‘big league’ by ponying up $184 for a signed, ‘now out of print’ copy of Trump’s book, ‘The Art of the Deal.’” http://apne.ws/2d16COf BERNIE SANDERS on the cover of The Nation, interviewed by Katrina vanden Heuvel and John Nichols: “The Democrats have got to open the door to young people. Welcome them in and understand that it will be messy, that many young people are not professional politicians. The Democratic Party is going to have to adjust itself to their reality, rather than force young people to be adjusted to the Democratic leadership’s reality.” http://bit.ly/2cjh9yM HILLARY’s open letter to Wells Fargo customers in the wake of the major scandal at the bank: “Executives should be held individually accountable when rampant illegal activity happens on their watch. Their compensation should take a hit if their companies pay major fines. And they must face appropriate legal consequences if they break the law.” The letter http://hrc.io/2cr2Rzs ... The latest on Wells Fargo http://nyti.ms/2cYLQMJ **** A message from BP: We’ve donated $147 million to U.S. community programs over the past five years. Check out the programs we support in your community. ****** HILL WATCH -- “Freedom Caucus stiffs GOP on campaign cash,” by Rachael Bade and Heather Caygle: “A bloc of conservatives is refusing to transfer cash to the National Republican Congressional Committee, convinced the committee is favoring moderate candidates over hard-line conservatives. Dozens of other Republican lawmakers also haven’t paid their expected party ‘dues,’ including several in tough primaries or general election races who figure they need the money for themselves. Several GOP sources told Politico that 3 in 10 members of the House Republican Conference are delinquent on their dues. And multiple senior Republicans said the shortfall exceeds $10 million.” http://politi.co/2cEcoml COMING ATTRACTIONS -- “Ed Gillespie favored in 2017 Republican primary for Virginia governor, poll finds,” by WaPo’s Laura Vozella: “In a crowded Republican field, strategist Ed Gillespie has the support of 19 percent of Virginia adults compared with 6 percent for Corey Stewart, who is chairman of Trump’s Virginia presidential campaign and the Prince William Board of County Supervisors. Gillespie’s closest competitor is the latest entrant to the GOP race: state Sen. Frank W. Wagner (Virginia Beach), who announced his candidacy in late August and drew the support of 11 percent in the poll. U.S. Rep. Rob Wittman had 8 percent ... “The poll, conducted Sept. 6 to 12 for the university by Princeton Survey Research Associates, found that 40 percent of Virginians have no preferred candidate.” http://wapo.st/2dcZ0F5 THE SECRET SAUCE -- “Bloomberg Politics will launch the ‘poll decoder’ -- a brand-new look inside major polling organizations’ numbers, broken down by race, gender, age, and education and then cross-referenced by those demographics' choice for president. Unlike other polling aggregators that provide one overall average poll number, news organizations gave Bloomberg Politics unique access to allow the poll decoder to show which candidate is winning which coalitions -- and by how much.” http://bloom.bg/2cE7Nkc TRUMP TRANSITION CHAIR UPDATE --“Chris Christie Knew About Bridge Lane Closings as They Happened, Prosecutors Say,” by NYT’s Kate Zernike in Newark: “Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey knew that three of his top officials were involved in a plan to shut down lanes leading to the George Washington Bridge as it was happening and that the closings were intended to punish a local mayor for declining to support him, federal prosecutors said on Monday. The assertion was an unexpected and startling beginning to the trial of two former Christie administration officials charged with closing the lanes in 2013 and then covering it up. And it was a surprising claim because of the side of the courtroom it came from, as lawyers made opening statements.” http://nyti.ms/2dakhzf FOR YOUR RADAR -- Venezuela is in such bad shape that it is now importing oil from the United States. http://nyti.ms/2d7Dc1x MEDIAWATCH -- “Clinton press poolers clash with Egyptian leader's security,” by Halley Toosi in New York: “Reporters traveling with Hillary Clinton got a taste of the Egyptian security state on Monday -- and they didn't much care for it … According to the press pool report, upon reaching the hotel, the journalists were ordered to leave their bags, phones and computers with campaign staff ‘outside of the zone that had been deemed secure.’ ‘Reporters had to argue with Egyptian security to even carry recorders on their person,’ the pool report states. ‘There were also repeated arguments between Clinton campaign staff and the Egyptian security officials about how many reporters could enter the meeting despite having already reached an agreement with the country’s protocol officer prior to our arrival.’" http://politi.co/2cEoJu2 -- @ZekeJMiller: “Trump readout of el-Sisi meeting” http://bit.ly/2d4J7Qn -- “Joe Scarborough, Donald Trump look to repair relations,” by CNN’s Dylan Byers: “Last week, Scarborough and his ‘Morning Joe’ co-host, Mika Brzezinski, visited the Republican presidential nominee at Trump Tower to rekindle a once-rosy relationship that has turned bitter and adversarial ... The three also discussed the possibility of conducting an interview for ‘Morning Joe,’ though nothing was decided or finalized.” http://cnnmon.ie/2d7CvW1 --TV’S SLOW DEATH: “On the Eve of a New Broadcast Season, Emmys Ratings Drop to a Record Low,” by AdAge’s Anthony Crupi: “According to Nielsen live-plus-same-day data, ABC’s Sunday night presentation of the 68th Primetime Emmy Awards marked an all-time nadir for the ceremony, averaging 11.3 million viewers and a 2.8 rating among adults 18-49. While this marked a mere 5% decline versus the 11.9 million viewers Fox drew a year ago, the drop in the advertiser-coveted demo was much more steep -- down 22% compared with a 3.6.” http://bit.ly/2d19qLB --KEEP IN MIND: The four debate moderators are basically unknown to people 18-29, according to our recent Morning Consult poll. A plurality has not heard of a single debate moderator besides Anderson Cooper. OUT AND ABOUT -- POTUS and FLOTUS enjoying a dinner out last night at Cosme. Per our tipster: “Super trendy Mexican place ... on 21 St between Park and 5th. 3 blocks from the terrorist bombing on Saturday. Nypd seem psyched.” Menu http://bit.ly/2czUsHM SPOTTED: In addition to Speaker Paul Ryan, also spotted at Notre Dame over the weekend: Chief Justice John Roberts showing one of his children around the campus. The chief went to high school near Notre Dame in LaPorte, Indiana ... Sen. Marco Rubio in first class cabin of Acela yesterday afternoon from NYC to DC, on the same train as Sen. Elizabeth Warren, who was in the quiet car ... Virginia Sen. Mark Warner having drinks at The Gage on Michigan Ave in Chicago yesterday evening. The Senate was in session. ... Texas Rep. Roger Williams -- a candidate to be the next NRCC chairman -- at a restaurant at The Waldorf in New York. --The underground happy hour crew gathered at Bobby Vans on 15th Street to celebrate birthday week girl Jackie Stewart. SPOTTED: Megan McCafferty, Sara Skubikowski, Jackie Stewart, Joon Suh, Charlie Patterson, Brian Reardon, Elizabeth Brooks, Alex Ford. BETH WILKINSON, partner and co-founder at Wilkinson Walsh + Eskovitz, was inducted as a Fellow of the American College of Trial Lawyers this week … MELINDA HENNEBERGER has become a member of USA TODAY’s board of contributors … JOSH EARNEST stopped by the NowThis newsroom yesterday afternoon for a Facebook Live Q&A. http://bit.ly/2cFda64 HAPPENING TONIGHT – Tonight is the first of the five-part BuzzFeed Brews series featuring politicians from both sides focusing on key issues in 2017. First up: Sens. Cory Booker and Mike Lee on criminal justice reform at 7 p.m. at the Newseum. LATE-NIGHT BEST – Stephen Colbert, “Did Trump End The Birther Controversy, Or Is That His Biggest Lie Yet?” http://bit.ly/2cjiDJn ENGAGED -- Kareem Dale and Natasha Burroughs were engaged at the Grand Hyatt over the weekend during the CBC conference -- where they first connected in 2012. Kareem is former special assistant to the president for disability policy in the White House and current director and senior counsel with Discover Financial Services. Natasha is a communications professional and cousin of Rep. David Scott, the Democrat from Georgia. Pics http://bit.ly/2cFjESc … http://bit.ly/2d1difn NEW POLITICO PRO hires – Marty Kady emails the staff: “Angela Greiling Keane is joining our team as deputy technology editor. Angela is a veteran of Bloomberg News, where she most recently served as a White House correspondent. ... Ted Hesson is joining the Labor and Employment team as a reporter. ... He’s been writing and editing immigration and economic stories for Vice, National Journal, and Upworthy for the past year. ... Adam Cancryn is joining the health care team on the providers beat. Adam was a senior reporter at S&P Global Market Intelligence.” --HuffPost has hired Emily McCombs as their new Parents Editorial Director. She previously “served as Executive Editor at xoJane, the site she launched with Jane Pratt in 2011, and most recently was Executive Editor at Elite Daily.” BIRTHDAYS: Ashley Tate-Gilmore, director of White House Travel Office – Nedra’s 2013 profile http://yhoo.it/1F9jFpf … Keith Mason, former Clinton WH official and former COS to Georgia Gov. Zell Miller who is “still very close to both Clintons and raising $ for Hillary” (h/t Paul Begala) … digital media guru Joe Mansour, “leading the digital practice for @FP1Strategies by day. Whiskey lover & dog owner by night,” per his Twitter ... Peter Flaherty ... Carter Lavin, membership coordinator of California Solar Energy Industries Association and proud resident of Oakland, Calif., is 28 ... Cathy Straight, managing editor of CNN Digital (h/ts Carl Lavin) ... Deborah Roberts is 56 ... Crystal Wallingford, marketing events coordinator at Norton Rose Fulbright US LLP and a Karen Hughes alum ... Alejandra Campoverdi, director of multicultural content at the L.A. Times and former White House deputy director of Hispanic media (h/t Ben Chang) ... Moira Bagley Smith ... WashTimes’ Rowan Scarborough ... Kristen Holmes of CNN ... Politico alum Shaun Waterman, now editor in chief of Fed Scoop … Politico alum Margaret Burge, events manager at Fed Scoop … NPR news editor and blogger Lauren Hodges … Bloomberg’s Drew Singer ... Douglas Sellers ... Aniello Alioto, global engagement manager at Greenpeace International ... Dan Henning, producer for Sirius XM Radio and a Bill Press alum ... Max Root is 21 ... Graham Vyse, politics editor of InsideSources ... … Van Jones, CNN commentator and co-founder of Rebuild the Dream ... NPR’s Neda Ulaby ... Marty Tolchin is 88 ... Melissa Jane Kronfeld ... Asher Allen, son of Jon ... Francesca Craig, social secretary at the French Embassy ... Maureen Shanahan, SVP at SKDKnickerbocker ... Valerie Lapinski, head of video for Guardian US and a Time alum ... former Rep. Walt Minnick (D-Idaho) is 74 … Adam Howard, COS for Rep. Mike Turner ... Terry “Big Guy” Gilfillan … Mark Mullery … Kenneth Maresco … Ashley O’Connor … Caitlin Blair … Sarah Hawkins ... Reena Flores, writer/video producer at CBS Politics ... Nancy Bocskor, an NRCC alum ... Sarah Hawkins Warren ... Riyad Hammad ... Sally Wendkos Olds ... Mardi O’Shaughnessy … Vanessa Kirsch ... Nancy Godfrey ... Carl Zichella ... Angie Schiavoni, the pride of Madison, Wisc. ... Sara O’Keefe ... John Judge ... Clay McClure (h/ts Teresa Vilmain) SUBSCRIBE to the Playbook family: POLITICO Playbook http://politi.co/1M75UbX ... New York Playbook http://politi.co/1ON8bqW … Florida Playbook http://politi.co/1OypFe9 ... New Jersey Playbook http://politi.co/1HLKltF ... Massachusetts Playbook http://politi.co/1Nhtq5v ... Illinois Playbook http://politi.co/1N7u5sb ... California Playbook http://politi.co/2bLvcPl ... Brussels Playbook http://politi.co/1FZeLcw ... All our political and policy tipsheets http://politi.co/1M75UbX
Hillary Clinton’s campaign is hoping Lester Holt is no Matt Lauer. Clinton campaign manager Robby Mook told “CBS This Morning” that his expectation for Holt on Monday night, when Clinton and Donald Trump square off in the first presidential debate, is that he call out Trump’s lies. Lauer was assailed by his colleagues in the media for allowing Trump’s assertion that he didn’t support the Iraq War go unchecked during NBC’s commander in chief forum earlier this month. Story Continued Below “We’re really focused on this opportunity that Hillary has to speak directly to the voters on the issues,” Mook said in an interview Monday morning. “But we are concerned that Donald Trump may lie, he may throw misinformation out there, and that Hillary will have to spend all of her time trying to correct the record rather than talking about the things she wants to accomplish.” Asked what he expects the moderator to do, Mook said “all that we’re asking is that the record be checked.” “So if Donald Trump lies, which he has repeatedly done in the past, that that be simply checked,” he said.
“By the way, my tax cut is the biggest since Ronald Reagan — I'm very proud of it.” — Donald Trump Donald Trump’s tax cut would actually be even larger than Ronald Reagan’s 1981 tax cut. Trump's latest revision of his tax plan is estimated to cost between $4.4 trillion and $5.9 trillion, according to the Tax Foundation, or an annual average of $440 billion annually. By comparison, Reagan's 1981 tax cuts reduced taxes by an average $200 billion annually (in 2012 dollars), according to the Treasury Department. Some of those tax cuts were later rescinded when they ballooned the deficit. George W. Bush’s 2001 tax cut had an average cost of $91.5 billion annually, according to a 2013 Treasury analysis, while his 2003 cuts cost $84 billion annually.
ORLANDO -- Tim Kaine visited the Pulse night club here on Monday evening, the site where gunman Omar Mateen killed 49 people in June. The Virginia senator laid flowers at a memorial surrounding the club. He attended alongside former Rep. Gabby Giffords (D-Ariz.), who was injured in a mass shooting in 2011, as well as Giffords's husband astronaut Mark Kelly and Sen. Bill Nelson (D-Fla.). Story Continued Below "The thing that's painful about this: this is a weird thing to say but I always hoped that Virginia Tech would be the worst one ever," Kaine told reporters after a quiet, 10-minute visit to the site. "As bad as that was, I hoped nothing would ever eclipse it. But such is life. We got work to do." Kaine was Virginia's governor in 2007, when a shooter killed 32 people at the university. Later Monday, Kaine, Giffords and Kelly are scheduled to attend a presidential debate watch party with LGBT activists here in Orlando. Kaine's running mate, Hillary Clinton, visited Pulse in July.
(CNN)A top aide to Ohio Gov. John Kasich criticized Republican National Committee Chairman Reince Priebus after the party chairman warned of consequences for former presidential candidates like Kasich who've refused to back Donald Trump for president, despite signing loyalty pledges during the primary. "The idea of a greater purpose beyond oneself may be alien to political party bosses like Reince Priebus, but it is at the center of everything Governor Kasich does," said John Weaver, Kasich's chief strategist. "He will not be bullied by a Kenosha political operative that is unable to stand up for core principles or beliefs." Weaver was responding to Priebus' appearance on CBS' "Face the Nation" on Sunday. During that interview, the RNC chairman suggested that GOP presidential candidates who'd signed pledges to back the eventual Republican nominee during the 2016 primary, but who have since withheld support for Trump's candidacy, could be prevented from running for president again by the party. Kasich has repeatedly said he does not plan to endorse Trump. "Those people need to get on board," Priebus said. "And if they're thinking they're going to run again someday, I think that we're going to evaluate the process -- of the nomination process and I don't think it's going to be that easy for them." "People in our party are talking about what we're going to do about this. I mean there's a ballot access issue in South Carolina. In order to be on the ballot in South Carolina, you actually have to pledge your support to the nominee, no matter who that person is," he explained. "So what's the penalty for that? It's not a threat, but that's just the question that we have a process in place." 
Washington (CNN)The Cincinnati Enquirer, one of Ohio's largest newspapers, is backing Hillary Clinton after supporting Republican presidential candidates for nearly a century. "The Enquirer has supported Republicans for president for almost a century -- a tradition this editorial board doesn't take lightly. But this is not a traditional race, and these are not traditional times," the editorial board of the Enquirer published Friday. "Our country needs calm, thoughtful leadership to deal with the challenges we face at home and abroad. We need a leader who will bring out the best in all Americans, not the worst." "That's why there is only one choice when we elect a president in November: Hillary Clinton," the editorial reads. The Gannett publication announced its endorsement in advance of the first presidential debate between the two nominees. Ohio is a battleground state that both candidates have increasingly worked harder to win. The paper said Clinton was a "competent" secretary of state who made "mistakes" in Benghazi that were "tragic" but called Republicans' assessment of her actions a "diabolical conspiracy." "Clinton, meanwhile, was a competent secretary of state, with far stronger diplomatic skills than she gets credit for. Yes, mistakes were made in Benghazi, and it was tragic that four Americans lost their lives in the 2012 terror attacks on the US consulate there," it wrote. "But the incident was never the diabolical conspiracy that Republicans wanted us to believe, and Clinton was absolved of blame after lengthy investigations." Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump is more interested in his self that the country, the paper concludes. "Trump brands himself as an outsider untainted by special interests, but we see a man utterly corrupted by self-interest. His narcissistic bid for the presidency is more about making himself great than America," the board said. "Trump tears our country and many of its people down with his words so that he can build himself up. What else are we left to believe about a man who tells the American public that he alone can fix what ails us?" While the editorial board are sympathetic to voters interest in the change that Trump could bring, the Enquirer concludes that not all change is good. "Our country needs to seek thoughtful change, not just change for the sake of change. Four years is plenty of time to do enough damage that it could take America years to recover from, if at all," it wrote. 
Jill Stein didn't get invited to the first presidential debate, but the Green Party candidate is still hoping to cause a stir. In the hours before Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton take the stage, Stein and her supporters plan to hold a "Let Jill Debate" protest and subsequent "People's Debate." Story Continued Below Both events are to be held outside Hofstra University in Hempstead, New York, the site of Monday's debate. When the debate starts at 9 p.m., Stein's campaign says she will "participate live in the debate on social media." Stein didn't pass the 15 percent national polling threshold to qualify for the debate, and neither did Libertarian Party presidential nominee Gary Johnson. Johnson's campaign said he, along with running mate Bill Weld, will be New York City on debate day. The pair plan to watch the debate live and live-tweet from their Twitter accounts.
Donald Trump’s White House bid is “a movement, not a campaign,” a new ad released by the Manhattan billionaire proclaims. The 30-second TV spot, announced Tuesday via email by the Trump campaign, is entitled “Movement” and features a string of phrases describing the GOP nominee as a “builder, businessman, success” and praising him for “doing what others called impossible.” Story Continued Below Cutting quickly between video of construction sites, Trump himself and seemingly ordinary American families and children, the video touts the real estate mogul’s campaign as “dreaming big” and “building bigger.” Among other claims, the ad says Trump’s candidacy is “defined by freedom” and “leaving the past behind.” The latter statement from the ad’s unseen narrator is accompanied by video from a 1992 “60 Minutes” interview with Bill and Hillary Clinton in which the former president denied having an affair with Gennifer Flowers, a woman Bill Clinton would later admit to having had a sexual relationship with. “While Hillary Clinton ‘distracts and diverts’ attention away from her horrific record with negative advertisements that lack substance, our campaign plans on promoting the positive energy that has turned Mr. Trump’s campaign into a full-fledged movement,” Trump campaign senior communications adviser Jason Miller said in a statement that accompanied the ad’s release.
UNITED NATIONS — The New York-area hunt for an Afghan-born bombing suspect cast a pall on this week's gathering of international leaders at the U.N. General Assembly, a session U.S. President Barack Obama plans to use to rally support for helping the world's refugees. Instead, the search for and eventual capture Monday of 28-year-old Ahmad Khan Rahami gave a fresh talking point to Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump, who wants to dramatically curtail U.S. admissions of refugees and other immigrants and who has criticized his Democratic rival Hillary Clinton's more welcoming stance. Story Continued Below "I just saw that and wanted to weep," a U.S.-based refugee advocate told POLITICO as news spread of the manhunt. "Trump is going to be all over this bullshit." And he was. "Think of it," the real estate mogul told Fox News on Monday morning. "Hillary Clinton wants to allow hundreds of thousands of these same people that are, you know, they have such hatred and sickness in their hearts. It’s sickness, but it’s — it’s sickness and it’s hatred, and she wants to allow hundreds of thousands." Clinton responded, in a hastily arranged news conference on an airplane tarmac near her New York home, with a reiteration of her call for stricter "vetting" of immigrants and an "intelligence surge" to better identify terrorist threats. "So I am absolutely in favor of and have long been an advocate for tough vetting for making sure that we don't let people into this country, and not just people who come here to settle, but we need a better visa system," she said. But she sought to distinguish between terrorists like the perpetrators of the 9/11 attacks and refugees in general, while taking a shot at Trump for good measure. "These were not refugees who got into airplanes and attacked our city and our country," Clinton said. "So let's not get diverted and distracted by the kind of campaign rhetoric we hear coming from the other side." Authorities were still piecing together details about Rahami, a naturalized U.S. citizen who was born in Afghanistan but whose last known address was in Elizabeth, New Jersey. According to media reports, he was wounded in a shootout with police in Linden, New Jersey, but taken into custody by noon Monday. He is wanted in connection with a blast that hurt 29 people over the weekend in the Chelsea area of New York City, as well as other bombs found in the city and in New Jersey. It was not immediately clear how Rahami reached the United States, or whether he even arrived as a refugee. But activists acknowledged that such nuances would likely get lost in the debate this week as terrorism will likely become an even more prominent issue than it already is. This year's General Assembly, and the many events on the sidelines, are tackling issues ranging from how to stop growing microbial resistance to antibiotics to climate change. The bloody civil war in Syria, the battle against the Islamic State terrorist network and the dilemma over North Korea's nuclear program are also key topics. The world's refugee crisis — in which an unprecedented 65 million people are either displaced in their own countries or sought help in other states — is receiving special attention, however. On Monday, U.N. Secretary General Ban Ki-moon kicked off a summit of world leaders to discuss the topic. And on Tuesday, Obama will host his own refugee summit. Of huge concern is the plight of Syrian refugees, hundreds of thousands of whom have trekked to Europe to escape the despair of refugee camps. During his opening remarks on Monday morning, Ban, who will leave the secretary-general's seat in just a few months, called on nations not to be afraid of refugees fleeing violence and persecution. "Refugees and migrants are not to be seen a burden; they offer great potential, if only we unlock it," he said. "Acting together, we can respond to rising xenophobia and turn fear into hope." As the U.N.-sponsored summit kicked off, millions of people in the New York area received alerts on their cell phones about the search for Rahami, who authorities warned was likely armed and dangerous. Refugee advocates say they have mixed feelings about the two summits. They believe the U.N.-sponsored event Monday is falling short of concrete steps groups such as Amnesty International and Oxfam sought. The leaders gathered Monday adopted the so-called New York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants, but the statement puts off much of the heavy lifting of coming up with a new strategy for handling mass migration crises until 2018. There's more hope that the U.S.-sponsored event on Tuesday will lead to tangible results, including serious commitments from the private sector on ways to assist refugees. But activists are disappointed that while Obama is calling on other countries to double their intake of refugees, he isn't willing to lift the U.S. intake as much. Obama has set a target of 110,000 refugee admissions, including a significant number from Syria, in fiscal year 2017; some activists had hoped for 200,000. Opposition among Republicans in Congress, which controls funding for the U.S. refugee resettlement program, likely stayed Obama's hand. Clinton said last year that she'd like to see the U.S. accept some 65,000 refugees from Syria; but in the year since, she's stayed silent on any numbers. Her campaign stresses that while Clinton believes in keeping the U.S. refugee resettlement program intact as a symbol of American generosity, she believes newcomers must be properly screened. Her relative reticence on the subject — at least as compared to Trump — has rankled some refugee advocates, who now wonder whether, with the latest attack in New York, whether she will become even more shy. "It's really important that Hillary make a strong statement supporting the fiscal year 2017 admissions goals set by President Obama and make a commitment to continue to increase our annual refugee admissions once she's elected," said Yasmine Taeb of the Friends Committee on National Legislation, a Quaker lobby. Taeb acknowledged the "tough political climate," noting "the rise in anti-Muslim and anti-refugee rhetoric." But she urged world leaders not to "turn our backs on innocent women, men, and children fleeing violence and persecution." Trump, Clinton and Obama were all set to hold bilateral meetings with world leaders in New York on Monday. Clinton and Trump are due to meet Egypt's president, while Clinton also will meet Ukraine's president and the prime minister of Japan. Obama's meetings include one with Iraq's prime minister; the pair will likely discuss ways to keep up the fight against the Islamic State. Nolan D. McCaskill contributed to this report.
Donald Trump, in hot water over a report that his charity used donations to cover business-related legal fees, told a campaign rally crowd on Tuesday that “there’s nothing like doing things with other people’s money.” The comment about “other people’s money” came during a campaign rally in North Carolina, where Trump pledged to keep refugees from the Middle East out of the U.S. and instead put them in “safe zones” that would be built with money from Gulf nations. It is a financial maneuver the real estate mogul said he has performed many times throughout his career. Story Continued Below “It’s called OPM. I do that all the time in business. It’s called other people’s money. There’s nothing like doing things with other people’s money,” Trump said. “Because it takes, the risk, you get a good chunk of it and it takes the risk. We’re going to do this, in this case, from a humanitarian standpoint. OPM: other people’s money.” Under a Trump administration, the Gulf states would not be the only foreign countries on the hook to pay for the Manhattan billionaire’s proposals. From the very beginning of his campaign, Trump has pledged to build a wall along America’s southern border and force Mexico to pay for it. During Trump’s visit to Mexico last month, Mexican President Enrique Peña Nieto said his nation would not pay for the wall. Trump said the subject of who would pay was not discussed during their meeting. The former reality TV star made his promise to use “other people’s money” on the same day The Washington Post published a story accusing Trump of spending $258,000 from his charitable foundation to settle lawsuits involving his other businesses.
(CNN)Presidential debates are about ideas, tough questions -- and gaffes. The impact of one line zingers can fade after the moment, but gaffes can linger, altering a race and shifting the momentum. Mistakes happen in almost every debate. And as Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump meet for their first clash Monday -- 56 years to the date after the famous showdown between Richard Nixon and John F. Kennedy -- viewers will be on alert for any stumbles that might seal the fate of either candidate. Here are eight of the biggest blunders from nearly six decades of presidential debates: Nixon vs. Kennedy, 1960 The first televised general election debate featured a candidate who understood the power of television and one who didn't. John F. Kennedy, tall, young and confident, looked into the camera and addressed 80 million viewers. Richard Nixon, pale and recovering from the flu, shifted his eyes, looking unfocused as he addressed the questioners rather than the viewers. Nixon was also sweaty and unshaven. People who listened to the debate on the radio thought Nixon won. People who watched the debate thought Kennedy won. The next day's Chicago Daily News headline summed up the importance of the visuals: "Was Nixon Sabotaged by TV Makeup Artists?" Donald Trump's 6 debate tactics It went so badly for Nixon that for the next 16 years, general election candidates avoided televised debates. Ford vs. Carter, 1976 So memorable was President Gerald Ford's gaffe that it made it into his obituary. Asked about the expansion of Russian power in Eastern Europe, Ford flatly denied it. "There is no Soviet domination of Eastern Europe, and there never will be under a Ford administration," he said. Flummoxed, the moderator gave Ford a chance to modify his response. But Ford stuck by his response throughout the debate, insisting that Poland, Yugoslavia, and Romania were all "independent and autonomous." Sometimes thought of as "the accidental president," Ford's bumbling response only highlighted the sense among some that he wasn't quite right for the job. Dukakis vs. Bush, 1988 The question wasn't hard. "Governor," CNN's Bernard Shaw asked, "if Kitty Dukakis were raped and murdered, would you favor an irrevocable death penalty for the killer?" It was an easy opportunity for Michael Dukakis, the Democratic governor of Massachusetts, to sound human. But he whiffed and discussed his ironclad opposition to the death penalty. He talked about how Massachusetts had the lowest murder rate in the country. And he criticized then-Vice President George H.W. Bush over his drug war policies. Poll: Clinton, Trump virtually tied headed into debate What he didn't do in his two-minute response is talk about this wife, Kitty. The next day, Kitty Dukakis called the question shocking and inappropriate. Dukakis later admitted that he made a mistake by answering such a raw question so clinically. Bush vs. Clinton vs. Perot, 1992 Just as an audience member stood up to ask President George H.W. Bush about how the national debt had personally affected him, he checked his watch. And in that moment, he provided Bill Clinton an opening. He also gave viewers of the first presidential town hall the impression that he just didn't care and that he had better things to do with his time. The Arkansas governor pounced, showing his rare gift of connecting with voters by approaching the questioner and painting a picture of a wrecked economy where her friends and neighbors had lost jobs. The debate echoed a New York Times headline months earlier that suggested he was out of touch with average voters—"Bush Encounters the Supermarket, Amazed." Bush later said that in the moment he was thinking: "I hate these debates. I'm so glad it's almost over." Bush vs. Gore, 2000 Vice President Al Gore just couldn't hide his exasperation. Especially not after Republican operatives spliced together a clip of him sighing and sighing again and again during his first presidential debate against George W. Bush. After the sighing reel was circulated, the entire narrative of the first debate changed. The post-debate spin effectively turned a debate night victory into a loss for Gore in the days that followed. Columnists mocked him. And pundits had a talking point. On the "Today" show, Katie Couric asked him if his sighing was "presidential behavior." Why the debate expectations game is a farce In 2007 Gore looked back and said: "The sighs, the sighs, the sighs. Within 18 hours, they had turned perception around to where the entire story was about me sighing. And that's scary. That's scary." Rick Perry vs. his memory, 2011 "Oops" is never a word that announces something good. For then-Texas Gov. Rick Perry, it announced the beginning of the the end of his bid for the 2012 GOP nomination. In the moment, he started off pretty strong and specific. "I will tell you. It's three agencies of government when I get there that are gone," he said, staring at then-Congressman Ron Paul, who was standing next to him. "Commerce, Education, and the...uh...what's the third one there?" Finally, he just gave up, after the moderator pinned him down. "Let's see...I can't, the third one, sorry," he said. "Oops." (He later remembered that it was the Department of Energy). The rap on Perry was that he wasn't up to the job and the "oops" moment underscored it. There was no cleaning this one up. Barack Obama vs. Mitt Romney, 2012 In his closing statement for one of the most watched debates in television history, President Barack Obama said it "was a terrific debate." He was right -- for Mitt Romney. Some 70 million people watched a flat-footed and lethargic Obama get hammered by a well-prepped and aggressive Mitt Romney. Obama spoke in run-on sentences. Romney spoke in bullet points. A CNN insta-poll of registered voters showed that 67% of registered voters who watched the debate thought Romney won, and just 25% went with Obama. Even Obama's campaign aide, Stephanie Cutter, conceded on CNN that Romney "scored some points on style." How Lester Holt is getting ready for Monday's debate Yes, like every available style point. The Republican National Committee released a video ad called "Smirk" that showed a split-screen of Romney smoothly ripping Obama, while the president nodded and smirked. Obama's poor performance jolted the race, giving Romney the momentum. At least until the second debate. Marco Rubio vs. Chris Christie, 2016 Four. That's how many times Sen. Marco Rubio pivoted to the exact same soundbite attack on President Obama. Four times -- in five minutes. Dogged by criticisms that he was an inexperienced first-term senator who could deliver a speech but not much else, Rubio provided just the evidence his critics needed. It also likely destroyed any chances he had at a good showing in the New Hampshire primary. He later did something that presidential candidates rarely do -- admit they made a mistake. "I did not do well on Saturday night, so listen to this," he told a crowd after his fifth place finish. "That will never happen again." But the damage was done and his campaign never recovered. 
Even as law enforcement continues to investigate a series of bombings over the weekend in and around New York City, President Barack Obama said Monday that military successes against the Islamic State have exposed the militant group “as the failed cause that it is.” The president declined to offer specifics of the investigation into the bombings, referring reporters to the FBI and other law enforcement agencies for updates. But as the president was speaking, NBC News and other media outlets began reporting that Ahmad Rahami, a man wanted in connection with the bombings, had been taken into custody. Story Continued Below Law enforcement has not publicly tied Rahami, a U.S. citizen of Afghan descent, to any terrorist group but in his public statement Monday, Obama spoke not just about the investigation into the weekend’s attacks but also the global fight to combat terrorist groups like the Islamic State and Al Qaeda. “We will continue to lead the global coalition on the fight to destroy ISIL, which is instigating a lot of people over the Internet to carry out attacks. We are going to continue to go after them. We're going to take out their leaders, we're going to take out their infrastructure,” the president said from New York, where he will attend the United Nations General Assembly meeting later this week. “As we take away more of their territory, it exposes ISIL as the failed cause that it is. And it helps to undermine their ideology which over time will make it harder to recruit and inspire people to violence.” Speaking specifically to the ongoing investigation into the bombings in New York and New Jersey, the president said he had been briefed by FBI Director James Comey and had spoken with New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo and New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie. The president also said that a “particularly high level of federal resources” were already in place in New York to assist with the UN General Assembly and that those resources would be able to assist in the investigations. Recalling his conversations with governors Cuomo and Christie, Obama praised New Yorkers and New Jerseyans for their toughness: “Folks around here, you know, they don’t get scared. They are tough. They are resilient. They go about their business every single day.” “That kind of toughness and resoluteness and a recognition that neither individuals nor organizations like ISIL can ultimately undermine our way of life. That's the kind of strength that makes me so proud to be an American,” the president said. “By showing those who want to do us harm that they will never beat us, by showing the entire world that as Americans we do not and never will give in to fear, that's going to be the most important ingredient in us defeating those who would carry out terrorist acts against us.”
Hillary Clinton has been given the "Between Two Ferns" treatment. The Democratic presidential nominee sat down for an interview on the Funny or Die talk show hosted by comedian Zach Galifianakis. During the interview -- posted today, but taped the Friday Clinton was diagnosed with pneumonia -- Clinton jokes about Donald Trump, her pantsuits and the "double standard" of being a woman running for office, among other things. Mid-interview she says bluntly: "I really regret doing this."       Here's a sampling of some of the best jokes:  Clinton: "I assume he'll wear, you know, that red power tie." Galifianakis: "Or maybe like a white power tie...." Clinton: "That's even more appropriate."  Galifianakis: "As secretary, how many words per minute could you type? And how does President Obama like his coffee? Like himself ... weak?" Clinton: "You know, Zach those are really out of date questions ... you need to get out more." Galifianakis: "What happens if you become pregnant? Are we going to be stuck with Tim Kaine for nine months? How does this work?"  Galifianakis: "Not to take away from the historic significance [of your campaign] ... but for a younger, younger generation, you also become their first white president and that's pretty neat, too."  Galifianakis: "When you went to Donald Trump's wedding, did he write his own vows and did Michelle Obama write Melania's?" Clinton: "I really couldn't see or hear very well, so I'm not quite sure what his vows were. But I'm sure they were great and huge and wonderful." Galifianakis: "Like his bowels." Clinton: [Rolls eyes, laughs]  Galifianakis: "We should stay in touch ... what's the best way to reach you? Email?" Clinton: [Silent.]  
Washington (CNN)Six days before the crucial first presidential debate, Donald Trump is using a spate of bombings and stabbings to build an interlocking argument on two issues where he thinks tough talk gives him a winning hand -- immigration and terrorism. The attacks over the weekend mercifully did not kill anybody -- but they inevitably put the fear of terrorism back at the center of the showdown between Trump and Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton. From Trump's point of view, the new terror scares play directly into a vision of a nation under siege and which he must get Americans to buy into if he is to win in November. "We cannot let this evil continue," Trump said in Florida on Monday after the capture of a US naturalized citizen of Afghan descent suspected of planting a series of bombs in New York and New Jersey over the weekend, and the stabbing of nine people in a separate attack in a Minnesota mall on Saturday in an attack claimed by ISIS. "If you chose Donald Trump, these problems are going to go away." Still -- Trump's hard bore approach does carry risks. His Democratic rival Hillary Clinton is also maneuvering in the wake of the attacks, portraying herself as the kind of steely and calm commander-in-chief Americans traditionally turn to in times of crisis. "I know how to do this," Clinton said at an airport news conference on Monday. Trump is presenting the attacks as the result of what he says are lax, weak anti-terrorism policies pursued by President Barack Obama and his Democratic foe Clinton while she was secretary of state. And he's offering a solution: that the new threat of homegrown Islamic terrorism could be snuffed out if only the United States adopted the kind of "extreme" vetting of foreigners and drastic changes to the immigration system that he proposed and which lit a fire under his presidential campaign. "Hillary Clinton's decisions overseas have left us with the threat we face today and her immigration policies will invite this threat onto our shores, and it's already happening," Trump said Monday. "Let me state very clearly, immigration security is national security." Trump is also likely to seize on the fact that Ahmad Khan Rahami, the accused New York bomber, a US naturalized citizen of Afghan descent, had spent time in Afghanistan and Pakistan in recent years to renew his call for a halt on immigration to the US from nations with proven links to terrorism. Though Trump's plans might not have prevented Rahami from visiting South Asia, where thousands of law abiding US citizens travel every month, Rahami's travels will play into the febrile political atmosphere that Trump is trying to tap into following the attacks. And revelations Monday that at least 858 people that had been ordered deported or removed under another name were improperly granted US citizenship due to a failure to maintain adequate fingerprint records, according to a new report, will be used by critics of the immigration system to bolster his claims of the need for reform. Trump's tough response to the terror attacks is likely to be a hit with his faithful supporters who have responded to such a message before -- for instance after attacks in Paris, San Bernardino California and Orlando which helped to shape the Republican primary process. But it's a gamble because while some Americans like the tough talk, he risks exacerbating impressions that with his vehement response to terrorist attacks, he is exhibiting the deficiencies that have many other voters wondering whether he is fit to be president. It's also unclear whether the limited human toll of the weekend's attacks will dilute their impact on an election still 49 days away -- in an election season in which the narrative often seems to shift by the hour. For instance, the huge campaign controversies of recent days -- Trump's false claim that Clinton was to blame for accusations that Obama was not born in the United States and the Democratic nominee's health issues dominated campaign conversation for days last week -- but barely got a mention on Monday. Voters also appear conflicted on the how national security will factor into the election. A CNN/ORC poll this month showed that voters trust the Republican more to tackle terrorism, by 51% to 45%. But the same survey found that voters think Clinton has the superior temperament required of a president (56% to 36%) and is better able to handle the responsibilities of commander in chief (50% to 45%). Trump's potential temperamental vulnerability came into focus during his Florida rally, when he bemoaned the medical treatment offered to Rahami after he was injured in a shootout with police. "He will be taken care of by some of the best doctors in the world. He will be given a fully modern and updated hospital room. And he will probably even have room service, knowing the way our country is. And on top of all of that, he will be represented by an outstanding lawyer," Trump said. But New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo, a Clinton supporter, pointed out that what Trump was proposing was a wholesale repudiation of the humanitarian, civic and legal values for which the US stands -- a factor that could give some voters pause when they consider handing the White House to Trump." "Welcome to America," Cuomo told CNN's Wolf Blitzer. "We have a system of jurisprudence, you are innocent until you proven guilty, you have a right to counsel, you have a right to hospitalization if you are ill. That is our system and it's what makes this country special. And what makes this country great." The Clinton campaign, for its part, has long believed that in the unwanted circumstances of an "October Surprise" terror attack, voters would turn to experience and a steady hand rather than Trump's more impulsive leadership. "I have sat at that table in the Situation Room, I have analyzed the threats, I have contributed to actions that have neutralized our enemies. I know how to do this," Clinton said during her news conference. While Trump responded to the fears of Americans, Clinton issued a call to their intellect. "We should also launch an intelligence surge to help identify and thwart attacks before they can be carried out. We need to work more closely with Silicon Valley and other partners to counter terrorist propaganda and recruitment efforts online," Clinton said, repeating policies she has long embraced. 
A pilot who ferried GOP vice presidential nominee Mike Pence, his family, staff, secret service contingent and traveling press has been fired following revelations that he faces criminal charges for intentionally hitting a man with his car. The pilot, Vincent Caldara, is a former police officer and chairman of Trump's Florida Law Enforcement Coalition. The news of Caldara’s criminal charges was first reported by The Guardian in an article on potential criminal activities of some of those in law enforcement supporting Trump. Story Continued Below “I’m a very strong Trump supporter, I’m a retired law enforcement officer, and I’m currently on Governor Mike Pence’s flight operations team as one of his pilots during the campaign,” Caldara told a crowd at the opening of a Trump campaign office in Brevard County in early September. “Donald Trump and Governor Mike Pence are the law and order candidates.” Pence’s camp distanced itself from Caldara: “All of our pilots are assigned by the airline,” Pence spokesman Marc Lotter told POLITICO. Caldara “is not and has not been” a paid staffer for the campaign at the state or national level, Lotter added. He referred questions about any volunteer role Caldara has to Trump’s Florida campaign, which did not respond to a request for comment. “He is no longer employed at Eastern Air Lines,” said Nick Loudon, executive director of special projects at Eastern Airlines, the private charter company that flies Pence. He said he could not comment further due to “legal considerations.” Caldara had not flown the Pence plane for several weeks before the news of his assault charge broke. Caldara, 55, is charged with aggravated battery with a deadly weapon after allegedly striking a friend with his vehicle “three times, against his will, causing back and leg injuries,” in July 2015, according to court documents. The two had been in argument, and the victim, whose name is withheld, “stood in front of Caldara’s vehicle as Caldara attempted to leave.” The police report stated that, according to the victim, “Caldara started the vehicle and then drove forward, bumping him with the front bumper of the vehicle…Caldara then drove forward again, striking [the victim] with the front bumper of the vehicle, knocking him to the ground. [The victim] advised he fell to his knees and was struck again by Caldara’s vehicle, knocking him down again. [The victim] stated he crawled out from under the vehicle and then Caldara drove off.” Caldara has pleaded not guilty. Caldara is also being sued by a woman who alleges that Caldara hit her with his motorcycle in 2014, “seriously and severely” injuring her, according to court documents. The complaint alleges that Caldara was driving “carelessly and negligently” when he struck the victim. Caldara’s Twitter account, which appears to have been deleted, listed him as “Chairman of the Florida Law Enforcement Coalition to Elect Donald J. Trump for President.”
(CNN)The fate of several dead American ISIS hostages quietly came back to the forefront at a Senate Armed Services Committee hearing Thursday when a member asked Defense Secretary Ash Carter to find a way to bring their bodies home. Sen. Joe Donnelly brought the issue up amid growing talk by military commanders about using Kurdish and Arab forces to push ISIS out of Raqqa, the terror group's stronghold in Syria and self-declared capital. The US believes several of the US hostages murdered by ISIS likely were killed in the Raqqa area and their bodies have never been recovered. "When we go to Raqqa, we lost some young men and women there who were killed by ISIL, and we want to have them come home, " said Donnelly, an Indiana Democrat, using another word for ISIS. "We don't want to leave anyone behind. And we would ask for your cooperation and assistance," he said to Carter. Donnelly specifically mentioned Peter Kassig, an aid worker killed in November 2014, and Kayla Mueller, another aid worker ISIS held, tortured and then claimed died in an airstrike. The US believes the American hostages, including journalist James Foley, were killed by the now-dead ISIS operative known as Jihadi John. "All the parents and all the folks back home, we want them all to come home. And we'd sure appreciate your assistance in making that happen," Donnelly said. Carter answered "noted." The military is aware of the families' desires, but also knows how very tough that job may be, one defense official told CNN. The US military has a long history of trying to recover the remains of dead Americans. Recently the bodies of two American civilians who fought and were killed with militia groups fighting ISIS were returned to the US. And fallen service members missing on foreign battlefields are still being searched for from the Vietnam and Korean wars, as well as World War II. The US also searched for years in Iraq for the Scott Speicher, a downed Navy pilot from the first Gulf War, until his remains were recovered in 2009. But whether the remains of the hostages can be located, identified and brought home may be very difficult the defense official said. It's widely believed there are a number of burial sites around Raqqa and without some confirmation of where the Americans are buried it may be too sensitive to begin removing remains. 
(CNN)Congressional Black Caucus members demanded that the Justice Department "aggressively pursue investigations, indictments and prosecutions" regarding the recent deaths of two black men, which stemmed from fatal police shootings. "We come to you today to urge you to aggressively pursue investigations, indictments and prosecutions through the Office of Civil Rights against any and all law enforcement officers who harm or kill innocent unarmed black men, women and children," said Rep. Maxine Waters, D-California, reading excerpts from a letter members later presented to Attorney General Loretta Lynch decrying violence. "We will not continue to ask our constituents to be patient without any hope for change," she added. "Madame Attorney General, you have the unique opportunity and constitutional responsibility to change this narrative." Caucus Chair G. K. Butterfield said the incidents this week are not isolated. "The Congressional Black Caucus is outraged with the dozens of unlawful police shootings that are taking place all across America involving unarmed, innocent African-American citizens," Butterfield told reporters. "If we were to identify each of these, it would consume this entire press conference," the North Carolina Democrat added. Multiple members of the group, which includes dozens of African-American members of Congress, have spoken out following the death of Terence Crutcher, who was shot and killed last week in Tulsa, Oklahoma, after his car broke down. The 40-year-old black man raised his hands above his head just before Officer Betty Shelby fatally shot him. Crutcher was unarmed at the time. "He posed no threat. He had no weapon. And yet he was confronted by the Tulsa Police Department and he was both tasered and shot to death," said New Jersey Rep. Bonnie Watson Coleman in a video posted on the caucus' page. "This is disgusting. And I am angry and I am hurt." In a news conference Thursday, Lynch expressed sorrow about the ongoing conflicts between law enforcement and people of color. "One of my top priorities as attorney general has been to do everything in my power to help heal those divides. And the Department of Justice will continue working tirelessly to protect the rights of all Americans," she said. "We have come together with thoughts and prayers far too many times for victims of violence -- civilians and law enforcement alike," she added. Multiple police officers and citizens have been injured this week during protests after the fatal shooting of Keith Lamont Scott by a police officer. Police say Scott was armed at the time he was fatally shot, but his family claims that he was reading a book in his vehicle when police officers approached and shot him. Charlotte-Mecklenburg Police Chief Kerr Putney said Thursday that the department would not be releasing a video of the encounter between Scott and law enforcement. Rep. Joyce Beatty told CNN's John Berman that lawmakers "can't be silent." "I think transparency is of the utmost. I understand the legalities. I understand that you have to have a full investigation," she said on "At This Hour." "We want to make sure that the US Department of Justice is engaged. We want to have independent investigators going into these communities so we take away all doubt or perceptions of the biases," the Ohio Democrat said. "We're losing too many lives." Both presidential candidates have spoken out this week about the need to improve the relationship between black communities and law enforcement. Hillary Clinton, who the Black Caucus' political action committee endorsed, addressed the shootings in a speech Wednesday in Orlando, Florida. "There is still much we don't know yet about what happened in both incidents. But we do know that we have two more names to add to a list of African-Americans killed by police officers in these encounters," Clinton said. "It's unbearable. And it needs to become intolerable." And Donald Trump said Wednesday he was "very troubled" by the fatal police shooting in Tulsa and suggested the officer in question "got scared" or was "choking," a slang term for failing under pressure. 
(CNN)Investigators have now pieced together a detailed timeline of Ahmad Rahami's movements from the time when they say he left bombs in Seaside Park, New Jersey to his capture in Linden two days later, law enforcement sources tell CNN. Based on the new information, investigators now believe Rahami went back to his family's Elizabeth, New Jersey home after the Chelsea bombings and was seen there by his family. In law enforcement interviews with family members, Rahami was described as behaving normally. According to the officials, his return home appears to be in a time period before Rahami was publicly identified as a suspect in the bombings. The federal complaint filed against Rahami describes how he came to Manhattan about two hours before the first blast on West 23rd Street in Chelsea, but does not explain a three-hour gap from then to when he is believed to have left the city via the Lincoln Tunnel at approximately 11:30 p.m., around the same time the NYPD and New York City mayor were hold their first news conference regarding the nights' terror. RELATED: Ahmad Khan Rahami: What we know about the bombing suspect Investigators have been aided both by surveillance footage as well as tracking of his phone, which had no cellular service but used available Wi-Fi. While a timeline has been created, investigators are still not clear where Rahami allegedly built the bombs he used, according the multiple sources. But one source familiar with the investigation remarked that the bombs reflected a skilled hand at assembly. Rahami himself remains in the hospital. In a federal court filing Thursday, lawyers from the US attorney's office in New Jersey wrote that they've been informed by Rahami's medical team that "he is currently incapacitated and intubated. As such, he is not in sufficient physical health for presentment to the Court -- even at a bedside proceeding." While investigators have talked to the family, they are still seeking more information on what, if anything, they knew about Rahami's intentions. According to law enforcement sources, it was the cell phone of Rahami's younger sister that contained the video of him "lighting the fuse" of a partially buried cylindrical object, followed by "a loud noise and flames, followed by billowing smoke." The complaint alleges that event took place two days before the bombings and describes how laughter is heard on the video before Rahami returns into the frame and is seen picking up the object. So far, investigators have no information to suggest the sister knew of Rahami's plans. RELATED: Where did Ahmad Khan Rahami travel? Rahami's wife has returned to the US after talking with the FBI in Dubai, according to law enforcement officials. She told investigators in Dubai that she had no knowledge of her husband's activities and is expected to talk more with the FBI now that she is back in the US. Sources tell CNN that it now appears that she left in June and a previously booked ticket to return this week. 
(CNN)Last year saw an increase in violent crime -- including murder -- compared to 2014, according to new data released by the Federal Bureau of Investigation on Monday. The annual findings showed an estimated 1,197,704 violent crimes, up 3.9% from 2014, while the murder rate spiked by 10.8% over the same span. Those crimes include "murder and nonnegligent manslaughter, rape, robbery, and aggravated assault," the FBI's website said. But the report indicated that violent crime is still below 2006 and 2011 levels for 10-year and five-year comparisons. The numbers are somewhat expected, reflecting both anecdotal and statistical evidence of an increase in violence since last October. That trend has been visible in several large cities, including Chicago, Baltimore and Washington. Other major cities such as New York and Los Angeles have not experienced the same. Attorney General Loretta Lynch said the data show "we still have so much work to do," but stressed the overall numbers are down compared to several years ago. "Violent crime tears at the fabric of our common life -- and so any increase in violent crime is of the deepest concern to me as Attorney General and to the entire Department of Justice," Lynch said. The findings are part of the FBI's annual crime data report, which is released around the same time every year. They are certain to figure prominently in this year's presidential race, perhaps as early as Monday evening, when Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump square off in the first general election debate at Hofstra University in Hempstead, New York. A similar trend of increasing violent, concentrated in some cities, appears to have continued into 2016. Data from the largest US cities for the first half of the year shows continued increase in violence in some big cities. 
Donald Trump’s campaign manager Kellyanne Conway praised her candidate for showing restraint at the tail end of Monday night’s debate when Hillary Clinton attacked his history of disrespectful and derogatory remarks about women. “I have to say, certainly as a woman, I appreciated the restraint at the end. I am not sure I would have been able to exercise it myself, but restraint is a virtue and it’s a presidential virtue,” Conway told MSNBC’s Morning Joe Tuesday. “To tell Hillary Clinton after she accused him of being terrible with women, to tell Hillary Clinton ‘I was prepared to go rough tonight and I am not going to do it because your husband and daughter are here.’ That is going to grow in importance in the next couple of days in a moment of great temperance and restraint.” Story Continued Below With just minutes left in Monday night’s debate, Clinton managed to work in a line of attack against Trump that she has also used most-recently in a new campaign ad, hitting the Manhattan billionaire as “a man who has called women pigs, slobs and dogs.” After the debate, Trump told CNN that ““I was going to say something extremely rough to Hillary, to her family, and I said to myself, I can't do it,” indicating that he was uncomfortable leveling such an attack with Clinton’s husband and daughter in the audience. Tuesday morning, Conway was happy to fill in the blanks for viewers wondering what exactly Trump’s attack might have been. “I think he could have said what was on millions of Americans’ minds, no doubt, that are we going to relitigate who’s been good to women and who hasn't?” Conway said. “They’re taking a couple comments he made over any number of years as a private citizen, versus where he could have gone, and I think we all can finish the sentence. People did last night, they finished the sentence, they said, you know, maybe he was going to talk about Bill Clinton's record with women, but he decided not to.” Overall, Conway said Clinton failed to deliver a “knockout punch” that would have forced Trump into a major error. Instead, Trump’s campaign manager said the former secretary of state came off as rehearsed and determined to squeeze her talking points into the conversation, regardless of how pertinent they were to the questions of moderator Lester Holt. “Donald Trump is guilty of answering the question asked, and I thought Hillary Clinton last night wanted to make sure that no matter what was asked and what was answered, she was going to repeat back to us everything that she had learned in the last week or two weeks, and that’s fine,” Conway said. “I don't think Hillary Clinton did a thing last night. If somebody can correct me, what was the big takeaway moment where she offers this huge vision for economic growth and an end to wage stagnation,” she added. “So I didn't hear any big moment for her where she convinced the 70 percent of Americans who want change, who want a different direction, that she's their gal.”
More than a dozen members of the Congressional Black Caucus marched down to the Department of Justice midday to demand federal intervention to stymie police shootings of unarmed African-Americans. "The killing of unarmed black men and women by police is a crisis," said Rep. Maxine Waters (D-Calif.). Story Continued Below The letter calls on Lynch to “aggressively pursue investigations, indictments and prosecutions through the Office of Civil Rights against any and all law enforcement officers who harm or kill innocent, unarmed black men, women and children.” CBC members said it’s also time for Congress to act. “We are going to make sure that we push for legislation so we’re going to be calling on [House Speaker] Paul Ryan to come up with some legislation that we can work on and put forward to change this. But in the meanwhile, we want the attorney general to utilize her powers,” Rep. Gregory Meeks (D-N.Y.). But other lawmakers said the proposals are already out there, they just need a push from leadership. "A lot of what we need has already been drafted, mostly by members of this caucus," said Rep. Cedric Richmond (D-La.), specifically mentioning criminal justice reform and police accountability legislation. Ryan (R-Wis.) said earlier this week he still hopes to pass criminal justice reform in the lame duck. “I think people have lost trust, they’ve lost hope in some instances,” said Charlotte Rep. Alma Adams (D), who flew back from North Carolina this morning. “They see hope here with the attorney general and they want her to step in to use her power to make sure people are treated fairly and there is some justice and there is some transparency,” she added. The members didn’t actually walk all the way from the Capitol to DOJ headquarters, which is about a mile away. Instead, lawmakers boarded a bus at the Capitol and disembarked about two blocks from DOJ, walking the rest of the way.
Hillary Clinton offered her assistance to Charlotte officials Thursday following two days of protests and violence in the city, urging the community to "come together to stop the violence." According to a pool report readout of phone conversations between Clinton, Charlotte Mayor Jennifer Roberts and North Carolina Rep. Alma Adams, the Democratic nominee emphasized the importance of restoring "the bonds of trust between police officers and the communities they serve." Story Continued Below During the call, Clinton stressed that "too many Black Americans have lost their lives and too many feel that their lives are disposable." The former secretary of state made similar comments two days prior when she lamented the “horrible” shooting death of an unarmed black man in Tulsa, Oklahoma, last Friday, adding that it is “just unbearable and needs to be intolerable." The Democratic nominee also called for unity in a time of turbulence. "They discussed the steps we must take to ensure that everyone is respected by the law, and everyone has respect for the law," according to the readout. "There are good, honorable police officers serving their communities across our country, and we must all work together to mend the wounds that exist and build the America we want our children and grandchildren to grow up in," the readout adds. Mayor Roberts later praised Clinton's initiative in reaching out to local officials during an interview on CNN, quipping that the former secretary of state had visited the city so often during the campaign that "it could almost be a second home to her." "She did lend her support to the city," Roberts said. "She understands that big cities has challenges and she wanted me to know that if there's anything she could do to help, that she would be happy to do that." Roberts said she was not aware plans by either Clinton or Trump's campaign to visit Charlotte in the coming days. Charlotte has seen two days of protests and violence following the shooting death of Keith Lamont Scott, an African-American man who was pulled over by police officer Brentley Vinson Tuesday. Twelve officers were injured on the first night of protests Tuesday, while another disputed shooting Wednesday night left a protester in critical condition. That protester died Thursday. Forty four arrests have been made. North Carolina Gov. Pat McCrocry called for a state of emergency in Charlotte late Wednesday as clashes between police officers and protesters escalated. "These police officers are showing a tremendous amount of courage and there's obviously a few hundred people who have come to our town center in Charlotte, North Carolina, which is a great city in and their major goal seems to be destruction and harm and that's wrong and it's unacceptable," McCrory said on CNN shortly after making the announcement. "We cannot tolerate violence or tolerate the destruction of property and will not tolerate the attacks towards our police officers occurring right now and I feel very strongly about that right now," he added. "That is not the American way."
Washington (CNN)House Speaker Paul Ryan dodged Tuesday when asked about Donald Trump's criticism of a former Miss Universe, trying instead to put the focus on Hillary Clinton following the first presidential debate. Trump on Fox News Tuesday defended making critical remarks about former Miss Universe Alicia Machado's weight gain back in the 1990s. The Republican nominee said she had "gained a massive amount of weight and it was a real problem." Ryan, who has been critical of Trump's comments in the past, did not bite on this one, however. "I'm not going to get into the who said what this morning on a talk show because I didn't see it," Ryan said. "I think this debate, I think people, met their expectations, and I think Hillary gave a very polished, well-rehearsed status quo defense and I think Donald Trump gave a unique Donald Trump response to the status quo," Ryan added. But gleeful Democrats, clearly happy with Monday night's outcome, latched on to Trump's Machado comments. "He's just repulsive. I mean, he really has no filter, he has no comprehension. He engages in rhetoric that is insulting to women. He doubled down this morning," said Rep. Debbie Wasserman Schultz, the former Democratic National Committee chairwoman. "Someone needs to remind him that it's the 21st century and we've evolved long past it's what women's looks and women's substance that matters. And we're about to elect the first woman president, so we'll show it to him that way." House Republicans, whose own fortunes could depend on how well Trump does on Election Day, gave him mixed reviews. Rep. Mark Sanford of South Carolina said there was a "sophomoric element" to Trump's repeated interruptions of Clinton onstage. Rep. Charlie Dent, one of a handful of remaining moderate Republicans, was critical of Trump's bragging about not paying taxes. But Rep. Tom Cole, a close ally of Ryan's, said Trump merely needed to clear the bar for looking presidential. "I think actually Trump had a pretty good night," Cole said. "Neither one of them landed a knockout punch, but I think he needed to pass the bar to be presidential. And I think he did." 
Party People is a new podcast from CNN where a pair of conservative CNN contributors talk to influential voices about the future of conservatism and the Republican party. (CNN)Cook Political Report national editor Amy Walter said undecided voters are different this election cycle because they're "absolutely clued in" with who the candidates of both major parties are -- and they still don't like what they see. "Normally what you see in those groups, people who are undecided, they're undecided because they really haven't been paid much attention," Walter told CNN's Party People podcast hosts Kevin Madden and Mary Katherine Ham in a recent conversation. Walter, who also worked for former Democratic Rep. Marjorie Margolies Mezvinsky, said undecided voters sounded like children trying to avoid hopping into a cold pool. GOP policy guru: Trump can't 'fake his way through 90 minutes' "Here, these undecided voters are absolutely clued-in and they're like that feeling we all had in school when you had to jump into the cold pool in first hour P.E., and you're like, 'I don't want to get in there, I don't want to jump in there! I know I'm going to have to get in.' So, they are undecided because they don't want to make a choice, not because they don't know about their choices," she said. Walter said for the first time that she can remember, she's having trouble trusting the data that's coming from the campaign trail, and that undecided voters are struggling to choose between the lesser of two evils. Voters say this is the ultimate 'lesser of two evils' election "What I hear from these groups, is just this idea of like 'You know, I don't know if I trust Hillary Clinton,'" she said. "One woman said, 'I don't trust Hillary Clinton on terrorism' -- to sort of get to your point of instability in the world -- 'but Donald Trump is going to get us into World War III.' So, that's why people are like 'I'd rather cut my arm off than have this election, because that's what you're making me choose from.'" Walter, who also previously worked for CNN, described how the political polarization between different demographic groups, in particular white voters and whether they have a college degree, can't be blamed entirely on Donald Trump. "It has been a dramatic shift," Walter said. "You can't blame that all on one candidate who had a great rally. This has been a steady movement that way." To hear how Walter got her start in politics and more, listen to CNN's "Party People," a new podcast where a pair of conservative CNN contributors talk to influential voices about the future of conservative politics and the Republican party. Get CNN's "Party People" podcast at CNN, Stitcher, TuneInRadio or iTunes. 
A decade ago, the U.S. Census counted 15 people living in Roanoke’s downtown. If the world knew anything about the city of 100,000 in southwest Virginia, it was likely because of the massive illuminated star beaming down from a nearby mountain, a sad reminder of a long-ago era when holiday shoppers, bearing paychecks from the railroad that dominated the local economy, thronged the downtown department stores. Story Continued Below Now Roanoke is back on the map, with people at home and away starting to talk about it in a way they haven’t since the 1880s, when the “Magic City” sprang up out of nearly nowhere around a new railway interchange like some Far West gold-mining town. The downtown has been revitalized and, for the first time in its history, has 2,000 people living in it, many of them getting to and from other parts of the city via a refurbished greenbelt. A highly competitive medical school and world-class, $77 million research institute with a top-notch neuroscience program have both sprung up near the hospital, and the institute is about to double its size. People from the outside world—attracted by the beauty of the surrounding Blue Ridge and Allegheny mountains—are moving in, reversing a 30-year population decline. Schools are good, violent crime is at a half-century low, and a public broadband network just doubled Internet speeds. Passenger rail service to Washington’s Union Station is making its return, and a tourism industry is flourishing where none existed before. The latest bit of good news, Oregon-based Deschutes Brewery, the eighth-largest craft brewery in the country, announced in March that it had chosen Roanoke for the site of its $85 million East Coast hub, bringing an initial 108 jobs. “Up until 2005, it was always, ‘Woe is us, and it’s so bad, and there was this star, which was kind of an embarrassment,’” recalls Beth Doughty, executive director of the Roanoke Regional Partnership, which markets the region to potential investors. “Now there’s a groundswell of love for the place, of community pride. We’re celebrating that star.” How did a small city in a disadvantaged region four hours from a major metropolis—one that had seen its signature industries atrophy or depart, that lacked so much as a branch campus of a state university—transform itself from the forgotten stepsister of the Appalachians into a formidable rival to Asheville, North Carolina? The answer has lessons for small, out-of-the-way cities everywhere: Roanoke’s people did it largely by themselves, in small steps and with an eye to assets and alliances in the wider region around them. “At some point we realized that we may never have the white knight come in with a Volkswagen auto plant and give us a quick win,” says Lisa Garst, a former city councilor in neighboring Salem who now heads Livable Roanoke Valley, a nonprofit that aims to engage citizens, governments and businesses in a regional planning process. “We realized what’s going to happen is going to come from people who are already invested here, know the value of the area and can stick it out for a 20-, 30- or 40-year time frame.” And it all happened in what would seem the most unlikely of places: a city created, built and controlled for most of its history by the distant investors of that most controlling and rapacious of Industrial Age corporations, the railroad. *** Virginia may be the site of the first successful English colony and cradle of presidents, but Roanoke is an extremely young city. In 1881—when Philadelphia was about to celebrate its bicentennial and there were 61,000 people living in Richmond—what’s now downtown Roanoke was nothing but fields, cow pastures and marsh a mile and a half west of the village of Big Lick, population 650. In February of that year, E.W. Clark & Company of Philadelphia dispatched surveyors to Roanoke County to find the best spot to build a hub that would connect the two railroads it had acquired: the Shenandoah Valley Railroad (which was expanding north to south) and the Norfolk & Western (which ran east to west). Big Lick’s businessmen offered the company $10,000, a free acre of land and tax exemptions if it would build the hub in their hamlet. The company agreed, took the incentives, and, to the locals’ surprise, began construction of a brand new community not in their hamlet but a mile and a half to the east near the foot of Mill Mountain. They named it Roanoke (because “Big Lick” just wouldn’t do) and within weeks it dwarfed the older village and would soon spread west and absorb it. In a matter of months, Clark & Company’s subsidiaries laid out a new street grid on the banks of the rail line and constructed 128 houses, a depot, shops, iron works, railroad offices and the grand Hotel Roanoke, which has served as the city’s central landmark ever since. Demographers define “boomtowns” as having a 15 percent annual growth rate. In the first decade after the company’s arrival, Roanoke’s population increased an average of 290 percent a year and the city became Virginia’s third biggest after Richmond and Norfolk. The speed of the growth meant a certain lack of polish. The Hartford Courant’s correspondent found “streets of temporary wooden shops and dwellings, drinking shops and ‘hotels’ with false board fronts hiding the upper half stories and big letter signs after the manner of the West.” As in the instant cities of the Far West, there were drunken fights in the saloons and brothels, unpaved roads that turned to mud when it rained and reeking open sewers beside wood sidewalks. “The town,” the Baltimore Sun reported, “suggests a mining camp or a mushroom city of Colorado.” Roanoke’s ribald reputation chastened company officials, motivating their wives to organize civic improvement efforts in the first decade of the 20th century, culminating in their contracting celebrated landscape architect John Nolen to the city in 1907. Nolen, a student of Frederick Law Olmsted Jr., is generally credited with being the father of American city planning, and for Roanoke he created what was the nation’s first comprehensive city plan. Nolen, who had been raised in an orphanage and had a rather un-Victorian empathy for the poor, was appalled that the city had “no public gardens, parks, parkways, no playground, no attractive school yards, no monuments, no public library, no open plazas or public squares … and no public buildings of distinction.” He found the living conditions in the African-American neighborhood—home to a third of the population—completely unacceptable. His plan called for comprehensive investments throughout Roanoke, including a network of parks, a river walk along the Roanoke River, playgrounds in every ward, a grand city hall and library, and the purchase of Mill Mountain for the public, a resource he likened to Mount Royal in Montreal. The plan, he said, would turn Roanoke into the “most attractive city in the state if not the entire country.” But the city fathers didn’t like the idea of investing in black neighborhoods, and voters rejected even a scaled-down bond issue. Nolen’s plan was put on the shelf. Many of its recommendations would wait a century to be implemented. *** For the next half-century, Roanoke settled into a comfortable company-town pattern, with the Norfolk & Western dominating the civic scene and the regional economy through its ownership of 400,000 acres of Appalachian coal country. The railway built its own locomotives and rolling stock near the town center, underwrote the construction of a hospital at the foot of Mill Mountain and donated land for parks and churches. The city remained sharply segregated, with African-Americans maintaining their own commercial and entertainment district right into the 1960s, when much of it was demolished in the name of “urban renewal.” By then, Roanoke had begun to feel the same forces undermining cities across the country. Federally subsidized superhighways tore through neighborhoods and funneled people to new homes in far-flung suburbs. Department stores, shops, restaurants and hotels followed them, eroding the tax base and the vitality of downtown. “By the mid-1970s, downtown Roanoke was in sad shape,” says Dwayne Yancey, editorial page editor of the Roanoke Times. “The old farmer’s market in its heart was a bad place—hookers, transvestites, dealers, all manner of shady characters. Decent people didn’t go there.” Educator Anita Price, who is African-American, arrived around this time from Baltimore, following her husband back to his home city. “I was depressed for two years because I looked around and thought, ‘Oh, Lord, how am I going to give my children a good education, give them the cultural environment that we’re used to in this area that looks absolutely devoid of any amenities?’” recalls Price, who is now vice-mayor. “It was segregated, the downtown was lily-white, and I saw no minority professionals. These things really concerned me.” The city council, deadlocked by factional differences—partisan, racial and parochial—couldn’t take action. “They would argue with each other instead of doing strategic planning, like the federal Congress now,” says retired bank executive Warner Dalhouse, who rallied city luminaries to do something about it. “Downtown was becoming a ghost town, but we believed it was the beating heart of the whole Roanoke Valley, the city lights of the whole western part of the state.” In 1975, Dalhouse and his colleagues saw an opening: The city had annexed a large chunk of county territory and, in order to give the new residents fair representation, a judge had ordered the entire city council, mayor and vice-mayor to go up for reelection, all at once. “It looked to several of us like a historic opportunity because you could elect a new council and get diversity and business expertise and energy and progressive ideas and mutual agreement all at the same time,” Dalhouse says. They drafted a bipartisan dream team—including preacher Noel Taylor (who would later become one of the first African-American mayors elected in a predominantly white Southern city) and Nick Taubman, son of the founder of Advance Auto Parts—ran them as the “Roanoke Forward” party, and raised the then unheard-of sum of $90,000 to promote their candidacies. “It was a landslide,” Dalhouse recalls of the 1976 vote. “We elected all seven.” Roanoke has a strong city-manager form of government, and the dream team hired a young, energetic outsider for the position, Bern Ewert, who had to leave his previous gig in Stratford, Connecticut, after blowing the whistle on a bribery scheme. “In Roanoke, the charge from them to me was very broad: Integrate the city workforce, improve city relations, rebuild the neighborhoods and downtown, and lower taxes,” recalls Ewert, who was 35 when he arrived just after New Year’s in 1978. “And when you finished all that, come back and talk to us.” The fact that past bond issues to do such things had been shot down by voters didn’t make the task any easier. Nor did the local preference for demolishing historic buildings rather than renovating them, as Ewert proposed. But Ewert gathered up his courage and did what nobody had previously dared to do. He went to Jack Fishwick, president of the Norfolk & Western, a man who determined the fate of entire counties in the Kentucky and West Virginia coal country but didn’t participate in city politics because, as Ewert puts it “they were so powerful they were afraid they’d skew things. I was scared of him, like everyone else was.” But he made his pitch: To save downtown, they needed his support. Fishwick agreed and, like magic in the Magic City, winds began filling the reformer’s sails. The local CBS television affiliate agreed to give Ewert’s team two prime-time slots a week to present and solicit public ideas and preferences for the revitalization of downtown, an effort called Design 79. A local department store gave his staff a storefront where they collected thousands of ideas and suggestions from more spotlight-averse citizens. “The idea was to get as many citizens involved as we possibly could,” Dalhouse says. “By the time it got to a vote”—for the $15.5 million bond issue to move forward—“literally thousands were invested in it.” The resulting plan was modular, so it could be tackled piece by piece, and included revamping the historic city market building as a food emporium, adding benches, trees and awnings to the surrounding farmers market, expanding the library and a downtown park, building parking garages and connecting downtown and the Hotel Roanoke with a new pedestrian bridge over the busy rail corridor. The centerpiece was a rehabilitation of a large 1920s commercial building on Market Square to serve as the new rent-free home of several area museums and theaters. “We knew we needed a magnet—the equivalent of an anchor store at a shopping center—to attract people to the center,” Ewert recalls. The referendum passed on the first try, with a 55 percent majority. The joint museum space, Center on the Square, was an instant hit, with 40,000 visitors on its opening weekend in 1983. “That was a real red-letter date,” says Yancey of the Times. “It gave people a reason to go there; restaurants and businesses followed, and the trend line has just continued from there.” But just as downtown was flickering back to life as an entertainment district, the rest of the city was reeling from a body blow to its identity from which it took two decades to recover. *** The shocking announcement came on an early spring day in 1982. The Norfolk & Western, which had been based in the city since its foundation, was merging with a D.C.-based rival and moving its headquarters to Norfolk, 240 miles away. The new Norfolk Southern would shed 1,500 local jobs—a third of the total and including many clerical positions—beginning a long, slow retreat from the city it had built. “In those days, they didn’t give you three weeks of media chatter beforehand, they just made an announcement and boom!” says Doughty, who worked for a local public relations firm at the time. “We were pretty happy, content and self-satisfied being a railroad town, so that was quite a kick in the pants for the community and the region.” The blows kept coming. The railroad closed the Hotel Roanoke, now a Tudor-style, 382-room edifice and as much a symbol of the town as the Mill Mountain star, shutting off its fountains and dispatching liquidators to sell off its furnishings. “To see that place closed with a chain link around it was just more bad news,” says Ray Smoot, a veteran administrator at Virginia Tech, 35 miles to the west in Blacksburg. Not long thereafter, the railroad abandoned its grand headquarters building down the hill from the hotel. People looked to the local banking powerhouse, Dominion, to fill the void, only to have it absorbed by a Charlotte rival in 1992. “It really set up a decade of civic angst,” says Yancey. “If we’re not a railroad town and we’re not a banking town, what are we?” But the marginalization of traditional power had a silver lining, observes Ed Walker, a native son who was attending Washington & Lee University School of Law, an hour to the northeast, at the time. “Everybody used to pack up their briefcases and go to the railroad and the bank to see if they could build this museum or do x, y or z,” he says. “Now there was nowhere to go to anymore. The city had to look to itself. And that created a power vacuum that let some talented and interesting and unexpected change agents come forward and try things that never could have happened when I was growing up.” The first such agent was a very large one, Virginia Tech, a public research university in the next valley to the west that had never had much to do with Roanoke. “Virginia Tech did not at the time have a first-class hotel or conference center on its campus in Blacksburg,” says Smoot, then the CEO of the Virginia Tech Foundation, the university’s investment arm. “And there was the iconic Hotel Roanoke sitting there empty.” The railroad agreed to donate the hotel to the university foundation, which allied with city officials and local civic leaders to raise $28 million to completely rehabilitate the structure, while the city put up $14 million to build a conference center wing, which opened in 1995. “That’s the thing that began Virginia Tech’s relationship with Roanoke,” Smoot says. A decade later, that relationship would move into overdrive, transforming both parties. Other higher education institutions in the region—from Roanoke College in Salem to the Virginia Community College system—partnered with civic leaders and the state to turn the old Norfolk & Western headquarters building into a higher education center, where various institutions could offer classes, continuing education and workforce training. “We’re going to change this town from a blue-collar town into a university town,” retired Norfolk & Southern chief Fishwick proclaimed during this era. “I think it’s the greatest thing to happen in Roanoke in my lifetime.” The center enrolls 2,800 students at a time, and by 2010 was estimated to be boosting the local economy by $32 million. Meanwhile, a deteriorating sewer line winding along the overgrown and ignored banks of the Roanoke River was wearing out, requiring that the city establish a right of way to properly replace it. A local nonprofit, the Valley Beautiful Foundation, introduced city leaders to the greenway concept in John Nolen’s 1907 plan: a riverside park with walking or biking trails connecting the city’s districts. Slowly, starting in the late 1990s, a greenway expanded along the new sewer lines, eventually to extend into a 285-mile network crisscrossing the valley between the Appalachian Trail to the north and the Blue Ridge Parkway to the south. They were immediately popular. “We had problems with trying to keep people off the greenways until we finished constructing them,” recalls Darlene Burcham, who was city manager during much of the build-out. “People could live in one place and work in another and not have to get in their car.” *** As the greenways expanded, Walker, by then a young, third-generation attorney doing due diligence reviews for businesses, was getting frustrated with the creative and financial limits of his profession, which was not always in alignment with his desire to effect positive social change. He had helped open the Downtown Music Lab, a nonprofit providing at-risk teens a place to play and record music (musician Dave Matthews was among the donors), but it was a project assigned to him by Dalhouse, the retired bank executive, that showed him another path. “I had early on identified Walker as a talent and had decided to give him some nudging in one direction or another,” Dalhouse says. A historic movie palace in Roanoke’s declining Grandin Village neighborhood was up for sale, and local do-gooders needed help raising $1.6 million to buy and rehabilitate it as a community theater. His instincts about Walker were spot on. “I just had this epiphany about the incredible convening power of real estate,” recalls Walker, who was amazed by how quickly people and money rallied around the project. “Nothing moves faster than community-minded capital with investing in a community’s real estate. You can take the status quo and change it immediately.” Anchored by the theater, the Grandin neighborhood promptly bounced back and is now one of the city’s most desirable areas. So, in 2002, Walker quit the law and embarked on a series of profitable, but socially minded, redevelopments in the heart of the city, a place Design 79 had shored up as an entertainment and a shopping district but where a grand total of 15 people actually lived, most of them in apartments above their ground-floor place of business. The first was the stately 10-story Colonial American Bank building, which he and a partner purchased for $1.4 million in 2003 and renovated as upscale condos ranging in size from 3,000 to 4,800 square feet. Walker’s family moved into the top floor and his partner into another condo, and Dalhouse purchased a third (which he and his wife live in today), prompting other well-heeled buyers to follow suit. Walker then bought the former Grand Piano and Furniture Company block nearby and, with the help of historic tax credits and an $880,000, no-interest loan from the city housing authority, converted it into 58 mixed-income apartments. “Condos were one thing, but it was largely unknown how many people would pay rent to live down here,” Walker says. To his shock, the entire building was leased on opening day. “Everybody looked at each other and said, ‘What just happened?’” Since then, Walker has helped develop Kirk Avenue, which runs behind the City Market area, as a restaurant and arts corridor, including a music hall that offers traveling bands free loft accommodations upstairs; transformed the decaying Patrick Henry Hotel into a mixed commercial and residential space with 134 apartments and a restored ballroom; and purchased a beloved local radio station to prevent it from abandoning its funky indie-folk-country format. He’s also donated a park and playground in Grandin Village, and developed inexpensive condos in a former Cotton Mill in another part of the city and a large riverfront property that now houses an enormous rock climbing gym. Combined, his projects to date run to some $70 million and 600,000 square feet. He founded an annual conference—CityWorks (X)po—that draws 350 experts to Roanoke to discuss “big ideas for small cities.” “Ed’s a very unusual developer in that he didn’t want to make a lot of money and run, but was more interested in the long-term benefit to the community,” says Burcham, the former city manager. “He realized we needed various income levels of housing, and he did that.” By the late aughts, downtown was taking on a 24/7 vibe, with more shops, businesses and eateries moving in to cater to residents, who numbered in the hundreds and total more than 2,000 today. A local art museum, having outgrown Center on the Square as the result of a large bequest, raised $66 million to build the new, 85,000-square-foot Taubman Museum of Art two blocks away, which opened in 2008. Even with the Great Recession that kicked off later that year, the city moved forward with step-by-step investments: two new high schools, an award-winning renovation of the main library, the revamping of a downtown park and amphitheater (which reopened with a concert by Sheryl Crow), and the continued expansion of trails and bike paths. “Hail Mary passes—going after The One Big Thing—often fail,” says Chris Morrill, a past president of the Government Finance Officers Association, who has been city manager since 2010. “You go for rapid incrementalism. You figure out where you want to go and you just keep moving: market building, new park, greenways, plaza, reopening the formal entrance of City Hall. You keep the momentum going and eventually all the naysayers say, ‘How did we get here?’” Beth Doughty of the Regional Partnership agrees. “People want economic development to be a silver bullet, but it’s not. It’s like spinning plates,” she says. “No one person or entity is responsible for all of the plates, but you do want them all spinning at the same time.” But Roanoke still had a problem: What did it want to be? *** Despite the progress, the city remained in an identity crisis through the 1990s and well into the aughts, disheartened that it had been left behind by upland Southern rivals such as Asheville and Charlotte. “I was asked from the day I arrived, ‘What is your vision of the city?’” says Burcham, who was city manager from 2000 to early 2010. “I said it’s not my vision, it’s the community’s vision, but everybody needs to get away from the idea that the goal was to be Charlotte, that if we didn’t get a particular airline coming here we were doomed.” Meanwhile, the board of the Roanoke Regional Partnership—a joint venture of regional city and county governments that spent much of its time trying to lure northeastern manufacturers to the region—decided it wanted to also focus on improving the area’s competitiveness. “Talent is the currency of the 21st century, and we needed to be more concerned about attracting it,” says Doughty, who left her position as head of the regional chamber of commerce in 2008 to take on the task. Essential to that was finding a new narrative the community could embrace, she says, and it became clear to her what it was. “If you asked people what’s the best thing about Roanoke, they would say, ‘The mountains, they’re so beautiful,’” she says. “But they talked about them like they were wallpaper. If we could embrace the idea we were an outdoors city, we could monetize the outdoors and really strengthen the region’s real advantage, its livability.” The Partnership hired a full-time outdoor branding guru, Pete Eshelman, who set about building partnerships with governments, businesses, nonprofits, and state and federal park authorities to extend trails, reopen whitewater rafting destinations, improve fishing and launch America’s Toughest Marathon, an annual event so-called because running it involves a 7,400-foot ascent. He’s helped organize professional road-cycling events, get a top BMX rider to develop a plan for an action sports park and raise money to build new canoe ramps and kayak park on the river. “This could only work if we had buy-in from the community, so it had to be real and true,” Eshelman says. “Now when they travel somewhere and talk with people about what Roanoke is like, an outdoor narrative is going to be part of the description, and that wasn’t the case before.” Simultaneously, the region’s visitor promotion agency, which previously focused on getting conventions to come to town, began marketing the area as “Virginia’s Blue Ridge,” a place of scenic beauty and outdoor adventure with a happening city in the middle. As a result, over the past five years travel spending has grown by more than a fifth, and hotel revenue by 25 percent. More visitors are coming—creating 600 more jobs—but the real goal of the effort is to get some of them to decide to come back and put down roots. “This is more than just tourism; this is workforce development, because we’re competing for world talent,” says Landon Howard, the agency’s president. A good thing, too, because suddenly Roanoke needed to recruit a lot of very talented people very quickly to partake in the most consequential undertaking since E.W. Clark & Company showed up back during Chester Arthur’s presidential administration. *** There’s been a hospital at the foot of Mill Mountain since 1900, when railroad officials decided they needed a place for injured workers to be treated. The current incarnation, Roanoke Memorial, was by the early 21st century the flagship of a sprawling nonprofit hospital network, a fleet of air ambulances and the only Level I trauma center in the western half of the state. The network, Carilion, was financially sound, but changes in how health care providers are reimbursed required that it shift its focus from managing hospitals to improving health outcomes across the surrounding communities, a clinic model that required a hiring bonanza, including a quadrupling of its physician staff. But how to recruit and retain so many highly skilled people to come to the mountains of southwestern Virginia? An essential component would be to open a medical school in Roanoke, an attractive feature for many of medicine’s best and brightest, recalls Nancy Agee, then Carilion’s chief operations officer and now its CEO. “It creates a different vibe and helps satisfy the sense of curiosity that many of the best and brightest physicians have,” she says. “We could do it ourselves, but wouldn’t it make more sense to find a partner?” By good fortune, a partner was close at hand. Down at Virginia Tech, President Charles Steger had challenged his institution to grow from a lower-50-ranked research university to one of the top 30 by 2013, a move that would require moving into fields funded by the National Institutes of Health. “We didn’t have a human medicine school, but we did have a lot of experience with technology transfer and research-related entrepreneurship,” says Smoot, the Virginia Tech administrator. “So a conversation began with Carilion.” The result was two joint ventures to be built in 2010 on what had been an old industrial site on the way from the hospital to downtown Roanoke: an elite, research-intensive medical school and a biomedical research institute with world-class aspirations. They approached Michael Friedlander, then chair of the neuroscience department at one of the nation’s leading and largest medical research institutions, the Baylor College of Medicine at Houston’s Texas Medical Center, to head the institute. “I only knew where Roanoke was because for some reason it was the place the Weather Channel gave for the region’s temperatures,” he says. “But they said you are going to get to build from scratch an innovative biomedical research enterprise and you can pretty much build it around your vision. And of course, you don’t often get offered stuff like that. It was a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity.” Friedlander took the job but knew the greatest challenge would be attracting top people from established institutions like Texas Medical Center, which had more employees (105,000) than Roanoke had people. “I had been struck by the natural beauty of the place and by the people’s pride in it and wanting to make it work,” he says. “Most academic medical centers in the U.S. are in not-so-great parts of major cities. Here we’re right next to a major health center with one of the top 12 busiest emergency departments in the country and you can go out at lunch time and be pulling trout out of the Roanoke River in hip waders.” If he could get people to visit, Friedlander thought, he would have a shot. His fishing expedition worked. Today, the Virginia Tech Carilion Research Institute has some of the top researchers in neuroscience working on everything from the decision-making patterns of drug addicts to the use of brain imaging in psychiatry. It will break ground soon on a $66 million expansion that will double the number of research teams to 50. The medical school next door is also research intensive, with the unusual requirement that students undertake a research project of publishable quality. Although the institution is only six yers old, this year it had 4,600 applications for 42 spots. Commercial research spinoffs are beginning to populate the downtown side of the complex, an area being promoted as the Innovation Corridor. “We’ve gone from a train city to a brain city,” says Mayor Sherman Lea, who, like the vice-mayor, circuit court clerk, school board chair and other city-wide elected officials, is African-American. (“When you have a city with less than 30 percent African-Americans in the mountains next to Tennessee, you wouldn’t think that. But that’s how we’ve changed,” he says of the electorate’s choices.) And soon it will be a beer city as well, having lured Deschutes here instead of long-envied Asheville and 48 other cities the brewery considered up and down the East Coast. Deschutes chief financial officer Peter Skrbek says he was drawn by logistics and clean water, the strong public schools and an outdoorsy culture akin to the company’s home in Bend, Oregon. “But the biggest thing was just being wanted by the community and their enthusiasm for us to come there each time we would visit,” he says. “I’ve never seen such enthusiasm for a company’s investment.” When the Deschutes news broke, one industry publication declared Roanoke the new Asheville. Over at the Roanoke Times, Yancey’s editorial responded: “We’d gently beg to differ,” he wrote. “We’re the new Roanoke.”
Donald Trump knows how to work a Republican room. Give him that. Give him a gym packed full of yahoos wearing backward baseball caps and he’ll bring down the rafters. Story Continued Below But give him a debate crowd where they let Democrats and independents in, well, he doesn’t play so well. Some candidates give energy to the crowds and some get energy from the crowds. Trump is more of a getter. He needs the crowds. And when the people are not yelling and shouting and stamping their feet for him, he just seems to dry up. Give him a crowd where the audience actually wants to hear what the two candidates for president have to say and Trump is at a disadvantage. He is used to audiences that are already primed and ready. They shout the lines to him. They shout, “Wall!” and he goes into his bit about building a wall on the Mexican border. They yell, “Benghazi!” and he goes into his bit about how Hillary Clinton was asleep at the switch. But it wasn’t Hillary who was asleep Monday night at the first presidential debate at Hofstra University in New York. It was Trump. He turned out to be a snooze. He needed to be an 11 and he turned in a performance that ranked about a 4. Nothing he said seemed to work. "It's terrible what's been going on in Chicago,” he said. “I have property there." Nothing like keeping your priorities straight, I guess. He was so off his game that he didn’t even remember to bring up the wall or Benghazi. Maybe it was his health. Trump had not been on stage for two minutes before Twitter lit up with mentions of his sniffing into the microphone. Which he did on and on. And was interrupted only by his sipping of water. And rubbing his nose with his index finger. A nonsensical “issue” to bring up when talking about the presidency? If so, why did the Trump campaign make such a big thing out of Hillary’s recent — and fleeting — bout of pneumonia? Who knows what Trump really has? If, like a lot of germophobes (he hates to shake hands, but campaigning has forced him to do so) he is also a hypochondriac, then his life must be a psychological hell right now. He knew this first debate was going to be tough. Before it started I heard a TV reporter say, “Arguably, this is the biggest night in modern American political history.” (One tip: Whenever you hear a reporter say something is “arguably,” the answer is always, “No, it’s not.”) But it was sure to be important. And Trump could have used a strategy that wouldn’t have cost him the millions of dollars he has been shelling out to the dopes around him. He could have studied up. He could have practiced. Just a little. And the need for practice is hardly a secret. These 90-minute slugfests are difficult. It’s difficult just to stand up for 90 minutes, let alone stand up for 90 minutes and talk and make sense. Hillary knew that. She is married to the best debater I have ever seen. And Bill Clinton practiced so hard for his presidential debates that he drove his staff batty. While most campaigns do mock debates to prepare, they rarely do full 90-minute mock debates every day. It’s just too draining. But Bill would insist on full mock debates and then make everybody sit down and watch the debates on tape and evaluate every word he said and every gesture he made. So Hillary did not just prepare for Monday night, her staff told reporters she was “overpreparing.” And so how did she spend the morning of the debate? By holding a mock-debate. During the real debate, she hit virtually all her talking points. She didn’t hold back. Trump, she said, had started his presidential career with racist lies over birtherism and “he has a long record of racist behavior.” There was only one argument, in fact, that I thought she blew. “I have met a lot of people who have been stiffed by you,” Hillary said. “Are they not owed an apology?” Actually, they are owed more than an apology. They are owed money. Roger Simon is POLITICO's chief political columnist.
The beginning of the presidential candidacy of Donald Trump included statements that would have ended the campaign of any other politician. Has an announcement speech ever looked so much like a flashily produced political suicide? Did he really just call a key part of the electorate criminals and rapists? Ever since his blunt, racially divisive debut in Trump Tower in June 2015, Trump has proven that gaffes do not singe his hide like they do the fragile and fretful politicians who tiptoe through the typical campaign for public office. Time and again, Trump poured gasoline on himself and lit a match. Time and again, pundits predicted fatal self-immolation. Instead, Trump often rode the ensuing firestorm like an Atlas rocket. His poll numbers actually went up after he insulted John McCain’s war record. What mainstream politician has ever said something like that, much less received a boost out of it? The only thing more stunning than Trump’s dismantling of campaign norms has been how consistently he has flirted with disaster. Story Continued Below He has insulted brown people, black people, Muslim people, Jewish people. He has insulted women. He has insulted the grieving parents of a dead soldier. He has mocked a disabled person and expressed admiration for dictators. He has ham-handedly pandered to a politically critical portion of the population by posting to social media a picture of gringo Tex-Mex captioning it, “I love hispanics!” He has suggested he could shoot somebody and not lose votes. He has openly talked about the possibility of the assassination of his opponent. Twice. And these are just the insults, not the demonstrable falsehoods. It helped him dispatch 16 challengers in the extended primaries of a party of which he has been an off-and-on member, and it has taken him to Monday night, to the first of three debates against Hillary Clinton—his best chance yet to get an edge in the race to become the 45th president of the United States. Amid the pre-debate speculation that he could say something at the debate that would cost him the election, it’s difficult to imagine what he could say that would do what so many other statements of his were unable to and end his campaign. Here are 37 of his gaffes that could have been fatal—but somehow weren’t. 1. “When Mexico sends its people, they’re not sending their best. They’re not sending you. They’re not sending you. They’re sending people that have lots of problems, and they’re bringing those problems with us. They’re bringing drugs. They’re bringing crime. They’re rapists. And some, I assume, are good people.” June 16, 2015, announcement speech. 2. “He’s not a war hero. He was a war hero because he was captured. I like people who weren’t captured.” July 17, 2015, Family Leadership Summit in Iowa. Trump was referring to Senator John McCain, a former Navy pilot who was tortured during his five-and-a-half years as a POW during the Vietnam war. 3. “You could see there was blood coming out of her eyes, blood coming out of her wherever.” August 7, 2015, CNN interview about Megyn Kelly, one of Fox News’ moderators in the first Republican debate. 4. “Well I really watch the shows. You really see a lot of great, you know, when you watch your show and all of the other shows, and you have the generals and you have certain people that you like.” August 16, 2015, interview on NBC’s “Meet the Press,” trying to name his foreign policy advisors. 5. “Look at that face! Would anyone vote for that? Can you imagine that, the face of our next president?!” September 9, 2015, in Rolling Stone, talking about GOP candidate Carly Fiorina. 6. “It has not been easy for me ... My father gave me a small loan of a million dollars.” October 26, 2015, on NBC’s “TODAY” show. 7. “@mygreenhippo #BenCarson is now leading in the #polls in #Iowa. Too much #Monsanto in the #corn creates issues in the brain? #Trump #GOP.” October 22, 2015, retweet by @realDonaldTrump. 8. “I want to know who are the soldiers carrying suitcases with $50 million? How stupid are we? I wouldn’t be surprised if those soldiers, if the cash didn’t get there.” October 1, 2015, speech in Keene, New Hampshire, suggesting U.S. soldiers embezzled cash intended for disbursement to officials in Iraq and Afghanistan. 9. “Now the poor guy, you ought to see this guy. ‘Ah, I don’t know what I said! I don’t remember!’” November 24, 2015, physically mocks New York Times reporter Serge Kovaleski, who has a congenital condition called arthrogryposis that affects his joints. 10. “I think, for me, nuclear is just the power, the devastation is very important to me.” December 15, 2015, answering a debate question about his priority in the “nuclear triad,” the three ways (air, land and sea) that nuclear missiles can be launched. 11. “The other thing with the terrorists is you have to take out their families, when you get these terrorists, you have to take out their families. They care about their lives, don’t kid yourself. When they say they don’t care about their lives, you have to take out their families,” December 2, 2015, interview on “Fox & Friends.” 12 a. “Is there anyone in this room who doesn’t renegotiate deals? Probably 99 percent of you. Probably more than any room I've ever spoken in.” 12 b. “I’m a negotiator like you folks were negotiators.” 12 c. “You’re not going to support me because I don’t want your money,” December 3, 2015, speaking at the Republican Jewish Coalition. 13. “Donald J. Trump is calling for a total and complete shutdown of Muslims entering the United States until our country’s representatives can figure out what is going on.” December 7, 2015, reading from a statement by the Trump campaign. 14. “Two Corinthians, right? Two Corinthians 3:17, that’s the whole ballgame. Where the spirit of the Lord—right?—is, there is liberty!” February 18, 2016, speech at Liberty University, citing the book of the Bible that Christians call “Second Corinthians.” 15. “So if you see somebody getting ready to throw a tomato, knock the crap out of ’em, would you? Seriously. Okay? Just knock the hell — I promise you, I will pay for the legal fees. I promise. I promise.” February 1, 2016, rally in Cedar Rapids, Iowa. 16. “If and when the Vatican is attacked by ISIS, which as everyone knows is ISIS’s ultimate trophy, I can promise you that the Pope would have only wished and prayed that Donald Trump would have been President because this would not have happened. … For a religious leader to question a person’s faith is disgraceful. I am proud to be a Christian and as President I will not allow Christianity to be consistently attacked and weakened, unlike what is happening now, with our current President. No leader, especially a religious leader, should have the right to question another man’s religion or faith.” February 18, 2016. Press release from the Trump campaign. 17. “Well, just so you understand, I don't know anything about David Duke, okay? I don't know anything about what you’re even talking about with white supremacy or white supremacists. So, I don't know.” February 28, 2016 on CNN, asked if he’ll disavow the endorsement of former Ku Klux Klan leader David Duke. 18. “Lyin' Ted Cruz just used a picture of Melania from a G.Q. shoot in his ad. Be careful, Lyin' Ted, or I will spill the beans on your wife!” March 22, 2016, tweet from @realDonaldTrump. 19. “The answer is that there has to be some form of punishment.” March 30, 2016, at an MSNBC town hall meeting in Green Bay, Wisconsin, discussing what should happen to women who procure illegal abortions. 20. “It's not like, gee whiz, nobody has them. So, North Korea has nukes. Japan has a problem with that. I mean, they have a big problem with that. Maybe they would in fact be better off if they defend themselves from North Korea … Including with nukes, yes, including with nukes," April 3, 2016, interview with Chris Wallace on Fox. 21. “I was down there, and I watched our police and our firemen, down on 7-Eleven, down at the World Trade Center, right after it came down. And I saw the greatest people I’ve ever seen in action.” April 18, 2016, speech in Buffalo, New York, misidentifying the 9/11 attacks. 22. “His father was with Lee Harvey Oswald prior to Oswald’s being — you know, shot. I mean, the whole thing is ridiculous. What is this, right prior to his being shot, and nobody even brings it up. They don’t even talk about that. That was reported, and nobody talks about it. I mean, what was he doing — what was he doing with Lee Harvey Oswald shortly before the death? Before the shooting? It’s horrible.” May 3, 2016, interview with Fox News, repeating unsubstantiated allegations that Ted Cruz’s father was involved in the assassination of John F. Kennedy. 23. “Happy #CincoDeMayo! The best taco bowls are made in Trump Tower Grill. I love Hispanics!” May 5, 2016, tweet by @realDonaldTrump. 24. “And rape.” May 19, 2016, Fox News interview with Sean Hannity, in which Trump alleges that Bill Clinton committed rape as well as other sexual offenses. 25. “The judge was appointed by Barack Obama, federal judge. Frankly, he should recuse himself because he’s given us ruling after ruling after ruling, negative, negative, negative. What happens is the judge, who happens to be, we believe, Mexican, which is great. I think that’s fine.” May 27, 2016, rally in San Diego, in which he criticizes Indiana-born Judge Gonzalo Curiel, who, on the basis of his Mexican ancestry, Trump alleges cannot judge fairly in a lawsuit related to Trump University. 26. “Look at my African American over here!” June 3, 2016, rally in Redding, California. 27. “Just arrived in Scotland. Place is going wild over the vote. They took their country back, just like we will take America back. No games!” June 24, 2016, tweet by @realDonaldTrump from Scotland. 28. “He was a bad guy—really bad guy. But you know what? He did well? He killed terrorists. He did that so good. They didn’t read them the rights. They didn’t talk. They were terrorists. Over. Today, Iraq is Harvard for terrorism.” July 5, 2016. 29. “Russia, if you’re listening, I hope you’re able to find the 30,000 emails that are missing. I think you will probably be rewarded mightily by our press. Let's see if that happens." July 27, 2016, at news conference in Doral, Florida, encouraging Russia to hack into Hillary Clinton’s emails. 30. “If you look at his wife, she was standing there. She had nothing to say. She probably—maybe she wasn't allowed to have anything to say.” July 30, 2016, interview with ABC News, referring to Khizr Khan and his wife Ghazala, parents of a Muslim U.S. soldier killed in Iraq. At the Democratic National Convention, Khizr Khan criticized Trump for his anti-constitutional ban on Muslims. 31. “It’s against two NFL games. I got a letter from the NFL saying ‘This is ridiculous.’” July 30, 2016, in an interview with ABC about the presidential debate schedule. The NFL categorically denied sending such a letter. 32. “He’s not going into Ukraine, OK? Just so you understand. He’s not going to go into Ukraine, alright? You can mark it down and you can put it down, you can take it anywhere you want.” July 30, 2016, interview on ABC, referring to Russian President Vladimir Putin, whose 2014 annexation of Crimea proved that he was already in Ukraine. 33. “I would like to think she would find another career or find another company if that was the case. I don’t think she would allow herself to be subjected to that.” August 1, 2016, interview in USA Today, discussing how he would expect his daughter Ivanka to handle sexual harassment in the workplace. 34. “I always wanted to get the Purple Heart. This was much easier.” August 2, 2016, at a rally in Ashburn, Virginia where a supporter presented him with a copy of a medal the veteran had been awarded in Iraq. The Purple Heart is awarded to members of U.S. military who are injured or killed while serving. 35. “If [Hillary Clinton] gets to pick her judges, nothing you can do folks. Although the Second Amendment people, maybe there is, I don’t know.” August 9, 2016, at a rally in Wilmington, North Carolina. Many read his remark as a suggestion that opponents of Clinton should take up arms against her if she’s elected president. 36. “ISIS is honoring President Obama. He is the founder of ISIS. He founded ISIS. And I would say the co-founder would be crooked Hillary Clinton.” August 10, 2016, interview on ABC News. 37. “You’re living in poverty, your schools are no good, you have no jobs, 58 percent of your youth is unemployed. What the hell do you have to lose?" August 19, 2016, at a rally in Dimondale, Michigan, explaining why African Americans should vote for him.
Police robots are all over the news. Early Monday morning, FBI agents and New Jersey police officers used a bomb-squad robot to try to defuse the makeshift bombs found near a train station in Elizabeth. (The explosives ended up detonating after police used the machine to try to cut a wire.) Earlier this month, sheriff’s deputies from Los Angeles used a robot to disarm a violent suspect who had barricaded himself inside a berm in a Southern California desert. And last Friday, another robot was used to force doors open as police searched for a gunman hiding out in an Amtrak train. But perhaps the most ground-breaking—and potentially unnerving—case of robot-enabled policing took place in July when officers in Dallas used a robot to subdue a gunman, and ended up killing him. The man, later identified as Micah X. Johnson, had shot and killed police officers at a protest in the city’s downtown. His rampage left five officers dead and at least nine other people injured. The suspect fled into a local community college (not a parking structure, as had initially been reported) where he barricaded himself in an alcove at the end of a corridor. The police on his tail couldn’t approach because Johnson was still firing at them periodically, and there was nowhere to take cover in the corridor. During the standoff, Johnson told the officers he wanted to kill more people, and he said he had planted bombs in the area. With about 58 students and college staff still locked down inside the building—including eight people sheltering in a room on the floor below the shooter—the officers decided they could not wait Johnson out. Instead, they placed plastic explosives on a robot and sent it down the corridor. When it got to the alcove, they detonated the explosives, ultimately killing Johnson. Story Continued Below The news that the Dallas police department had killed a suspect using a robot shocked the country. It struck many as ruthless and excessive, if not downright illegal. To many, the killing seemed like an extra-judicial execution. It has provoked new fears at a time when police across the United States are being accused of excessive use of force, especially against blacks, including recent incidents just this past week in Tulsa, Okla, and Charlotte, N.C. For some critics, the idea of using bomb-enabled police robots to kill suspects could make matters only worse, calling to mind images of Terminators run amok or military drones taking out wedding parties. It has also reignited debates about “militarized policing.” “When things get easy, they tend to get overused,” said Jay Stanley, an American Civil Liberties Union policy analyst who studies the civil-liberties implications of new technologies. He is concerned that the Dallas incident—which experts say is the first known case of police using a robot to deploy lethal force—could be the beginning of a slippery slope. “The kind of incident where there is a clear and present danger represents the tip of a very large pyramid,” he said. There is evidence the Dallas police resorted to plastic explosives only because there were no other viable options. Thor Eells, chairman of the National Tactical Officers Association, told POLITICO that the Dallas police were hoping to take Johnson alive, going so far as bringing a trauma surgeon to the scene to begin treating Johnson if he survived the blast. The plastic explosives were necessary, experts say, because the officers needed to make sure Johnson would be incapacitated immediately (and thus unable to trigger his bombs). Both tear gas and pepper spray, as painful as they are, would have left him functional, and a “flash-bang” grenade ran the risk of detonating any bombs Johnson might have on him. Still, Dallas’ robot-enabled killing raises a host of questions that the wider society is still grappling with. “Does this remain something that is only used in extraordinary circumstances?” asked Stanley. “Or do police departments start clamoring for robots specifically designed to use force?” Stanley believes armed robots could make police officers quicker to pull a trigger, an unnerving prospect at a time when civil liberties activists say too many police are still too quick to do that already. “Let’s say there’s a protest, and there aren’t any police on the scene,” he said, “and a robot starts spraying pepper spray, or tear gas, or rubber bullets, on the crowd, and they do it with poor situational awareness”—the cameras on robots don’t provide the same visual acuity to their operators that a human on scene would have organically—“and they hit people who are not involved, or they do it when it’s not necessary.” SWAT experts push back against such fears. They point to existing laws that currently govern the situations in which law enforcement agencies may use force. “I am still legally responsible for having to explain and justify [any] level of force,” said Eells. “The mechanism of how the force is delivered is irrelevant to the courts.” And unlike firearms, which are distributed to all officers, only specialized SWAT teams own the large, expensive robots capable of killing a person. “You’re not going to see a plethora of these things in the future,” said Sid Heal, president of the California Association of Tactical Officers who, while serving in the Los Angeles Sheriff’s Department, was a national leader in assessing and pioneering new technologies. Stanley counters, however, that every new technology introduces gray areas in which new kinds of abuse can seep in. He points to Tasers. Laws concerning use of force govern Tasers the same way they govern robots or pistols. “As it happens, [Tasers] are vastly overused,” Stanley said. “They’re often used to get recalcitrant suspects to cooperate with the police [or] as a punishment for dissing a cop.” Plus, though they were promoted as “less-than-lethal” alternatives to guns, they have nevertheless killed people. “Often, the way new technologies play out on the ground is not the way you would expect,” Stanley said. All of this raises questions about whether new laws are needed to govern robots and drones. Some states, including Oregon, Virginia and Wisconsin, have outright banned law enforcement agencies from arming drones. Only North Dakota, so far, has explicitly permitted police to put weapons on drones, though only with less-than-lethal munitions, such as tear gas, bean bags and Tasers. In states with no such laws, police departments simply operate as they see fit, within the context of existing law. Ryan Calo, a professor at the University of Washington who’s a leading expert on the intersection of robots and law, said making law enforcement agencies draft policies about how and when they can use robots and drones forces them to think through scenarios in advance. “If you want to put a Taser on a drone and tase a mentally ill person,” Calo said, “or if you want to follow someone around with a drone, that’s where you need to have a process in place that you’ve properly vetted with the leadership.” *** Robots are not new to policing. Most people are familiar with the bomb-squad versions, which have been in use for about 20 years. The large machines are maneuvered by remote control to inspect suspicious objects, and sometimes detonate them, while keeping humans out of harm’s way. What’s less well known is that SWAT teams are also increasingly using robots. The most common application is reconnaissance. In the middle of a standoff, where a suspect is barricaded in a room or a building, SWAT officers can toss small, camera-bearing devices, nicknamed “throwbots,” into a building to assess the situation. Robots can be used to deliver phones to people police are negotiating with. They can be used to search a parking lot for a suspect hiding under a car—instead of having an officer lower their head and risk getting it blown off. Robots have been used in more creative situations as well. In one case, a SWAT team used a robot to reach through a window and pull a blanket off of a suicidal person to check whether he had a weapon. (He didn’t.) In other cases, robots have swept homes for booby traps, and they’re often used to toss tear gas or pepper spray into rooms, to disable suspects before officers enter. In the California desert earlier this month, sheriff’s deputies used a robot to creep up behind the suspect and take away his rifle while he was distracted by helicopters and police officers yelling at him through loudspeakers. Police argue that these kinds of robots actually help save lives. Officers who are executing a search warrant in a volatile situation can send a robot in first. Send in an armed human, and the situation could quickly escalate into a shooting match. Send in a robot, and police can get a lay of the land and even start communicating with a suspect before putting an officer into the mix. Using a robot to approach the suspect in the desert earlier this month kept everyone safe, said Capt. Jack Ewell, head of the Los Angeles County Sheriff Department’s Special Enforcement Division. As soon as the suspect realized his weapon was gone, he surrendered. “It prevented a potential shooting in which he could have been harmed, we could have been harmed, or a stray bullet could have been gone somewhere,” Ewell said. But using a robot to kill? That’s something new. The SWAT experts POLITICO spoke with said they didn’t know of a previous situation where a police department had used a robot to deploy lethal force. But they added it’s not likely we’ll suddenly see police departments regularly using robots this way. For one thing, robots like the one in Dallas are expensive. Most SWAT teams can’t afford them. The machines are large and unwieldy, weighing 400 to 800 pounds. Police departments need trailers just to move them about. They aren’t particularly mobile. While they can roll down a simple corridor or street, they can’t maneuver through a building as quickly a human can. (The robot used in Dallas, a Remotec Andros Mark V-A1, weighs nearly 800 pounds, and it can go only 3.5 mph.) And while robots can be outfitted with a firearm, the robot is never going to have the same agility in handling a dynamic situation as a well-trained SWAT officer. We also won’t soon be seeing autonomous machines—Terminator-style “killer robots” that act on their own. Even the military doesn’t give its robots independent shooting power. Military drones do perform certain actions on their own—like flying to a specific location or circling a target. But when it comes to pulling a trigger, the military still insists on keeping a “man in the loop.” Police departments are no different. “We recognize the grave responsibility we have with making the decision to use force,” said NTOA’s Eells, who is also commander of the Colorado Springs SWAT team. “There’s a tremendous reluctance to give that up.” As for the controversial kinds of drone killings that the U.S. has committed overseas, the laws governing the military use of force abroad are different from those that govern law enforcement agencies at home. “Domestic law is based on the Constitution,” Heal said. “Everything we do has to be traced back to that rock.” *** As much as anything, the public’s reaction to the Dallas robot underlines the gulf between police departments and the public in their understandings of the new devices. In a news conference immediately following the standoff, police Chief David Brown said the department had used a “bomb robot.” The shorthand was clear to him; he meant the department had used a robot belonging to the bomb squad. But many in the public understood those words differently: that there was a robot designed to be a bomb. This, as much as anything, might be what many found so upsetting. And while it was clear to law enforcement officers across the country that the Dallas SWAT team’s primary goal was to subdue Johnson—not kill him—the lack of detail released by Dallas police about the challenges it faced in apprehending Johnson, especially in an age when so many people are already up in arms about police killings of black men, left many in the public with the impression that the police simply sought to execute him. Even those who study this subject were left confused about the police’s objectives. “I was surprised that they did purposely kill someone with a robot,” said one expert. Police departments naturally view new technologies just as additional tools that don’t fundamentally change the parameters in which they operate. The public, however, often sees new devices as potentially threatening. Take Seattle, for example. Several years ago, the city’s police department bought two Draganflyer X6 drones—essentially hand-held mini-copters—as reconnaissance tools for use during hostage standoffs and search-and-rescue operations. Seattle residents, however, immediately became alarmed about the ways the devices could threaten personal privacy, and they rose up against them. The backlash might have surprised the Seattle police, knowing as they did that any surveillance inside a private space would require the same kind of warrant as an inspection done in person. In the face of the outcry, however, the city’s mayor shut the program down. (The copters were gifted to the LA police.) The implications, according to UW’s Calo, are potentially unfortunate. “Now, if a kid gets lost in a park,” he said, “the Seattle police department can’t roll out their drone to find them.” In a 2012, Lt. Anthony Martinez of the Fresno police department wrote a thesis for California’s Law Enforcement Command College that pinpointed this very problem. The paper examined how new types of robots could potentially save police lives by removing humans from scenarios in which robots could perform equally well. Martinez surveyed representatives from law enforcement and civic groups about what they saw as the potential challenges. Costs and legal questions certainly came up, but the top concern was society’s acceptance. Take the example of a robot performing an initial house search. “From a law enforcement perspective, it seems like a no-brainer,” Martinez said, because you’re reducing the chance an officer will get hurt. “But if you flip that around, people might not be ready to have a robot come into their house and tell them what to do.” In order to get the public to accept the use of robots, Martinez wrote in his paper, police departments first need to get the public familiar with them. That makes the Dallas operation a potential game-changer. Now that the public has seen a robot deploy force, previous institutional reluctance to use the devices this way might start to break down. “Public perception is an important part of this,” Heal said. Commanders who before might have been reluctant to authorize the use of force by a robot, he said, “now see that their careers are survivable.” The fact that we might see novel uses of robots in critical situations is why the ACLU’s Jay Stanley thinks there needs to be more discussion of what communities are willing to accept, especially in today’s incendiary environment. “This has started a whole new conversation,” he said. “It’s worth pausing to think about what it means for us as a society.”
The bribery and corruption trial for New Jersey Democratic Sen. Bob Menendez will be delayed while he seeks Supreme Court intervention in his case, a federal court has ordered. The Justice Dept. had asked that Menendez's trial move ahead after the Third Circuit of Appeals rejected his bid to the have the allegations against him thrown out. Story Continued Below But the Third Circuit ruled on Monday that the trial will be delayed while Menendez petitions the Supreme Court to hear his appeal. That means that any trial — if it does take place — likely won't happen before 2017. Menendez was indicted in April 2015 for allegedly accepting hundreds of thousands of dollars in improper gifts and campaign contributions as bribes in exchange for using his office to help Dr. Salomon Melgen, a longtime friend and major campaign contributor. The Justice Dept. alleges Menendez received nearly $1 million worth of gifts and campaign contributions from Melgen. In turn, Menendez allegedly intervened on Melgen’s behalf in a multimillion-dollar billing dispute with the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services and attempted to enforce a $500 million port security contract with the Dominican Republic, as well as obtaining visa applications for several of Melgen’s girlfriends. Menendez has argued that under the Speech or Debate clause — a constitutional privilege that shields lawmakers and staff from legal action over legitimate legislative activities — he could not be charged with improperly aiding Melgen. He asked the Third Circuit to overrule a lower court, which had let the Justice Department's case against him move forward. The Third Circuit refused to dismiss the case, but did grant Menendez's request to delay the trial.
11/19/16, 3:14 PM CET BY Chris Spillane So is anti-establishment message of Nigel Farage, the Labour leader said. 11/19/16, 1:55 PM CET BY Sarah Wheaton Alumni of the Obama White House spent days mourning Trump’s win. Now they’re ready to fight. 11/19/16, 11:37 AM CET BY Chris Spillane Dick Schoof: ‘Chance of attack in the Netherlands is real.’ 11/19/16, 10:38 AM CET BY Chris Spillane Government could focus on starting the process of leaving the bloc sooner. 11/19/16, 10:13 AM CET BY Benjamin Oreskes Diplomats say the president-elect already has a playbook to undermine the global body. 11/19/16, 10:01 AM CET BY Michael Crowley and Nahal Toosi Flynn, Bannon represent ‘Islamophobic’ thinking of the type rejected by Bush and Obama, critics say. 11/19/16, 5:25 AM CET BY Michael Kruse The blue-collar workers who put Donald Trump in the White House are ready for him to deliver. How much time will they give him? 11/19/16, 5:20 AM CET BY Ryan Heath, Tara Palmeri, Harry Cooper and Quentin Ariès  11/18/16, 9:09 PM CET BY Harry Cooper A Polish political party’s links to a pan-European group raise questions about funding. 11/18/16, 6:31 PM CET BY Tom McTague Signs that Britain’s political class is coming to terms with June’s EU referendum. 11/18/16, 6:26 PM CET BY Hortense Goulard Conservative MEP denounced Juncker’s efforts to drum up support for Schulz as ‘outrageous.’ 11/18/16, 5:31 PM CET BY Ivo Oliveira Drawing the top stories around the globe. 11/18/16, 4:55 PM CET BY Cynthia Kroet Italians are likely to reject prime minister’s reform package in next month’s vote. 11/18/16, 4:48 PM CET BY Elana Schor, Kyle Cheney and Louis Nelson The president-elect starts building out his administration with loyalists. 11/18/16, 4:01 PM CET BY Nicholas Vinocur Left-wingers hope that by backing Alain Juppé, they will see off two political enemies. 11/18/16, 3:15 PM CET BY Cynthia Kroet Jens Stoltenberg did not mention the total number or reasons for the requests. 11/18/16, 3:02 PM CET BY Florian Eder and Janosch Delcker Wird Martin Schulz die SPD in den Bundestagswahlkampf führen? Oder schafft er es, doch noch einmal EU-Parlamentspräsident zu werden? Er muss sich bald entscheiden. 11/18/16, 2:34 PM CET BY Anthony Skinner Syrian refugees are pawns in Turkish president’s pursuit of power. 11/18/16, 2:33 PM CET BY Charlie Cooper Shadow Brexit secretary ‘seriously pissed off’ at colleague’s comments. 11/18/16, 2:33 PM CET BY Cynthia Kroet German chancellor is ‘championing the interests of Europe,’ Witold Waszczykowski said. 11/18/16, 12:58 PM CET BY Cynthia Kroet Nikola Gruevski stepped down in January over a wire tapping scandal. 11/18/16, 12:48 PM CET BY Barbara Surk Jens Stoltenberg said he had a ‘good talk’ with the president-elect. 11/18/16, 12:35 PM CET BY Esther King Majority of those who failed to gain international asylum come from the Balkan states. 11/18/16, 11:48 AM CET BY Esther King Immigration is what keeps the country running, says pro-EU Lord. 11/18/16, 10:57 AM CET BY Esther King Conditions at offshore detention center for refugees are ‘cruel, inhuman and degrading,’ said François Crépeau. 11/18/16, 9:36 AM CET BY Esther King Foreign Minister Linas Linkevičius warned that Vladimir Putin could use transition period in Baltics, Syria. 11/18/16, 8:55 AM CET BY MADELINE CONWAY Former ambassador to the UN says there are ways of supporting the opposition that does not involve the use of American military force. 11/18/16, 8:39 AM CET BY Cristiano Lima Her presence is likely to raise fresh concerns about potential conflicts of interest. 11/18/16, 8:35 AM CET BY Bryan Bender The retired lieutenant general’s hardline views on Islam — as well as laudatory statements about Russia — have made him a lightning rod, as did his strident attacks on Hillary Clinton during the campaign. 11/18/16, 5:33 AM CET BY Nicholas Vinocur The center-right’s first ever presidential primary looked all over. Now it’s wide open. 11/18/16, 5:25 AM CET BY Tim King The Günther Oettinger controversies are tainting this European Commission by intimate association. 11/18/16, 12:17 AM CET BY Nahal Toosi Much of Europe is alarmed over what Trump’s presidency could augur. 11/17/16, 11:52 PM CET BY Shane Goldmacher and Andrew Restuccia ‘We feel way ahead of schedule and never in a rush to do the wrong thing,’ said campaign manager Kellyanne Conway. 11/17/16, 9:42 PM CET BY Jacopo Barigazzi Maltese interior minister not impressed with Bratislava’s migration plan. 11/17/16, 9:33 PM CET BY Edward-Isaac Dovere In Berlin, the president warned his successor that his divisive campaign style won’t wear well in the Oval Office. 11/17/16, 8:24 PM CET BY Janosch Delcker US President hopes Trump won’t ‘simply take a Realpolitik approach.’ 11/17/16, 8:21 PM CET BY Hortense Goulard European Parliament president will only accept foreign minister role if he is also the SPD candidate for the top job. 11/17/16, 8:18 PM CET BY Konstantin Richter Germans, of all people, are now called on to be bulwarks of democracy. 11/17/16, 8:06 PM CET BY Paul Dallison and Esther King Euroskeptic party stands accused of breaking rules on spending EU funds. 11/17/16, 7:16 PM CET BY Brent Griffiths  11/17/16, 6:31 PM CET BY Maïa de La Baume Brussels faults Ankara for ‘neglecting and undermining’ democracy and the rule of law. 11/17/16, 6:27 PM CET BY Louis Nelson  11/17/16, 5:47 PM CET BY Cynthia Kroet Jean-Marie Le Pen should receive €15,000 because he was prevented from carrying out his duties. 11/17/16, 4:57 PM CET BY Carter Stoddard Net debt has ballooned to £338 million, and currency fluctuations are partly to blame. 11/17/16, 4:34 PM CET BY Laurens Cerulus In finally passing her surveillance bill, Britain’s PM just made Brexit even more complicated. 11/17/16, 4:13 PM CET BY Hortense Goulard French prime minister called for more European integration amid rising nationalism. 11/17/16, 3:23 PM CET BY Cynthia Kroet Former European Council president joins forces with Flemish singer. 11/17/16, 2:53 PM CET BY Paul Dallison Corey Lewandowski said president-elect will work closely with Theresa May, with no need for UKIP leader as a go-between. 11/17/16, 2:37 PM CET BY Cynthia Kroet Freedom Party leader’s comments on Moroccans living in the Netherlands were ‘unnecessarily offensive.’ 11/17/16, 2:11 PM CET BY Esther King Nigel Farage’s party stands accused of breaking rules on spending EU funds. Philippine President Rodrigo Duterte | Ye Aung Thu/AFP via Getty Images By Paul Dallison 9/20/16, 5:23 PM CET Updated 9/21/16, 11:11 AM CET Rodrigo Duterte, the controversial president of the Philippines, used industrial language to describe the European Union on Tuesday after calls for him to halt a wave of killings as part of a war on drugs. Members of the European Parliament last week said they were concerned about the “extraordinarily high numbers killed during police operations in the context of an intensified anti-crime and anti-drug campaign.” In a statement, they said: “MEPs urge the Philippines government to put an end to the current wave of extrajudicial executions and killings, launch an immediate investigation into them and adopt specific, comprehensive policies and programs in full compliance with national and international obligations and respect for human rights.” Duterte’s response was brief. “I read the condemnation of the EU against me. I will tell them, ‘f–k you.’ You’re doing it in atonement for your sins,” he told local government officials in Davao City, media in the Philippines reported. Also On Politico Paul Dallison The president said EU nations were hypocrites for attacking him because of their own bloody histories. “And then EU now has the gall to condemn me. I repeat it, ‘f–k you,’” he said. Duterte earlier this month called Barack Obama a “son of a b–ch” when it was suggested he would face questioning by the U.S. president about the war on drug crime, which has claimed more than 2,400 lives in just over two months.  © 2016 POLITICO SPRL Log in to access content and manage your profile. If you do not have a login you can register here.
WashingtonSince we last updated the CNN battleground map, Donald Trump has clearly improved his poll numbers both in some national polls and in some critical battleground states. The Republican nominee has also upped his game (as have his allied outside group friends) with television ad spending.  And, yet, Hillary Clinton maintains her advantage on the Road to 270 when it comes to piecing together the electoral math needed to win the presidency. Why two congressional districts could be key to this election With four days to go before the highly anticipated first presidential debate and just under 7 weeks before all the votes are cast, Hillary Clinton still sits above that key threshold in the latest CNN outlook. When you add up all the states either solidly or currently leaning Clinton's way, she has 272 electoral votes in her column in our new estimate. What's changed? -- Iowa (6) moves from from "battleground" to "lean Republican" -- Utah (6) moves from "lean Republican" to "solid Republican" -- Maine's 2nd Congressional District (1) moves from "solid Democrat" to "battleground" -- Nebraska's 2nd Congressional District (1) moves from "solid Republican" to "battleground" Explore the map and make your choices Road to 270: Electoral College map Note: The split congressional district ratings are symbolized with diagonal lines. The state of play Donald Trump has improved his standing in our electoral college outlook due to Iowa (a state Barack Obama won twice) and its six electoral votes moving from the true toss-up "battleground" category into the "lean Republican" category, giving Trump a total of 196 electoral votes either solidly or leaning in his favor.  That leaves 70 electoral votes up for grabs across four states (plus two congressional districts) -- Florida, Nevada, Ohio, and North Carolina.  Maine and Nebraska award individual electoral votes by congressional district in addition to the multiple electoral votes based on statewide results. Both Maine and Nebraska's second congressional district have moved into battleground status in this latest estimate. Maine's second congressional district has moved from "solid Democrat" to "battleground" and Nebraska's second congressional district has moved from "solid Republican" to "battleground," providing an opportunity for a candidate to pick up a single electoral vote in what otherwise might be hostile territory.  Finally, Utah moves back from "leaning Republican" to being solidly being in Trump's column.  There is no doubt that Trump has improved his chances in the last several weeks and that he is extremely competitive in all of the remaining critical battleground states, but Clinton's firewall is not yet showing any significant cracks and that is what makes Trump's path to 270 electoral votes still quite challenging. For all of the endless talk about Florida, Ohio and North Carolina, it is perhaps most important to keep your eye on Clinton's performance in the states that are leaning her way, but not solidly in her camp. Pennsylvania, Colorado, Michigan, and Virginia are the core of Clinton's current stronger and more viable path to 270. If Trump begins to find significant inroads to any of those blue-leaning states, that will set off some alarm bells at her Brooklyn HQ and suggest a more viable path for Trump. It is not enough for Trump to simply win the remaining 70 electoral votes in the battleground states -- that only gets him to 266. He still needs to chip away at Clinton's Democratic leaning firewall. Ohio poised to go down to the line on Election Day That's why we see both Trump and Clinton and their surrogates returning again and again to Pennsylvania, for example. And that's why Clinton and pro-Clinton forces spent more than $16 million on television ads in the Keystone State compared to the $5.3 million we've seen from Trump and pro-Trump forces. In fact, Pennsylvania is the state with the third-highest number of ad dollars spent this cycle, behind only Florida and Ohio. Clinton and Trump will surely continue the fully engaged battle for the votes of Floridians and Ohioans, but until and unless Trump can put one of those Democratic leaning states back on the board as a battleground or even make one lean his way, Clinton's electoral college advantage holds. Solid Republican: Alabama (9), Alaska (3), Arkansas (6), Idaho (4), Indiana (11), Kansas (6), Kentucky (8), Louisiana (8), Mississippi (6), Missouri (10), Montana (3), Nebraska (4), North Dakota (3), Oklahoma (7), South Carolina (9), South Dakota (3), Tennessee (11), Texas (38), Utah (6)West Virginia (5), Wyoming (3) (163 total) Leans Republican: Arizona (11), Georgia (16), Iowa (6), (33 total) Battleground states: Florida (29), Nevada (6), Ohio (18), Maine 2nd Congressional District (1) Nebraska 2nd Congressional District (1), North Carolina (15) (70 total) Leans Democratic: Colorado (9), Michigan (16), New Hampshire (4), Pennsylvania (20), Virginia (13), Wisconsin (10), (72 total) Solid Democratic: California (55), Connecticut (7), Delaware (3), DC (3), Hawaii (4), Illinois (20), Maine (3), Maryland (10), Massachusetts (11), New Jersey (14), New York (29), Oregon (7), Rhode Island (4), Vermont (3), Washington (12), Minnesota (10), New Mexico (5) (200 total) Will Mullery and Tal Yellin contributed to this story.
(CNN)Lawmakers hoping for a quick resolution in the talks to fund the government and provide a federal response to Zika were disappointed Monday when negotiators, who had worked through the weekend, said they would need more time to agree to a deal. "Everything's a little up in the (air)," Sen. John Cornyn of Texas, a member of the Republican leadership told reporters crowded outside his office waiting for word of an agreement. "Hope springs eternal." With no deal at hand, Senate leaders delayed until at least Tuesday a procedural vote to begin debate on the bill in hopes it might be ready then. In one sign of possible progress late Monday, Sen. Chuck Schumer of New York, who is a member of the Democratic leadership, told reporters that negotiators had resolved a key sticking point over language in the Zika measure that would prevent funds from going to a Planned Parenthood partner in Puerto Rico, something Democrats strongly oppose. "Yes, it's resolved," Schumer told reporters. "The whole Zika issue has been resolved." But a top Senate GOP leadership aide declined to confirm Schumer's pronouncement. And about an hour before Schumer spoke, Sen. Roy Blunt of Missouri, a senior Republican in the talks, said it would be "very, very premature" for Democrats to say the Zika language had been resolved. "None of this done until it's all done," Blunt said. Some senators and aides of both parties predicted a hand-shake agreement on the overall deal could be reached as early as Tuesday but others doubted the partisan divide could be bridged so quickly, especially since the deadline for the government to run out of money is not until the end of the month. With control of the Senate up for grabs in November, GOP leaders are anxious to wrap up the high-priority legislation and get their vulnerable members up for re-election home to campaign. Democrats denied Republican charges they were slow-walking a final agreement but privately acknowledged that they felt no pressure to accept a quick deal they didn't like just to let Republicans go home to campaign. Among the issues being negotiated, Sen. Ted Cruz, R-Texas, is pushing to add language to the government funding bill that would prevent the US from turning over to an international organization control over Internet domain names. Some Democrats are pressing for changes to the Export-Import Bank board to get around GOP opposition to confirming open slots on the board, which is disrupting some operations of the bank. Other issues include funding for Flint, Michigan's water supply problem, disaster aid for states hit my major flooding, disclosure requirements for political giving by corporations, and the number of hours truckers are allowed to drive in a week to limit driver fatigue. Some GOP lawmakers have been pushing for aid to help with damage caused by the recent Louisiana flooding. But Schumer suggested that both Flint and Louisiana would need to be addressed in a separate disaster aid package, saying the GOP was blocking additional money for Flint in the government funding package. "They want to do Louisiana, we want to do Flint," Schumer said. "They don't want to do Flint." Negotiators are also working to get offsets for the cost of the $1.1 billion Zika funding. Democrats initially pressed for it all to be considered emergency funding but there were signs they were prepared to meet GOP demands for some offsets. 
As opponents of the Trans-Pacific Partnership trade agreement look to prevent Congress from voting on the deal in the lame-duck session later this year, they have increasingly focused on one controversial section of the pact to make their case: the investor state dispute settlement system, or ISDS. ISDS allows foreign investors to sue host countries over regulations that affect their businesses. The cases are heard outside national courts by ad hoc tribunals that are empowered to award taxpayer-funded compensation. On the right, critics like Donald Trump claim the TPP would "give up congressional power" and cost America its "economic independence." Left-wing critics like Bernie Sanders are equally dour, claiming the pact "undermines our sovereignty and subverts democratically passed laws including those dealing with labor, health and the environment." Trump and Sanders overstate the novelty of this part of the TPP. ISDS has been included in thousands of pacts, including dozens involving TPP countries, most of which allow investors to pick the most favorable rules in a host state's treaty network. TPP didn't create the system, and rejecting it won't end it. But the critics have cause for concern. ISDS, as currently designed, allows investors to launch billion-dollar claims against governments for sometimes little more than making good on campaign pledges to their citizens. From Egypt to El Salvador, BuzzFeed's Chris Hamby reports, investors have invoked ISDS threats to obtain sweetheart settlements from governments. Some of those deals have put severe strain on national budgets. "Shadow Courts," a new book by Time magazine's Haley Edwards, shows how ISDS threats have strained support for free trade around the world. Fixing ISDS should be a high priority for the next administration. In fact, such a fix would require just a few sentences of legislation to rein in the worst abuses of the system while upholding investor rights. In 1990, now-TPP advocates Sen. Chuck Grassley (R-Iowa) and Rep. Dan Glickman (D-Kan.) helped enact the Administrative Dispute Resolution Act. This legislation allowed would-be legal disputes between American citizens and U.S. government agencies to be routed into binding arbitration. To address constitutionality concerns, a vital safeguard was built into the mix: third parties could appeal to U.S. courts to overturn an arbitration award if broader social interests were at risk. That legislation provided a template for my proposal to fix ISDS, which I presented at the American Political Science Association meetings earlier this month in Philadelphia. It leverages a little-appreciated aspect of the investment rules. Unlike weaker areas of international law, ISDS awards are enforced ultimately in national courts. Under current Supreme Court precedent, U.S. judges are instructed to defer to arbitral decisions. In other words, if a country loses a case in arbitration, it cannot appeal to national judges to overturn that decision because it was wrong or shortsighted. Under my proposal, this wouldn’t be the case. I proffer a so-called Equitable Investment Act. Just a few sentences long, this would give third parties a new right to petition U.S. courts to vacate arbitration awards that affect broader social interests. Here's how it would work in practice: Say a French bank sues Argentina under a bilateral Franco-Argentine treaty, alleging that a new Argentine administration's signature financial regulation plan cut into profits more than under a previous lighter-touch regime. Under the current ISDS system, the company could sue Argentina under the ISDS system and benefit from the possibility—however remote—that arbitrators would side with it and order cash payment. And under current federal arbitration laws, the bank would enjoy the near certainty that national courts would help enforce the award—with no review of the policy merits of the underlying claim. Under the Equitable Investment Act, in contrast, a U.S. court would be empowered to set aside the arbitrators' award if Argentine consumer groups showed it would harm their interests in a stable financial system back home. The legislation would presume that the U.S. has jurisdiction to review the award. While innovative, the proposal builds on existing practice. Already, U.S. courts can be asked to help attach Argentina's U.S. assets in such a dispute with French investors. The reform would simply expand their mandate and move up the timing of their involvement. Even if Argentine activists never used these rights, the possibility that they could would deter investors from challenging popular public interest policies. My proposal is doable in the first 100 days, even without a shift in the composition of Congress. Already, both parties have critiqued ISDS. Moreover, in a separate scuffle, a bipartisan coalition is poised to override President Obama's veto of a bill shredding the sovereign immunity in U.S. courts of foreign states linked to terrorism. With this standoff, legislators have shown themselves willing to strain diplomatic ties and risk loss of foreign sovereigns' investment in the U.S. In comparison, the relatively modest Equitable Investment Act would incentivize that money to return, as sovereigns facing overreaching ISDS claims would enjoy new protections for their assets. The impasse over ISDS points to a bigger problem: We lack a global governance system for investment that is coherent and fair enough to command popular support. Hillary Clinton has pledged to invent a "new paradigm" on investor-state dispute resolution, and Trump advisers have also called for change. But both Clinton and Trump are short on policy details. In the short term, they should take up this proposal. But in the long term, my stopgap measure will not be enough. New treaty rules are needed to put global governance on a more sustainable footing. Among other things, investors will be eager to move toward a system in which treaty outcomes are more certain. As part of a one-two punch with the changes to domestic arbitration law, the next administration should propose a global Equitable Investment Convention and call on other countries to sign up. My convention proposal would separate investor gripes into two tracks, which would better mirror our national laws' balance of property rights and democratic decision-making. First, states that expropriate property will have to compensate investors promptly and fairly. Instead of ISDS legal proceedings that take years to resolve and often deliver only pennies on investors' claims, teams of accountants would work to precisely tally the value of what investors sunk into their projects. States would then get a bill, which they could pay or challenge in a fast-tracked arbitration. Alternatively, if a state harmed an investor in less severe ways, arbitrators could still rule on whether and how the government fell short of its obligations. But unlike the current system, arbitrators would produce an advisory decision in six months. This document would not only find faults, but recommend specific reforms governments could make to come into compliance. States would accept or reject the advice, but they would be required to explain their choice and make all of the correspondence public. Most important, the Convention would fix ISDS' double standard. Instead of foreign investors enjoying rights that domestic investors, unions and environmental groups don't, the pact would level the playing field. Just as an investor can now ask a tribunal to determine whether capital controls violate a state's obligations, a union would be able to request a second opinion on collective bargaining rights. An environmental NGO could shine a spotlight on weak carbon emissions plans. And domestic investors could complain about preferential treatment received by wealthy foreign companies. These rulings will allow citizens to name and shame bad governments without compromising sovereignty. This proposal would accomplish what neither side of the TPP debate has promised: a path toward systemic reform of the over 3,000 ISDS pacts that already exist. Countries that joined the Convention would spare their investors from being dragged into U.S. courts under the Act. For any two countries that joined the Convention, their past deals would be automatically superseded—without time-consuming country-by-country negotiations. In a global economy, international and domestic law can check and improve each other. From trade wars to climate change to tax avoidance, we need to ensure that countries don't solve their problems at each other’s expense. International rules have a role to play, and independent adjudicators can be referees when the rules are in doubt. But the dialogue needs to be more dynamic—from arbitrators, to states, to the public, and back—if it's going to lead to better and more legitimate governance. Todd Tucker is a fellow at the Roosevelt Institute, where he researches international economic law and politics."
Washington (CNN)The FBI released Friday nearly 200 pages of notes from its investigation of Hillary Clinton's private email server, just three days before she squares off against Donald Trump in the first presidential debate. The notes, taken from interviews of top Clinton aides, supporters and others, include details of how a close Clinton confidant explained how the State Department made sure the White House system would not bounce back the emails from the then-secretary of state. But the documents -- a summary of which had already been released in the overall FBI report -- provide little in the way of major bombshells. Politically, however, Friday's release helps keep the issue relevant before the debate. The release also comes hours after news that top Clinton aide Cheryl Mills had obtained a limited immunity deal from the FBI in order to cooperate with its investigation. In one exchange, an unidentified interviewee details alleged efforts by a top State Department official, Patrick Kennedy, to argue during the release of the Clinton emails for classifications that would protect her. But Kennedy, in his own interview, denied the charge. Top Clinton aide Huma Abedin, in her interview, explained how they had to update email addresses with the White House so Clinton could email President Barack Obama because the President could only receive emails from approved addresses. If her email was not on an approved list, which was managed by the President's staff, the White House server would reject it. When Abedin was shown a 2012 email exchange, she did not recognize the pseudonym -- when agents explained it was Obama, she replied, "How is this not classified?" There is no evidence Obama knew that Clinton was using a private email server at the time. He has said he only found out about her use of it when it became public. Many of those who communicated with Clinton have told the FBI they didn't realize she was using a private server, and often one may not realize what email address is behind a name unless one clicks on it. Agents also interviewed "Guccifer" -- the hacker who targeted the Bush family -- who detailed his successful infiltration of close Clinton friend Sidney Blumenthal's email account and reviewed 30,000 emails and downloaded 25 attachments. Guccifer also detailed taking a screenshot of one Blumenthal exchange regarding the Benghazi attacks. FBI releases Hillary Clinton email report In other interviews released Friday evening, Clinton aides seemed generally unconcerned about her use of a private email server and said she adhered to standard security measures -- arguments they have made extensively in public. But one IT worker took a somewhat cavalier attitude, joking in one interview that a new 60-day retention policy was a "Hillary coverup operation" -- which sparked the Trump campaign's anger. "The fact an IT staffer maintaining Clinton's secret server called a new retention policy designed to delete emails after 60 days a 'Hillary coverup operation' suggests there was a concerted effort to systematically destroy potentially incriminating information," Trump spokesman Jason Miller said in a statement. "It's no wonder that at least five individuals tied to the email scandal, including Clinton's top State Department aide and attorney Cheryl Mills, secured immunity deals from the Obama Justice Department to avoid prosecution." The latest revelations in the Clinton email scandal are certain to play a central role in Trump's line of attack Monday, when the two meet for their first presidential debate in New York. Trump has built his "Crooked Hillary" line of insults off arguments stemming from her emails. The additional notes were released three weeks after the FBI released its report from its investigation of Clinton and her emails, as well as the notes from Clinton's own high-profile interview with federal agents. Clinton, in her interview, said she did not know about key records retention policies and whether she was violating rules. But on the trail, her campaign and supporters have routinely said she did not break any laws with her email handling. No criminal charges FBI Director James Comey in July took the unprecedented step of announcing in a press conference the FBI's conclusion that there was not enough evidence to merit a criminal prosecution, before handing over his findings to the Justice Department. The DOJ followed that recommendation and decided no prosecution was merited. After Comey testified about the decision before Congress, members requested access to his agency's report. Last month, the bureau gave members of Congress access to the notes, as well as notes from interviews with other Clinton staff and aides, but kept that version of the report classified. Comey testified that no transcript of the interview exists, only the notes taken on it. Clinton was not under oath. CNN's Laura Koran, Evan Perez, Adam Levine, Mary Kay Mallonee, Ross Levitt, Ryan Browne, Tal Kopan, Pamela Brown, Daniella Diaz and Kevin Liptak contributed to this report.
The window is rapidly closing for the White House to publicly hit back at Russia over a suspected Kremlin-backed cyber campaign to meddle in the U.S. election process, according to a vocal cadre of lawmakers who are hammering the Obama administration over its silence on the matter. The lack of any open retaliation, they say, is giving Russian hackers free rein to manipulate the election process in the final lap of the campaign season, sowing further doubts about an electoral system that GOP presidential nominee Donald Trump frequently bashes as “rigged.” Story Continued Below “I’ve been very surprised the administration hasn’t done something about it,” said Sen. Dianne Feinstein of California, the top Democrat on the Senate Intelligence Committee. “I think it’s a very serious problem. This isn’t a small matter. It’s an historic matter. No one has ever been allowed to monkey around with our electoral system.” Sen. Lindsey Graham (R-S.C.), a frequent critic of Russian President Vladimir Putin, lamented that the White House is tiptoeing around the hacks “because of this obsession they have with not offending Putin because of Syria and other things.” “If [Russia] did do it,” Graham added, “the Obama administration won’t do a damn thing about it.” Numerous former Obama administration officials acknowledge that the longer the White House waits to unveil any response, the more political scrutiny the move will receive, given Democrats’ allegations that the Kremlin is using its vast hacking apparatus to tilt the election in favor of Trump over Democratic rival Hillary Clinton. “It’s harder to do the closer we get to the election,” said Timothy Edgar, who served in the first Obama administration as the director of privacy and civil liberties for the White House national security staff. And some lawmakers and policy experts believe waiting until after Election Day to strike back publicly means missing a chance to stem the tide of digital assaults on election targets. “You can’t deter after the fact,” said Adam Segal, an international cyber policy expert at the Council on Foreign Relations. But officials are constrained by competing priorities that could take precedence over shaming Moscow for the hacks, which have compromised top Democratic political institutions as well as senior government officials on both sides of the aisle. Any response could put the final nail in the State Department’s already faltering efforts to negotiate a Syrian ceasefire agreement with Russia, spark a tit-for-tat cyber war between Washington and Moscow and potentially expose valuable espionage tactics at a time that the U.S. government is reportedly ramping up its digital snooping on Putin’s regime. And many on both sides of the aisle, as well as former officials, cautioned that moving swiftly on public finger wagging, economic sanctions or criminal indictments — the three most likely types of official responses — may have little actual deterrent effect before the election. “You know that countries conduct espionage on each other,” Senate Foreign Relations Chairman Bob Corker (R-Tenn.) told POLITICO when asked if the White House needed to issue an overt response. “You understand that, right?” House Intelligence Chairman Devin Nunes (R-Calif.) believes such public responses can establish an impossible mandate to identify hackers after every major breach. “I think that’s the danger in all this,” he said. “If you start to name someone, well, you’re going to have no shortage of people to name, and in a lot of cases it’s not attributable.” The first of this summer’s election-themed cyber intrusions — at the Democratic National Committee — probably led to July’s mass leak of 20,000 internal emails that appeared to show the party’s favoritism for Clinton over her presidential rival Sen. Bernie Sanders (I-Vt.). The message dump forced the resignation of DNC Chairwoman Debbie Wasserman Schultz. Later, hackers released the personal contact information of nearly every Democratic House member and staffer after another digital break-in at the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee. Elsewhere, suspected Russian hackers have also targeted Clinton campaign staffers’ personal emails, left-leaning advocacy groups, Democratic state officials and potentially even voter registration databases. According to media reports and numerous former officials, the Obama administration is probably far along in its investigation into the attacks. U.S. intelligence officials already have “high confidence” that Moscow is involved in the spate of hacks, according to anonymous federal officials quoted in The New York Times. On Thursday, Feinstein and House Intelligence Committee ranking member Adam Schiff (D-Calif.) said they had heard enough in their briefings with officials to conclude that Russia is to blame. “We believe that orders for the Russian intelligence agencies to conduct such actions could come only from very senior levels of the Russian government,” the pair said in a joint statement. The remarks broke with other lawmakers — even those like Graham — who have cautioned against accusing Russia before authorities make an official determination. “I very much hope the president will respond,” Feinstein told POLITICO. “In my mind, there’s no question that the Russians have been poking around in our various systems.” Lawmakers across the political spectrum have echoed Feinstein’s call for a response — regardless of who is responsible. “We need to take action,” Senate Foreign Relations Committee ranking member Ben Cardin (D-Md.) told POLITICO. “It’s not just naming, it’s … using the tools we have available to make it clear we won’t accept that type of behavior.” But with little more than six weeks to go before Election Day, the administration's choices may be limited. Preparing criminal indictments for the hackers responsible can take months, even years. The DNC hack was revealed only in June, kicking off the slate of intrusions and leaks that are still ongoing. In the last few weeks alone, suspected Russian-linked hackers have posted personal information on Democratic donors, revealed internal House race strategy memos from the DCCC and leaked the personal emails of former Secretary of State Colin Powell and an apparent White House staffer. “If the process is governed by the criminal investigation, I don’t see that you’re going to have any response by the election,” said Michael Zweiback, a former chief of the cyber crimes section of the U.S. attorney’s office in California’s Central District. Conversely, the administration has previously shown it can swiftly prepare economic sanctions following major hacks. It only took five weeks for the White House to announce sanctions on North Korea in retaliation for the bruising hack that temporarily disabled Sony Pictures Entertainment in late 2014. Whether similar sanctions could have a tangible deterrence effect on Russian hacking is debatable, though, even if such a move would help establish international norms in the long run. Christopher Swift, a former official with the Treasury Department office that oversees hacking-related sanctions, cautioned that Russia’s economy has already had two years to adjust to the strict international penalties slapped on the country in response to its military action in Ukraine. Additional sanctions may not be “adequate” to alter Moscow’s immediate decision-making, he said. Russian state-backed hackers often don’t work for the Kremlin in an official capacity, making them even more insulated from sanctions, added Swift, now a national security professor at Georgetown University. Many on Capitol Hill have simply pressured the Obama administration to publicly blame Russia for the hacks if the investigation finds it culpable. “The deterrence aspect of cyber response is very, very important,” said Sen. Deb Fischer (R-Neb.), who chairs a Senate Armed Services subcommittee that oversees cyber threats, during a recent hearing. “Public responses make an impression, as well.” But cyber policy experts and former Justice Department and White House officials concede that any response before the election will have unpredictable ramifications on the presidential campaign trail, just as campaigns are entering the last leg of the race. “No matter what they do, people are going to try and politicize it,” said Chris Finan, former White House director of cybersecurity legislation and policy. “I don’t know that they can completely insulate themselves.” “Both candidates are going to be asked what their position is and what should be done about it,” said Ed McAndrew, a former DOJ national security cyber specialist. “I think that the response, unless it is a strong response, is going to create more potential issues than it’s going to solve, and that [is] certainly so for the candidates.” The White House is also boxed in by the shaky deal the State Department tried to reach with Russia to reduce violence in Syria. State is also working with Russia to enforce the wide-ranging, controversial agreement reached with Iran last year to reduce its nuclear capabilities. The State Department is one of several agencies — including the Justice Department, Defense Department and the National Security Agency — with a key voice at the table advising the White House on its response to the election hacks. Given the sensitive situation, some forces within State are probably more hesitant to prod Moscow over other issues at the moment, agreed former officials from multiple agencies who have been involved in similar deliberations. The State Department has as much ability to “throw up the red flag” as any other agency, said Edgar, the former White House cybersecurity official, who is now a visiting fellow with the Watson Institute of International and Public Affairs at Brown University. Most cyber experts and lawmakers — even those who favor a public retaliation — accept that Russia would retaliate in-kind for any public move the White House makes. “You never know how they’re going to respond,” Cardin said. “One thing is that you can’t take them for their word.” Some suspect that a recent online dump of apparent classified NSA hacking tools was meant as a sly message from Moscow to Washington: We’ll reveal your espionage secrets if you mess with us. “We need to be prepared for the Russians’ public response,” said McAndrew, the former DOJ cyber specialist. “And it might be a tit-for-tat, it might be [Russia publicly revealing our operations].” But to those who favor public retaliation, the Obama administration can’t let these factors sway them from acting — and acting soon. “I think we still have some time,” said Sen. Jeanne Shaheen (D-N.H.), who has called on the Foreign Relations Committee to hold a hearing on the issue. “If you have an opportunity to forestall further meddling by sending a deterrent signal and making the Russians feel some pain … I think the administration has an obligation to do that irrespective of politics,” Finan said.
Two months after he was booed off the stage at the Republican National Convention for snubbing his party’s presidential nominee, Sen. Ted Cruz endorsed Donald Trump on Friday. That declaration to vote for him, though, comes after the Texas senator openly disparaged his primary opponent repeatedly — in part responding to Trump’s attacks on his wife and father. Story Continued Below 1. Early on, Cruz speculated that Trump’s tax returns could show a mob connection In February, Cruz offered his take on why Trump hadn’t released his tax returns in an interview on NBC’s “Meet the Press,” suggesting that they might show “Donald's business dealings with the mob, with the mafia.” “The fact that Donald seems terrified to release his taxes suggests that there’s a bombshell there,” Cruz said. “It’s natural to wonder, ‘Well, what is it that he's hiding in his taxes?’” 2. In March, Cruz called him a “sniveling coward” Speaking to a group of reporters in Dane, Wisconsin, after Trump made a comment promising to “spill the beans” on the senator’s wife, Cruz pointed his finger and said, “Donald, you’re a sniveling coward. Leave Heidi the hell alone.” “It’s not easy to tick me off. I don’t get angry often, but you mess with my wife, you mess with my kids, that’ll do it every time,” Cruz said. 3. He also called Trump a “big, loud New York bully” “Let me be absolutely clear: Our spouses and our children are off bounds,” Cruz said. “It is not acceptable for a big, loud New York bully to attack my wife.” 4. Also, “a small and petty man who is intimidated by strong women” Trump’s attacks, Cruz suggested, were actions of “a small and petty man who is intimidated by strong women.” 5. Cruz called one of Trump’s theories “nuts” and “just kooky” In May, after Trump cited a National Enquirer report that alleged Cruz’s father may have had some involvement in the assassination of President John F. Kennedy, Cruz addressed reporters in Evansville, Indiana: “This morning, Donald Trump went on national television and attacked my father. Donald Trump alleges that my dad was involved in assassinating JFK. Now, let’s be clear, this is nuts. This is not a reasonable position. This is just kooky.” 6. He also called him a “pathological liar” who “lies practically every word that comes out of his mouth” Also in Indiana, on the same day the state's voters would deliver a decisive victory to Trump, Cruz added: “I’m gonna tell you what I really think of Donald Trump: This man is a pathological liar. He doesn’t know the difference between truth and lies. He lies practically every word that comes out of his mouth, and in a pattern that I think is straight out of a psychology textbook, his response is to accuse everybody else of lying.” 7. And Cruz was specific with the term “pathological”: Trump is “utterly amoral,” he said “I say pathological because I actually think Donald, if you hooked him up to a lie detector test, he could say one thing in the morning, one thing at noon and one thing in the evening, all contradictory and he’d pass the lie detector test each time. Whatever lie he’s telling, at that minute he believes it, but the man is utterly amoral,” Cruz said. 8. And, while he was at it, Cruz accused him of narcissism and being a “serial philanderer” Continuing to unload in Indiana, Cruz offered: “He combines [dishonesty] with being a narcissist, a narcissist at a level I don’t think this country’s ever seen. Donald Trump is such a narcissist that Barack Obama looks at him and says, ‘Dude, what’s your problem?’’’ And: “Donald Trump is a serial philanderer, and he boasts about it. This is not a secret. He’s proud of being a serial philanderer.” 9. In July, Cruz still hadn’t forgiven Trump for the attacks on his family “I am not in the habit of supporting people who attack my wife and attack my father,” Cruz said, answering questions at a Texas delegation breakfast at the Republican National Convention in Cleveland and facing backlash for not yet endorsing Trump. Referring to his pledge to support his party’s nominee, Cruz said that statement “was not a blanket commitment that if you slander and attack Heidi I'm going to nonetheless go like a servile puppy dog" and support him.
A "journal" belonging to New York City bombing suspect Ahmad Rahami has been recovered by authorities, two federal officials told ABC News. The writings were apparently on Rahami when he allegedly engaged in a firefight with police, and the pages were shot through with a bullet. The officials said that in them, Rahami refers to the late American al-Qaeda cleric Anwar al-Awlaki, whose sermons and writings have been linked to a number of terrorist attacks and plots in the U.S.     A federal complaint filed against Rahami late Tuesday said that in the journal, he also praised Nidal Hasan, the 2009 Fort Hood shooter, and al-Qaeda founder Osama bin Laden. "You (USA Government) continue your [unintelligible] slaught[er] against the mujahidean [Islamic warriors] be it Afghanistan, Iraq, Sham [Syria], Palestine..." part of the journal reads, according to the complaint. "[God willing] the sounds of the bombs will be heard in the streets. Gun shots to your police. Death to your OPPRESSION." Investigators have also seized "a lot of papers" at a home linked to Rahami, a source told ABC News. As of late Monday, authorities had not determined a motive for Rahami, who has been linked to bombings over the weekend in the Manhattan neighborhood of Chelsea and in New Jersey. Though two of the explosives were housed in pressure cookers, as was the case in the 2013 Boston Marathon bombing, the officials said there was no mention in Rahami's purported writings of the perpetrators of that attack, Dzhokhar and Tamerlan Tsarnaev. Today officials said they're also investigating a possible link to five unexploded pipe bombs recovered in Elizabeth, N.J. Rahami has been charged with attempted murder related to the shootout with police just before he was apprehended Monday. Michele McPhee is a Boston-based freelance journalist and frequent ABC News contributor.
Nearly 55 million people viewed "debate-related" live videos on Facebook, the social media site said Tuesday morning. It's not clear for how long people would watch the videos, but the high number adds to the expectation that more than 80 million people will have watched the debate on television. Some 18.6 million people on Facebook in the United States generated 73.8 million likes, posts, comments and shares related to the debate. The top issues discussed were taxes, the Islamic State, racial issues, the economy, and crime and criminal justice. Trump dominated the conversation on Facebook, taking 79 percent to Clinton's 21 percent.
President Barack Obama characterized Donald Trump's presidential campaign as an "infomercial" during a fundraiser in Manhattan Sunday night. In town for this week's United Nations General Assembly, Obama spoke to supporters at the Gramercy Park home of restaurateur Danny Meyer and his wife Audrey. "This guy's unqualified to be president and he shows no interest in even gaining the rudimentary knowledge required to make really hard decisions on a day to day basis," Obama said of the Republican presidential candidate. "There's no curiosity. There's no desire to get up to speed. It's a infomercial. It's a reality show." Trump previously appeared on several seasons of NBC's reality show, "The Apprentice," and he has also lent his name to several products over the course of his career, including menswear, alcohol, magazines and hotels. And in a nod to Trump's comments and policies that have been slammed by critics as racist and xenophobic, Obama said, "It's tapping into some of our worst impulses ... one's that divide us rather then bring us together. One's that seek to put down people who have been historically vulnerable opposed to lifting them up." Obama admitted that presidential race will be a close race, explaining, "So this should not be a close election but it will be and the reason it will be is not because of Hillary's flaws but rather because structurally we've become a very polarized society and if all you're doing is watching Fox News and listening to Rush Limbaugh... a lot of misinformation on a regular basis, it's very hard for you to think that you're going to vote for somebody who you've been told is taking the country in the wrong direction." The president also acknowledge that Americans are still trying to come to terms with having a female president. "I will also say that there's a reason why we haven't had a women president... As a society we still grapple with what it means to see powerful women. And it still troubles us in a lot of ways unfairly. And that expresses itself in all sorts of ways." 
A House panel voted Thursday to hold Bryan Pagliano, a former technology aide to Hillary Clinton, in contempt of Congress for refusing to testify about the private email set-up Clinton used as secretary of state. The House Oversight and Government Reform Committee voted 19-15 along party lines, to send a contempt resolution to the full House. The move against Pagliano took place despite repeated warnings from his attorney that the showdown was fruitless since the computer specialist would assert his Fifth Amendment rights in response to any questions that would be put to him. Story Continued Below "Subpoenas are not optional," panel Chairman Rep. Jason Chaffetz (R-Utah) said after Pagliano failed to show up at the second committee hearing he was formally called to in the past two weeks. "Mr. Pagliano is a crucial fact witness in this committee's investigation former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton's of a private email server to conduct government business." Democrats called the contempt citation and the demand for Pagliano's public appearance a transparent political ploy aimed at embarrassing Clinton as the presidential election enters its final stretch. "Republicans want a photo op. They want a ready-made campaign commercial. No matter what anyone says, that is not a legitimate legislative purpose," said Rep. Elijah Cummings of Maryland, the panel's ranking Democrat. An attorney for Pagliano, Mark MacDougall, streesed that his client was ready to appear behind closed doors, but would not be part of a public spectacle. "Bryan already asserted his Fifth Amendment right on the record before this Congress. He was ready to do it again today in Executive Session. But the Republicans voted for contempt because he wouldn’t play the role they had scripted - in the campaign ad that they wanted to tape six weeks before the election. That’s all there is to it," MacDougall said in a statement. The contempt resolution requires approval by the full House. It's unclear whether a vote on the measure will be scheduled before Congress takes its typical pre-election break. Congress has three ways to seek enforcement of a subpoena: by filing a civil lawsuit, by asking federal prosecutors to charge someone with criminal contempt, or by having someone jailed at the Capitol. It's unclear whether any of those methods will work here. A judge may not enforce the subpoena because of Pagliano's Fifth Amendment claims, prosecutors rarely pursue such cases, and Congress' own power to take witnesses into custody hasn't been used in about a century. Republicans said the credibility of the Congress was on the line in the dispute. Some painted the confrontation in grave, nearly apocalyptic, terms. "We cannot have people come here and deny the right under the Constitution for us to question them. They may not want to answer and they have that right under the Constitution," Rep. John Mica (R-Fla.) said. "If you continue that, you destroy the whole basis of our government." Democrats also described the showdown as ominous, and said the panel itself might be damaged by the move. "This is a waste of time. It’s destroying this committee. It’s destroying the reputation of this committee," said Del. Stacey Plaskett of the Virgin Islands. Democrats repeatedly noted that last year Pagliano invoked his 5th Amendment rights in a closed session of the House Benghazi Committee. They noted his attorney offered to have Pagliano appear at a closed session, but Chaffetz declined. "I don’t think it should be done behind closed doors," Chaffetz said. "I think it’s the way this committee should operate." However, Rep. Stephen Lynch (D-Mass.) said the law doesn't require witnesses to show up at a public hearing to assert their rights against self-incrimination. He said he wasn't too worried about the contempt resolution because he doubted any court would enforce it. "I don’t think it’s going anywhere, and I take comfort in that fact," Lynch said. Chaffetz insisted he has different questions for Pagliano than the ones he refused to answer last year. However, Pagliano's lawyer has said he will refuse to answer any questions from the oversight panel. Democrats also persisted in arguments that the panel is trying to second-guess the FBI and Justice Department decision not to prosecute Clinton or anyone else. Rep. Trey Gowdy (R-S.C.) said that claim smacked of hypocrisy, because Democrats have been at the forefront of questioning the FBI's decisions on issuing national security letters to demand information or not to prosecute bank executives over the 2008 economic collapse. "God forbid we ask the FBI anything," Gowdy said sarcastically.
Donald Trump on Monday again wrongly claimed that he opposed the Iraq War before it started. "I did not support the war in Iraq," Trump said at the first presidential debate when asked how his judgment differed from that of his opponent, Hillary Clinton, who initially supported the war. "That is mainstream media nonsense put out by her." Story Continued Below Moderator Lester Holt of NBC noted that "the record shows otherwise." Indeed, in September of 2002, before the U.S. invasion of Iraq, Trump said, "Yeah, I guess so," when asked by radio host Howard Stern whether he supported that move. "When I did an interview with Howard Stern, very lightly, first time anybody's asked me, I said, 'I don't know,' essentially," Trump said, going on to add that he would soon have arguments with Sean Hannity of Fox News, who did support the war, and that there was an article from 2004 in which he appeared strongly opposed to the war. The U.S. invaded Iraq in 2003. "If somebody would call up Sean Hannity, this was before the war started," Trump said. "He and I used to have arguments about the war. I said it's a terrible and a stupid thing. It's going to destabilize the Middle East. And that exactly what this has done." "My reference is to what you said in 2002," Holt pressed, going on to ask how his judgment differed from Clinton's. I have better judgment, I also have a much better temperament than she does, you know?" he said, going on to add, "I think my strongest asset, maybe by far is my temperament. I have a winning temperament. I know how to win. She does not." Clinton, who was smiling through Trump's remarks, opened with a "woo! OK," when the questions turned back to her.
Targeting voters hesitant to embrace Republican Donald Trump in traditionally deep-red Utah, Hillary Clinton’s campaign launched “Mormons for Hillary” on Tuesday. The group’s launch, first reported by the Salt Lake Tribune, is the latest move by Clinton’s campaign in Utah, a state that has not gone in favor of a Democratic presidential candidate since 1964. The former secretary of state opened a campaign office in Salt Lake City last month and has published an op-ed in the Deseret News, a newspaper owned by The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Story Continued Below The group announced nearly 120 members, some of which have been lifelong Republicans. "In 2016, the Republican Party's candidate for president — my party — is belittling and scapegoating people of other religious and ethnic minorities in the harshest language," retired brigadier general and former Davis County, Utah, Republican Party chair David Irvine told the Tribune. "His disdain for them is equaled only by his disdain and crudity toward women. The most enduring pioneer value is charity in its broadest sense, and Utahns looking for those kinds of values should be reading [Clinton's book] 'It Takes a Village' — and voting for Hillary Clinton." Trump himself has admitted that he is “having a tremendous problem in Utah.” While Trump has tapped into veins of support with religious voters around the country, reliably-Republican Mormons have been slow to embrace the Manhattan billionaire. Former GOP presidential candidate Mitt Romney, perhaps the most well-known Mormon in political circles, has said he will not support Trump and in March delivered a speech condemning him. In particular, Trump’s proposal to ban Muslims from entering the U.S. has made him a tough sell for Mormon voters whose church has a history of facing persecution. Trump has since backed away from that proposal in favor of one that restricts immigration from countries affected by terrorism, but his earlier proposal damaged him with Utah voters. In June, Sen. Mike Lee (R-Utah) attacked Trump as well, noting that Trump’s “religiously intolerant” rhetoric makes him unattractive to Utahans “in part because my state consists of people who are members of a religious minority church. A people who were ordered exterminated by the governor of Missouri in 1838. And, statements like that make them nervous.”
WATCH: @POTUS & @FLOTUS on their excitement over opening of National Museum of African American History and Culture.http://snpy.tv/2cWV2AF 
(CNN)Hillary Clinton was deemed the winner of Monday night's debate by 62% of voters who tuned in to watch, while just 27% said they thought Donald Trump had the better night, according to a CNN/ORC Poll of voters who watched the debate. That drubbing is similar to Mitt Romney's dominant performance over President Barack Obama in the first 2012 presidential debate. Voters who watched said Clinton expressed her views more clearly than Trump and had a better understanding of the issues by a margin of more than 2-to-1. Clinton also was seen as having done a better job addressing concerns voters might have about her potential presidency by a 57% to 35% margin, and as the stronger leader by a 56% to 39% margin. READ: The complete full CNN/ORC poll results The gap was smaller on which candidate appeared more sincere and authentic, though still broke in Clinton's favor, with 53% saying she was more sincere vs. 40% who felt Trump did better on that score. Trump topped Clinton 56% to 33% as the debater who spent more time attacking their opponent. Although the survey suggested debate watchers were more apt to describe themselves as Democrats than the overall pool of voters, even independents who watched deemed Clinton the winner, 54% vs. 33% who thought Trump did the best job in the debate. And the survey suggests Clinton outperformed the expectations of those who watched. While pre-debate interviews indicated these watchers expected Clinton to win by a 26-point margin, that grew to 35 points in the post-debate survey. QUIZ: Are you more like Clinton or Trump? About half in the poll say the debate did not have an effect on their voting plans, 47% said it didn't make a difference, but those who say they were moved by it tilted in Clinton's direction, 34% said the debate made them more apt to vote for Clinton, 18% more likely to back Trump. On the issues, voters who watched broadly say Clinton would do a better job handling foreign policy, 62% to 35%, and most think she would be the better candidate to handle terrorism, 54% to 43% who prefer Trump. But on the economy, the split is much closer, with 51% saying they favor Clinton's approach vs. 47% who prefer Trump. Most debate watchers came away from Monday's face-off with doubts about Trump's ability to handle the presidency. Overall, 55% say they didn't think Trump would be able to handle the job of president, 43% said they thought he would. Among political independents who watched the debate, it's a near-even split, 50% say he can handle it, 49% that he can't. CNN's Reality Check Team vets the claims in the first presidential debate And voters who watched were more apt to see Trump's attacks on Clinton as unfair than they were to see her critiques that way. About two-thirds of debate viewers, 67%, said Clinton's critiques of Trump were fair, while just 51% said the same of Trump. Assessments of Trump's attacks on Clinton were sharply split by gender, with 58% of men seeing them as fair compared with 44% of women who watched on Monday. There was almost no gender divide in perceptions of whether Clinton's attacks were fair. The CNN/ORC post-debate poll includes interviews with 521 registered voters who watched the September 26 debate. Results among debate-watchers have a margin of sampling error of plus or minus 4.5 percentage points. Respondents were originally interviewed as part of a September 23-25 telephone survey of a random sample of Americans, and indicated they planned to watch the debate and would be willing to be re-interviewed when it was over. 
Truth be told, it isn’t really about Hillary anymore. Her picture comes on the screen, and you are very tempted to channel surf away from it. Story Continued Below But The Donald comes on, that orange pumpkin face fills the screen, and you stop to listen to what new outrage gushes forth from his lips. It does not matter if what he says is false. That Trump lies on a regular and dismal basis is no longer a question. It is a fact. For months and months, the national press corps has been tiptoeing around this. But now it has stopped clutching its pearls and has decided to call the truth the truth and a falsehood a falsehood. “Trump Gives Up a Lie, But Refuses to Repent,” was the front-page headline on Michael Barbaro’s tough-as-nails piece in The New York Times on Friday. The article, labeled a news analysis, was about “birtherism,” the racist lie that sought to discredit Barack Obama by saying he could not have been born in the United States because no African-American could honestly ascend to such a job. “It was never true, any of it,” Barbaro wrote. “Mr. Obama’s citizenship was never in question. No credible evidence ever suggested otherwise. “Yet it took Mr. Trump five years of dodging, winking and joking to surrender to reality, finally, on Friday, after a remarkable campaign of relentless deception that tried to undermine the legitimacy of the nation’s first black president.” “He nurtured the conspiracy like a poisonous flower, watering and feeding it with an ardor that still baffles and embarrasses many around him.” But not everybody around Trump is embarrassed. And his staff is paid to be baffled on a full-time basis. “We own both the momentum and enthusiasm dynamics right now,” Trump campaign manager Kellyanne Conway said a few days ago, in the Trump version of English. “Everybody loves a winner, so people now see these polls tightening where we’re up, tied or within the margin of error in nearly all of the swing states,” Conway said. “People are starting to see that Trump can actually pull this off.” That’s right. Trump is exposed as a liar and this gives him the “enthusiasm dynamics” to pull off a victory, because lies make the polls tighten and tight polls make everybody love a winner even if he lied to get his victory. Poisonous flowers grow in such word salads, I guess. What was Conway really saying? A translation was provided in a Washington Post story on Sunday: “After five years of peddling lies and innuendo about the circumstances of President Obama’s birth, Trump on Friday bowed to the facts and acknowledged for the first time that Obama was born in the United States, although he refused to apologize for his efforts to delegitimize the nation’s first black president.” There it was in a news story by Philip Rucker and Dan Balz: A major party candidate had peddled lies for five years, had finally been forced to admit the truth, but was refusing to take any responsibility for his lies and their outcome. “Everybody loves a winner,” Conway said. On Friday, Trump said he was going to make a “major statement” about the whole birther mess. And he was going to make this statement from his lavish, which is to say tasteless, new hotel on Pennsylvania Avenue, just blocks from the White House. The press usually goes along with Trump’s buffoonery, giving him virtually unlimited airtime, Internet coverage and newspaper space regardless of what he has to say. This time, however, he went a little far. He managed to squeeze a lie into the nothing he had to say. “Hillary Clinton and her campaign of 2008 started the birther controversy. I finished it. I finished it, you know what I mean,” Trump said. “President Barack Obama was born in the United States. Period.” With that, Trump left the stage, taking no questions and making no apologies. Two days later, John Dickerson had Conway on “Face the Nation.” Dickerson: Donald Trump advocated something for five years that was a lie. Why did he do that? Conway: Well, you’re going to have to ask him, but again, I think this is a sideshow now. Dickerson said our next president might have to send young Americans off “to die in wars” and, therefore, it might be important whether the president was a truth teller or a liar. Conway reacted as if Dickerson was speaking Martian and said the press really ought to be concentrating on Trump’s new child care plan. (Though she did not say if Trump was telling the truth about his new child care plan.) On Saturday, President Obama addressed the annual Congressional Black Caucus Foundation dinner. “Now, there’s an extra spring in my step,” he said with a broad smile. “I don’t know about you guys, but I am so relieved that the birther thing is over.” “I mean, [ISIS], North Korea, poverty, climate change — none of those things weighed on my mind like the validity of my birth certificate!” he said as the audience laughed. Truth and falsity are important, but so is balance. Having just quoted a Democrat, I’ll end with the words of a Republican, Abraham Lincoln: “No man has a good enough memory to be a successful liar.” Which may be why Trump will fail in the end: He simply won’t be able to keep track of all his lies. Roger Simon is POLITICO's chief political columnist.
Despite a lack of evidence, former Vermont Gov. Howard Dean is refusing to apologize for insinuating on Twitter that Donald Trump might be a “coke user” – instead, he claimed Tuesday that the Republican presidential nominee’s “grandiosity” and “delusions” are characteristic of cocaine use, while acknowledging that it’s unlikely he actually has a drug problem. As the nominees debated at Hofstra University in New York on Monday night, Dean – a Democrat who is supporting Hillary Clinton in the race – tweeted: “Notice Trump sniffing all the time. Coke user?” Story Continued Below The comment reverberated around the Twittersphere – it’s been retweeted some 26,000 times – but also drew criticism for being a low blow and a conspiracy theory. MSNBC’s Kate Snow, speaking with Dean on Tuesday afternoon, asked, “Why did you go there?” Dean, who is a physician, clarified that he was not actually assigning Trump a cocaine addiction diagnosis – “You can't make a diagnosis over the television; I would never do that,” he said – but maintained that Trump’s sniffling, as seen at the debate, “is actually a signature of people who use cocaine.” Then he pivoted the discussion to argue that Trump should release his tax returns and more detailed medical records. “He sniffs during the presentation, which is something that users do,” Dean said, and then attributed a series of other characteristics to Trump that he said “accompanies that problem.” He has “grandiosity,” “delusions” and “trouble with pressured speech” and “couldn't keep himself together” on Monday, Dean said. “I think it would be interesting to ask him and see if he ever had a problem with that.” “I just was struck by the sniffing and then by his behavior, which all sort of came together, these four symptoms,” Dean continued. “You know, do I think he has a cocaine habit? I think it's unlikely that you could mount a presidential campaign at 70 years old with a cocaine habit, but it’s striking.” Snow pushed back, comparing Dean’s comments to theories propagated by Trump surrogate Rudy Giuliani earlier in the race, questioning Clinton’s health. “You don’t see the parallel?” she asked. “Donald Trump has not only not made his tax returns public, he’s also not made his medical history public in any meaningful way,” Dean responded. “Hillary Clinton has done that and has answered any question that Giuliani may want to raise.” And, Dean told Snow, he has no plans to apologize for the comment, or delete the tweet. “I don’t think this is a ridiculous idea. Something funny was going on with Trump last night. Do I think it was cocaine? Probably not,” he said. “This guy’s already proving himself to be unstable. The question is, why is he unstable?” Republican National Committee chief strategist Sean Spicer said on MSNBC on Tuesday that it was “pretty pathetic and unreal” for “someone who has been a governor, a presidential candidate and, most importantly, a medical doctor to make that prognosis with no fact.”
LAKELAND, Fla. — In a bruising pre-debate series of attacks, Tim Kaine compared Donald Trump unfavorably to Richard Nixon, suggested Trump pays little in taxes and said Hillary Clinton will do “very well” as Trump struggles with the truth. About eight hours before Clinton and Trump take the stage in Hempstead, N.Y., Kaine predicted Trump will crumble when confronted with any questions that touch specific policy areas. Story Continued Below “You can run but you can’t hide. We’re going to see tonight: Can he give any details about anything? Can he answer questions like: where’s your tax return?” Kaine said, noting that presidents since Nixon have released their returns. “If you can’t be as ethical as Richard Nixon, folks, I mean come on.” At the airport in Lakeland, Kaine was greeted by Michael Phillips, a campaign volunteer with a disability who works on technology to allow people with disabilities to better communicate. Kaine read aloud a note from Phillips at a rally in this Central Florida town about an hour later, quoting Phillips as saying: “I’ve been waiting my entire life for a candidate like you and Secretary Clinton.” Kaine then held up a copy of Trump’s recent book, titled “Crippled America.” Phillips “has a severe disability. He said, ‘That’s not limiting me,’” Kaine recounted. “Donald Trump has a very different vision.” While Kaine repeated many familiar attacks on Trump as a poor steward of the military for his rhetoric aimed at the likes of Sen. John McCain and Khizr Khan, he also dinged Trump for promoting “stop and frisk” policies while tensions between police and black Americans persist in places like Charlotte and Minnesota, saying it would “widen the gap” between police and the community. Kaine spent most of his pre-debate comments on Trump and questioned his relationship with facts as a partisan argument rages over whether moderator Lester Holt should fact-check the debate. “Donald Trump thinks he can get this over on you,” Kaine said. “He’s got to answer the questions. And the last thing we get to see [at the debate] about Donald Trump is whether he can tell the truth.” Kaine did predict Clinton will do “very well” on Monday, a bit more cautious than his “A-plus” prediction at a rally Sunday night in the Miami area. And he said he’ll be doing his homework in preparation for the debate of his own in eight days in Farmville, Va. “I’m real interested in this debate. So I’m going to be on the edge of my seat taking notes,” he said. While Pence will be in New York to watch Trump, Kaine will attend a watch party that will include former Rep. Fannie Giffords in Orlando.
It was Hillary Clinton's idea to appear on “Between Two Ferns,” the irreverent web series hosted by comedian Zach Galifianakis, the program's executive producer told POLITICO. The Democratic presidential nominee took a page from President Barack Obama’s playbook with her appearance on “Between Two Ferns” Thursday. Clinton’s team got the ball rolling only after the Democratic presidential nominee told the Senate Democratic Caucus how impressed she was with Obama’s 2014 appearance on the show to pitch the Affordable Care Act. “It was actually her idea, strangely enough,” comedian Scott Aukerman, who directs and executive produces the web series, said. “… She told her team she wanted to do it and that she really liked the one with President Obama, so that kind of made the process really easy. We didn’t have to go through the hoops we sometimes have to go through in order to even get Hollywood people to do it.” The interview was taped on Sept. 9, the same day Clinton was diagnosed with pneumonia by her doctor. It wasn’t until later that the Funny or Die production team found out Clinton had been fighting pneumonia when she settled in for the interview. Aukerman said she arrived at the end of the day, a couple of hours behind their original scheduled time, but the crew had no idea she had been feeling unwell. “We kind of went, ‘she had pneumonia?!,’” Aukerman said. “We couldn’t believe it. The one clue we had was that she was drinking hot water.” The interview was taped at the New York Historical Society, and Aukerman said it was mostly improvised. As a result of the improvisation, most of the questions Galifianakis asked Clinton had not been cleared with the candidate or with Clinton’s team. Aukerman said that it is unlikely that Donald Trump, the Republican presidential nominee, will make a similar appearance on the show. “No, we have not invited Trump to do 'Between Two Ferns,'” Aukerman said. “I don’t think he would do it … I don’t think he has thick enough skin." "I wouldn’t be surprised if his team reached out, but I’d be surprised if it ever were to happen in the same way this happened, with us being able to improvise questions," he added. If Trump does do the show, don't be surprised if it is quietly released with little fanfare, just as Clinton's interview was. "We hadn’t done one in a couple years so we don’t overdo them, so every time we do one, it’s a surprise," Aukerman said. "We don’t put out press releases that we're about to put one out, we sneak them out in the middle of the night."
Former New York City Mayor Rudy Giuliani said Donald Trump is going to be clearer and more precise when he steps up to the debate podium Monday night, but beyond that “he’s basically going to be Donald Trump.” “My advice to him, I think Donald Trump has done best since Donald Trump has been just let loose to be Donald Trump,” the frequent Trump surrogate said on “Fox and Friends” Monday morning. “There's a lot of discussion of, you know, how things should be scripted and I think what we've all found that are working with him now is you let him be himself, this man is an extraordinary political thinker himself and a great communicator.” Story Continued Below But like other Republicans making the rounds on TV news Monday morning, Giuliani was quick to set a higher bar for Democrat Hillary Clinton, who the former mayor said has a decided advantage over Trump. Giuliani said the Manhattan billionaire will have to work to counter the former secretary of state’s experience in government and policy expertise on the debate stage. “She has, obviously, policy knowledge I don't have. She's been in government since I was a child. I don't remember a time she hasn't been in government in one way or another,” Giuliani said of Clinton. “So she's going to have obviously more specific knowledge than he has, but I think he's going to comport himself very, very well, and he's going to be -- he's just going to be like you see him on, when he comes here, and when you talk to him on the phone. He's going to be Donald Trump.” Giuliani dismissed concerns about Trump’s non-traditional approach to debate preparation, which has eschewed the mock debates that Clinton has used to ready herself. Giuliani said Trump has studied tapes of Clinton’s past debate performances as well as his own and likened the preparation to that of a boxer, suggesting that “you get the person ready the way they want to get ready.” One issue that Giuliani said Trump is not worried about coming up at the debate is the issue of his often inaccuracy-laden campaign rhetoric. Multiple media outlets, including POLITICO, have discovered numerous lies and half-truths in fact-checking Trump’s remarks, but the former New York mayor said the GOP nominee stacks up well against Clinton when it comes to truthfulness. “I can't imagine that probably the biggest liar that ever ran for president of the United States is going to bring up lies,” he said. “I mean, this is the woman who’s lied maybe 15 different times about Benghazi and told three different stories. So I think if she wants to get to the area of lying, she's lied about things related to national security. That’s a topic we would love.”
Washington (CNN)Is NRA-backed Donald Trump going anti-gun? Only for "bad people." Trump said Monday that he wants to take guns "away from criminals," and continued to praise the controversial stop-and-frisk policy during the first presidential debate, at Hofstra University. "We have gangs roaming the street and in many cases they're illegally here, illegal immigrants, and they have guns and they shoot people," he told moderator Lester Holt of "NBC News." "And we have to be strong and we have to be vigilant. Right now our police are afraid to do anything." He added: "We have to bring back law and order. Now whether or not in a place like Chicago you do stop-and-frisk, which worked very well, Mayor Giuliani is here, it worked very well in New York. It brought the crime rate very down. But you take the guns away from criminals who shouldn't be having it." Stop-and-frisk is a type of aggressive policing that allows -- some say encourages -- officers to detain a person on virtually any type of vague suspicion, search that individual without a warrant and arrest the person if any kind of illegal substance or weapon is found. Critics of the program questioned its constitutionality. They also pointed to the fact, documented in several studies, that the policy falls heaviest on black and Latino men. Holt said to Trump: "Stop and frisk was ruled unconstitutional in New York because it largely singled out black and Hispanic men." "No, you're wrong," Trump responded. "It went before a judge who was a very against-police judge. It was taken away from her and our mayor, our new mayor, refused to go forward with the case. It would have won an appeal." "The argument is that it's a form racial profiling," Holt said. "The argument is that we have to take the guns away from these people that have them and that are bad people that shouldn't have them. These are felons, these are people that are bad people," Trump said. 
Washington (CNN)Donald Trump said Monday night he didn't pursue a line of criticism he could have during the debate, out of respect for Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton's daughter, Chelsea. "I'm really happy I was able to hold back on the indiscretions in respect to Bill Clinton. Because I have a lot of respect for Chelsea Clinton," he told CNN's Dana Bash, who then asked what he would have said. "Maybe I'll tell you at the next debate. We'll see. But I'm very happy," Trump said. He added: "I think she'd be a poor president. I don't think she'd be do the job. We need somebody who will really be able to do the job. She doesn't have what it takes to make America great again." "I think it went better than I ever thought," he said. Trump later said in another interview after the debate that Clinton never gets anything "fixed." "She has been saying these things for years. And nothing ever happens. They never get fixed. It's all talk, no action," he said. The real estate mogul said the debate was "very exciting overall" and claimed online polls showed him doing well in the immediate aftermath of the debate. RELATED: Clinton puts Trump on defense at first debate "I just think it was very exciting overall, Dana," he told Bash. "Based on all of the online polls, we did tremendously." "You haven't had a real poll yet," Bash said. "Well, I mean, but the online polls were fantastic. Hundreds of thousands of people are calling and voting," he said. A CNN/ORC post-debate poll suggested debate watchers thought Clinton had stronger performance. Clinton was deemed the winner by a 62% to 27%, but the debate watchers surveyed were slightly more Democratic than the general public. 
Hillary Clinton never misses a chance to score political points or votes, as far as Donald Trump's campaign manager Kellyanne Conway is concerned. Conway laced into Clinton on Wednesday, a day after the Democratic nominee remarked upon "implicit bias" in policing while commenting on the police-involved shooting of an African-American man in Oklahoma to Steve Harvey's radio show. Story Continued Below “It’s just unbelievable that she would do that before we even know the facts, the details. I think that’s an overpoliticization of a situation where we don’t know the facts," Conway told Fox News host Brian Kilmeade on his "Kilmeade & Friends" radio program. “The loss of life is tragic and I feel like we all should be looking at it non-partisanly, not even bipartisanly, if you will. I'm using a new adverb here, Brian. But this is what she does. It’s like, she doesn’t pass up a moment to weigh in and try to score points or score votes.” She later added, "The best answer, sometimes, is no answer," remarking upon the nature of breaking news and evolving details of recent incidents like the ones in Tulsa, Oklahoma, and in Charlotte, North Carolina, where another man was shot and killed Tuesday. "But I’m going to see how many in the mainstream media actually play that clip today and harangue Hillary Clinton for that, Brian," Conway said. Trump referred to the Tulsa and Charlotte shootings on Wednesday, both on his Twitter account and in remarks before pastors in Ohio, while Clinton tweeted the names of the victims. "Keith Lamont Scott. Terence Crutcher. Too many others. This has got to end. -H," the Democratic nominee wrote. Bringing up the point that Trump was "completely harangued" by the media after pronouncing the explosion Saturday night in New York a "bomb" before it was confirmed as such, Conway noted that the alleged perpetrator ended "being a radical Islamic terrorist whose wife says, ex-wife says hates America and hates gays and his father said his son was a terrorist." Clinton used the term "bombings" to reporters on her plane, Conway recalled, adding, "So let’s just see the double standard at play here." "She just jumps on this not knowing any of the facts, and so I think that’s where politicians, and she is quite a typical one, get themselves in trouble, where everything is seen through a political lens," Conway said.
Attorney General Loretta Lynch publicly questioned the wisdom of broad-based stop-and-frisk policies as a crime-fighting tool Thursday, in the wake of comments from Donald Trump urging use of the technique to cut down on gun violence. Asked about her views on the practice, Lynch said she would not be drawn into debate about comments made by political candidates, but she clearly disagreed with the GOP presidential nominee by insisting that the use of the tactic had been counterproductive in New York City. "In New York … that practice was implemented in a way that was not helpful to community trust and to, frankly, public safety and enhancing the relationship between law enforcement and community members," Lynch said in response to question from POLITICO at a press conference about a crackdown on mail-fraud schemes. "The issue with stop-and-frisk in the New York area was the widespread indiscriminate use of that practice, particularly when it was not generating success from a law enforcement perspective, in either leads or tips or firearms, and the resulting lack of trust that it generated," the attorney general said. In an interview Wednesday, Trump called for broader use of stop-and-frisk and specifically praised its success in combating crime in New York. "I see what's going on here, I see what's going on in Chicago," Trump said in Cleveland during a taping of Fox News' "Hannity " "I think stop-and-frisk, in New York City, it was so incredible the way it worked. And, we had a very good mayor. But New York City was incredible the way that worked. So, I think that would be one step you could do." Use of the proactive technique, promoted by former New York Mayor Michael Bloomberg, has long angered many civil rights activists. In 2013, a judge in New York ruled that it had been carried out in an unconstitutional, racially discriminatory manner. An appeals court halted that ruling, but while the appeal was pending, the city — under new Mayor Bill de Blasio —wound up settling the case. In comments Thursday, Trump revised his earlier remarks, insisting he was only advocating the practice in murder-plagued Chicago. “I was really referring to Chicago with stop-and-frisk,” he told “Fox and Friends” during a phone interview Thursday morning. “They asked me about Chicago and I was talking about stop-and-frisk for Chicago.” Chicago has seen a spike in murders and shootings, with over 500 killings in 2016 and three months still to go in the year. "I think Chicago needs stop-and-frisk,” Trump said. “Now, people can criticize me for that or people can say whatever they want, but they asked me about Chicago, and I think stop-and-frisk, with good, strong, you know, good, strong law and order. But you have to do something. It can’t continue the way it’s going.” Lynch, who spent two stints as chief federal prosecutor in Brooklyn before being nominated as attorney general, said she wasn't opposed to stop-and-frisk techniques under certain circumstances. "As with every police procedure we want to empower law enforcement to be responsive to community needs. We want to empower them to protect the community. We want to give them the training they need in order to do it in a way that is constitutional, safe and effective and promotes trust," Lynch said. "It’s not really a yes or no answer." UPDATE (Thursday, 4:09 p.m.): This post has been updated to clarify the outcome of the New York City stop-and-frisk litigation.
Sen. Tim Scott (R-S.C.) on Thursday said that the release of video footage from the killing by police of Keith Lamont Scott might ease tensions in Charlotte, North Carolina. “If we had a body camera on the officer, there is no question that we would have greater clarity going forward to what actually happened,” he said in an interview with CNN’s Jake Tapper. Story Continued Below "I'm not a law enforcement officer, so I'm not going to pretend to understand their concept of releasing the video," Scott said. "We've seen different agencies do it in different times. The release of the video can help defuse some of the tensions if the video is helpful." "The faster the information comes to the surface, the quicker we get clarity, hopefully there will be a calming influence," Scott added. "But there is never a reason for violence in response to a situation. Violence for violence only begets more violence. This is the wrong direction and the wrong path.” Keith Lamont Scott was shot dead by police outside his apartment complex in Charlotte, North Carolina. Police were pursuing an arrest warrant for another person when they encountered Scott, who was African American, in his car. The Charlotte police chief says Scott was armed with a handgun, while his family denies it. “As far as we know, at this point in time, no, he did not own a gun,” said Justin Bamberg, one of the Scott family’s attorneys. “Our direct response is this: That is what the chief says. I haven't seen any evidence -- none of you all have seen any evidence that a gun was there. That is what people are saying,” he said when asked to respond to the chief’s statements asserting Scott’s possession of a handgun. “It's my understanding that his wife saw him get shot and killed. And that's something that she will never, ever forget,” Bamberg said. When asked whether the family wants the video released, he replied, “Ultimately what I think the whole community here wants is the truth. And to the extent that release of the video can somehow help us reach that truth, I think that the family will ultimately support its release.” The family was supposed to address the press conference with their attorneys, but were absent due to grieving, according to Bamberg. He said, “Let me be very clear. This family does not agree with rioting or innocent individuals being injured or killed. But they do support citizens and their right to voice their frustration, to voice their anger.” Correction: This article originally said that Senator Scott urged the Charlotte police to release the video. He merely said that release of the video might ease tensions.
House Speaker Paul Ryan met privately on Monday with Donald Trump’s daughter, Ivanka Trump, according to two people familiar with the meeting. Ryan was in New York to deliver a policy address at the Economic Club of New York and had a private meeting with Ivanka Trump afterward. The meeting was at her request, according to one of the people. Story Continued Below Ryan and Donald Trump have had a strained relationship since Trump emerged as the Republican presidential nominee back in May. Ryan waited weeks before endorsing Trump and has continued to criticize him, including last week when Ryan called for Trump to release his taxes. Ivanka Trump has emerged as one of her father’s most trusted advisers and confidantes, including pushing him just last week to roll out a new package for child care. She stood behind him on stage as he unveiled the plan. Neither Trump’s campaign nor Ryan’s office immediately responded to a request for comment on the meeting Monday in New York, or what was on the agenda for the discussion.
News Corp. executive Raju Narisetti will become CEO of Gizmodo Media Group, the new name for the group of six news sites that Univision purchased from Gawker Media in August, the Spanish-language broadcaster announced on Wednesday. Narisetti, currently the senior V.P. of strategy for News Corp., will join Univision late next month. As CEO, Narisetti will essentially replace Nick Denton, the founder and former CEO of Gawker Media who did not join Univision. Gizmodo Media Group president Heather Dietrick, deputy general counsel Courtenay O'Connor and executive editor John Cook will report to Narisetti. In turn, Narisetti will report to Felipe Holguin, the president and COO of Fusion Media Group — Univision's digital media division, which Gizmodo Media Group is a part of — and Isaac Lee, Univision's chief news, entertainment and digital officer. Story Continued Below Univision is also experimenting with ways of integrating content from the six Gizmodo sites — Gizmodo, Jezebel, Deadspin, Lifehacker, Jalopnik and Kotaku — with its other digital media properties. The company recently created a Spanish-language destination, "La familia crece" ("The family grows"), to host Spanish-language versions of select articles from the six Gizmodo sites.
First lady Michelle Obama has reacted publicly for the first time to the controversy over Melania Trump’s speech at the Republican National Convention in Cleveland earlier this summer, when the GOP presidential nominee’s wife was accused of using parts of Obama’s 2008 Democratic National Convention speech. Appearing on “The Late Show With Stephen Colbert,” Obama was pressed by the comedian whether she feels any sympathy for the spouses of presidential candidates. While she initially signaled she did not have any sympathy for Trump or Bill Clinton, Colbert pressed Obama by citing the example of the criticism surrounding the plagiarism episode. “Melania Trump was so criticized for using what turned out to be a portion of your speech. But do you have any sympathy? Because there are people around her creating things, and I have some sympathy for her,” Colbert said. “Do you understand how that might be sympathetic for what happened to her?” “Yeah,” Obama finally admitted, clearly not amused by the continued questioning. “That was tough.”       Colbert picked up on Obama’s evident irritation, as she was not smiling, and quickly moved on to discuss her signature project, Let Girls Learn, which aims to educate girls around the globe who do not have access to education. Earlier in the interview, the first lady called her family’s final days in the White House “bittersweet.” “Everything’s, like, the last, and I find myself choking up because we have raised our kids in the White House,” she said. “We’ve had so many amazing experiences. We have a phenomenal staff. We live in a house where people love us and care about us, and, you know, we’re going to be walking away from all of that.”
(CNN)Newt Gingrich thinks the current Clinton running for president is nothing like the last one. "I worked with Bill Clinton," Gingrich tweeted Tuesday. "Bill Clinton and I got a lot done -- welfare reform, balancing the budget. Hillary Clinton is no Bill Clinton." Gingrich also took issue with how Hillary Clinton pointed to the economic success of 1990s during Monday's first presidential debate as an indicator for how her presidency would be. "If Hillary Clinton is going to cite 1990s she needs to drop tax increasing, red tape increasing left wing policies. She is opposite of 90s," he tweeted. For Gingrich, a supporter of Donald Trump, it was praise for an old adversary -- done at the expense of Clinton's wife and the current Democratic presidential nominee. During his tenure as House speaker in the 1990s, Gingrich was frequently at odds with Bill Clinton during an acrimonious period of a divided Washington that included a government shut down. The tweet came the day after the first debate between Hillary Clinton and Trump, and it called to mind a famous quip from a previous debate. At the 1988 vice presidential debate, Democratic nominee Lloyd Bentsen fired off an indelible retort to the Republican Dan Quayle, who had invoked John F. Kennedy to defend his qualifications for the office. "Senator, I served with Jack Kennedy. I knew Jack Kennedy. Jack Kennedy was a friend of mine," Bentsen said, while staring down Quayle. "Senator, you're no Jack Kennedy." 
In a bloody page in the journal purportedly found on Ahmad Rahami when he was captured, the New York and New Jersey bombing suspect appears to praise major terrorist figures, including the main spokesman for ISIS. A reference to "Brother Adnani," presumably referring to the late Abu Muhammad al-Adnani, is the first public evidence that ISIS, as well as al-Qaeda, may have inspired Rahami's alleged violent acts. "I looked for guidance and [praise be to God] guidance came. Sheikh Anwar[,] Brother Adnani ... said it clearly attack the kuffar [unbelievers] in their backyard," the page says. "Sheikh Anwar" is likely a reference to influential American-born al-Qaeda cleric Anwar al-Awlaki, who was killed in a U.S. drone strike five years ago.       Elsewhere in the journal, Rahami purportedly praised al-Qaeda founder Osama bin Laden and 2009 Fort Hood shooter Nadal Hasan, according to a criminal complaint filed against Rahami late Tuesday, which doesn't mention al-Adnani. The Pentagon said al-Adnani was killed in a U.S. airstrike in Syria in late August. Before his death, he served as the primary spokesman for ISIS and often encouraged Western Muslims to conduct attacks in their home countries. "If you can kill a disbelieving American or European ... then rely on Allah and kill them in any manner or way, however it may be," Adnani said in an audio message two years ago. ISIS has not released any claim of responsibility for the bombings in New York, where 31 people were injured, and New Jersey, where no one was hurt.
A liberal attempt to revive the so-called public option — a government-run insurance plan to shore up gaps in the Affordable Care Act — is opening old wounds between the Democratic Party’s liberal and moderate wings. Thirty-three mostly liberal Democrats, including all the Senate leadership, have signed onto a nonbinding Senate resolution introduced last Friday to add the public option to Obamacare, arguing that it is needed to fix problems with the president’s signature health care law. Story Continued Below But missing from the list are vice-presidential nominee Tim Kaine and a half-dozen other moderates who face reelection in 2018 — when the map that favors Democrats this year will flip to favor Republicans. Kaine’s absence is especially striking since Hillary Clinton embraced the public option in July. A campaign spokesperson said Kaine is “supportive of a workable public option for health care insurance,” even though he has not co-sponsored the resolution. But other moderate Democratic senators made it clear that they remain uncomfortable with a government-run health program. Sen. Jon Tester, a moderate Montana Democrat up for reelection in 2018, said the focus should be on working “on a bipartisan basis to fix Obamacare.” “Until we get to the point that we’re willing to work together on that … we’re going to continue to see problems,” Tester said. Sen. Heidi Heitkamp (D-N.D.), who won her 2012 election with 50.24 percent of the vote and is expected to face a tight race in 2018, called the public-option debate a “distraction.” “We’ve had a whole lot of discussion about what’s going to happen to Obamacare but … we aren’t having discussions [about how we deliver higher-quality care at lower costs] because we keep discussing how we’re going to fund it,” she said. The resistance of moderate Democrats led to the scuttling of the public option when it was first debated as a potential part of the ACA in 2009. Now, the continued divide between liberals and moderates could be a preview of coming battles if Clinton were to become president and liberals mounted a serious effort to add a public option to Obamacare. Since the ACA was conceived, liberals have insisted that a government-run health insurer would pressure private insurers to reduce premiums. Now, progressives say, many of the ACA’s flaws could be repaired with a public option, which would essentially be a new plan offered on the Obamacare insurance exchanges, some of which are down to only one or two private insurers. Clinton has repeatedly said on the campaign trail that she would “defend” the Affordable Care Act if elected president. Her campaign website pledges that she will “build on its success to bring the promise of affordable health care to more people and make a ‘public option’ possible.” Sen. Jeff Merkley (D-Ore.), who is spearheading the effort, said that besides Clinton’s endorsement, rising premiums and the high-profile withdrawal of Aetna and United Healthcare from several exchanges makes the issue ripe for discussion. “We’re right in the middle of the presidential campaign, and I think it’s important during this campaign and [House and Senate races] to have a conversation about having competition in all the exchanges across the country,” Merkley said. He downplayed the lack of support from moderates and said he has not run the resolution by the Clinton campaign. He pointed out that all of the Democratic leaders have signed on as cosponsors. “So there is a wide range of folks — folks from states that have big insurance companies’ headquarters, like Connecticut — folks who don’t. It’s a broad spectrum,” he said. “We’re only a couple days into this.” Adam Green, co-founder of the Progressive Change Campaign Committee, which is championing the resolution, said the goal is to build momentum to enact a public option next year. Green said he’s happy with 33 co-sponsors so far and hopeful that moderate lawmakers from rural states are drawn to the idea of more competition among insurers. “Rural states have big problems with competition, and having a public option would actually be really popular in those states,” he said. But some red-state Democrats are skeptical. Sen. Claire McCaskill (D-Mo.), who is also due to face voters in 2018, said she’s open to discussing the public option “but I want to make sure that we’ve done everything to make the market work before we turn to that.” Republicans are already trying to frame the public option as “more Obamacare,” a preview of the battle that could come if Democrats are in a position to pursue the proposal. “Democrats actually introduced legislation last week calling for Obamacare 2.0, a new government-run health plan,” Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell said Wednesday. “And there are good reasons why so many of their own caucus won’t support it. It’s insulting to the millions of Americans who continue to watch their premiums spike — after Democrats said they’d be lower.”
Donald Trump took full advantage of the opportunity Monday to return to blasting Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton for failing to keep the country safe in the wake of this weekend's bomb attacks in New York City. And Clinton jumped on the news to prosecute her own case against Trump: that he is a dangerous demagogue whose inflammatory rhetoric puts the nation at further risk. The polls offer a more nuanced picture. Voters trust Clinton over Trump by a narrow margin when it comes to terrorism and national security — a reversal from past elections when Republicans were seen as the party stronger on national defense. But that’s not the end of the story: Trump’s supporters are far more concerned about terrorism than Clinton’s, suggesting the GOP nominee could appeal to voters who are increasingly anxious about safety at home. Story Continued Below The attacks this weekend present a new backdrop to the one-week run-up to the first general-election debate — a one-on-one showdown on national television between Clinton and Trump, held fewer than 30 miles from the scene of an explosion on the west side of Manhattan that wounded more than two dozen people on Saturday evening. Both candidates on Monday sought to reinforce their credentials on terrorism and spin it into an advantage. Clinton held a press conference at a suburban New York airport before traveling to Philadelphia, calling herself “the only candidate in this race who has been part of the hard decisions to take terrorists off the battlefield.” Trump, meanwhile, responded with a statement on Facebook, saying Clinton “has emboldened terrorists all over the world to attack the U.S., even on our own soil,” adding that terrorists “are hoping and praying that Hillary Clinton becomes [p]resident — so that they can continue their savagery and murder.” Overall, polls conducted prior to this weekend give the Democratic nominee a slim advantage on the issue. In last week’s Fox News poll, Clinton edged Trump among likely voters asked who would do a better job handling terrorism and national security, 47 percent to 46 percent. Among registered voters surveyed by CBS News/New York Times over a similar time period, 49 percent trusted Clinton more on national security and terrorism — which rated a close second to the economy and jobs on a list of most-important issues — compared to 45 percent for Trump. In a Quinnipiac University poll last week, 49 percent of likely voters said Clinton would do a better job “keeping the country safe from terrorism,” while 47 percent said Trump would do a better job. And in an ABC News/Washington Post poll this month, half of registered voters said they trust Clinton more to handle terrorism, more than the 41 percent who trust Trump — though that margin narrows to 48 percent for Clinton to 45 percent for Trump among likely voters. Clinton, multiple polls show, is viewed as having experience and as the better informed, more stable leader. In the Fox News poll, 61 percent of likely voters say the former secretary of state is “qualified to be president,” far more than the 45 percent who say Trump is qualified. Fifty-nine percent think Clinton “has the temperament to serve effectively as president,” compared to only 38 percent who say Trump is temperamentally fit. But voters also see Trump as a decisive candidate who will tell it like it is and is more committed to attacking the Islamic State in the Middle East. In a slightly older CNN/ORC International poll, conducted over the first four days of this month, half of voters said the phrase “a strong and decisive leader” applied more to Trump than the 42 percent who said it applied to Clinton. (That poll, the only live-caller national poll Trump has led since the conventions, also found Trump ahead on the issue of terrorism, 51 percent to 45 percent. Clinton’s slight edge on terrorism and national security in most polls reverses what was a traditional Republican advantage. For decades, voters have seen the GOP and its presidential nominees as stronger on defense. As an incumbent in 2004, then-President George W. Bush enjoyed a sizable advantage on terrorism over then-Sen. John Kerry (D-Mass.). A CBS News/New York Times poll in early October of that year found more voters had confidence that Bush (52 percent) would make the right decisions when it came to protecting against a terrorist attack than had confidence in Kerry (39 percent). Barack Obama faced a similar gap in the 2008 campaign against Sen. John McCain (R-Ariz.), who was lauded as a Vietnam War hero and has focused on defense issues during his time in the Senate. Voters throughout the campaign trusted McCain over Obama on terrorism, according to ABC News/Washington Post polls, though the gap between the two candidates narrowed toward Election Day. In 2012, Obama, with the benefit of incumbency and the killing of Osama bin Laden the year before, grabbed the advantage that year over former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt Romney. Obama was generally more trusted on foreign policy, according to data from the Pew Research Center, and exit polls showed more voters trusted Obama to handle an international crisis than Romney. But even though more voters, on average, trust Clinton over Trump on terrorism, rising unease about more attacks could benefit the Republican. Prior to this weekend, Trump voters were far more concerned about terrorism: In last week’s Quinnipiac University poll, a combined 79 percent of likely voters said it was “very” or “somewhat” likely that there would be a terrorist attack in the U.S. “in the near future … causing large numbers of lives to be lost.” (No one was killed in this weekend’s incidents.) Virtually all of Trump’s supporters, 96 percent, said it was at least “somewhat likely” there would be an attack in the near future, including a 57-percent majority who said it’s “very likely.” But just 64 percent of Clinton backers said it was likely, and only 19 percent said it was “very likely.” That anxiety extends to voters’ own lives. A combined 47 percent of likely voters said they are at least “somewhat concerned” that they or someone in their family “will be the victim of a terrorist attack” — with, again, a sharp break by the presidential candidate they support. More than two-thirds of Trump’s voters, 68 percent, said they were at least “somewhat concerned” about being the victim or someone in their family being the victim of a terrorist attack — while only 29 percent of Clinton supporters were concerned about it. This has also been a traditional Republican advantage: Voters most concerned about terrorism have tended to support the GOP ticket in large numbers. In 2008, McCain defeated Obama among the quarter of Americans who were “very worried” about a terrorist attack in the United States, 54 percent to 43 percent, according to the exit poll. But in the past two elections, terrorism hasn’t been a major issue for voters. In that 2008 exit poll, only 9 percent of voters said terrorism was the most important issue, and McCain won them overwhelmingly, 86 percent to 13 percent. The 2012 exit poll didn’t even ask voters about terrorism, though a September 2012 Pew survey found Romney voters (68 percent) were significantly more likely than Obama voters (55 percent) to say terrorism was “very important” to their vote. The last time terrorism was a significant factor in a presidential campaign, the Bush-Kerry race in 2004, 19 percent of voters in the exit poll rated it as their most important issue. Bush carried them by 72 points, 86 percent to 14 percent.
(CNN)It's becoming an election year tradition: Senate Minority Leader Harry Reid is hammering away at the Republican presidential nominee on his taxes. Reid took to the Senate floor Wednesday, taunting and ridiculing Donald Trump for not disclosing his tax returns. The reason for Trump's refusal is simple, Reid said. "Because Trump's tax returns would further destroy his presidential candidacy," said Reid, who made Mitt Romney's tax returns a major election issue four years ago. Trump has insisted for months that he cannot release his tax returns because he is under audit by the Internal Revenue Service; alternatively, his campaign has said that voters do not much care about the issue. It is not a requirement for presidential candidates to disclose their tax returns, but it is an enduring tradition. For the last 40 years, virtually every major party nominee has released his or her tax returns. (Gerald Ford released a summary in 1976.) Tax experts have said that an audit does not preclude Trump from releasing his returns. On Wednesday, Reid dismissed Trump's explanation, saying the real estate mogul is "not known for caution or restraint." "He is the most unhinged and reckless presidential candidate ever," Reid said. Instead, Reid said the real reason for Trump's failure to disclose the returns is due to the political damage they would inflict on his campaign. "Production of his tax returns would prove again that he is a fraud," Reid said. The retiring Nevada senator said the tax returns would show that Trump is "not the billionaire he claims to be" and a "welfare king" who is "mooching off the American taxpayer." Trump campaign spokeswoman Hope Hicks did not respond to a request for comment. It was the second time in as many days that Reid has torched Trump over his taxes. And it's become a familiar role for Reid, who excoriated Romney for refusing to release some of his tax returns in the 2012 presidential race. Romney released a 20-year summary of his tax liabilities from 1990 until 2009, as well as his tax returns from 2010 and 2011, but he did not release the returns from previous years. Reid, without proof, accused Romney of going a decade without paying federal income taxes. Four years later, Reid and Romney are now on the same side of the issue. In February, Romney speculated publicly that Trump's tax returns would reveal a "bombshell." Trump fired back on Twitter that month, claiming Romney "didn't show his tax return until SEPTEMBER 21, 2012, and then only after being humiliated by Harry R!" On Wednesday -- four years to the day that Romney released his 2010 and 2011 tax returns -- Reid found himself with an unlikely ally. "Mitt Romney and I agree on one thing, and that's one thing for sure," Reid said on the Senate floor. "And that is that Donald Trump should release his tax returns." 
Washington (CNN)House Speaker Paul Ryan ducked Thursday on whether he supports the "stop and frisk" policy pushed by Donald Trump. "I don't have an answer for you because it's not something that I've familiarized myself with -- the constitutionality of it, its efficacy, whether (it) worked well in New York City or not," Ryan said after being pressed twice by reporters on the policy the GOP nominee wants to revive, despite court rulings finding it unconstitutional. Ryan called for calm following the shooting in Charlotte, saying about the unrest in the city overnight, "these images are just so heartbreaking and they are upsetting." "The loss of any life is a tragedy. The response to that though cannot be more violence. As leaders, it is responsibility to promote calm, peace and dialogue. We cannot allow our nation to be divided up along racial lines and so I hope leaders can come together to find solutions," Ryan said. Clinton, Trump navigate politics of police violence The House speaker repeatedly brushed back reporters' efforts to have him weigh in on the law enforcement policy that Trump said he wanted to implement. "I haven't given enough thought to it," Ryan said initially about "stop and frisk," and added, "we need to do more to stop home grown jihadism." He touted his "better way" agenda and then shifted to stressing that law enforcement has used their own strategies, "I think there are success stories that local law enforcement have used to guard against this and that's the kind of ideas we need to have." Earlier this week Ryan said he wanted Congress to complete work on a major criminal justice reform bill. But at his weekly news conference he made it clear he didn't want to comment on the GOP nominee's proposal saying it wasn't an area where he had expertise, referring reporters to Judiciary Committee Chairman Bob Goodlatte. 
Cash-strapped Senate Democrats just got some good news: A $1 million donation from Sen. Patty Murray. The Washington senator and No. 4 Democratic leader made the transfer from her flush campaign account to the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee, announced by leaders in a party lunch. The infusion follows $3 million in transfers from Sen. Chuck Schumer, who is poised to ascend to the Democratic leader spot next year. Story Continued Below Murray, a former two-time Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee chair, is poised to move up in leadership next year, though she has yet to announce what role she will pursue. And her donation could help in the tight battle for Senate control: Party honchos are practically begging for enough money to run robust TV campaigns in a handful of battleground states.
Donald Trump enjoyed his strongest moments of the first presidential debate railing about trade deals crushing manufacturing jobs and then ripping the slowest economic recovery since World War II. But when it came to his specific plans to make things better, Trump came up short and ran into a details-obsessed opponent who shredded the GOP nominee’s tax plan as a retread of tax cuts for the rich that would explode the deficit. Story Continued Below Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton even had a catchphrase handy to parry Trump’s promises of a rocket-fueled economy: “trumped-up trickle-down.” If Trump’s goal on Monday was to put some serious meat behind his promises to ignite a sluggish economy and put Clinton squarely on the defensive on the issue, he succeeded only sporadically. Trump wasted no time in the high-decibel debate in blaming bad trade policies for a hollowing out of the American economy. “Our jobs are fleeing the country. They are going to Mexico, they are going to many other countries,” Trump said at the start. “We have to stop our jobs from being stolen from us. We have to stop our companies from leaving the United States and with it, firing all of their people.” Trump said his plan to cut the top corporate tax rate from 35 percent to 15 percent would “be a job creator like we haven’t seen since Ronald Reagan.” These kinds of appeals have helped Trump draw nearly even in the presidential race and ahead in swing states such as Ohio that have suffered the loss of well-paying manufacturing jobs that do not require advanced training. But when it came to laying out specifics for how he would create a renaissance in American manufacturing, Trump ran onto rougher ground. Pressed by moderator Lester Holt for details on how he would get jobs back, Trump muddled through a digression on China devaluing its currency (it has actually been appreciating) and saying we have to “stop them from leaving.” Exactly how was unclear beyond the imposition of large import taxes that many economists believe would spark damaging and possibly recession-inducing trade wars. Clinton responded in part by agreeing with Trump that trade deals should be better, ceding the offensive to the Republican nominee at the start. But she quickly pivoted to a simple message: The economy is much better than it was when President Barack Obama took over in 2009, and slashing taxes for top earners is not the best way to fix what’s currently broken. “I think that trade is an important issue. Of course, we are 5 percent of the world’s population. We have to trade with the other 95 percent. And we need to have smart, fair trade deals,” she said before launching into her first prepared zinger of the night. “The kind of plan that Donald has put forth would be trickle-down economics all over again. In fact, it would be the most extreme version, the biggest tax cuts for the top percent of the people in this country, that we’ve ever had. I call it trumped-up trickle-down, because that’s exactly what it would be.” This was one of Clinton’s top agenda items for the night: Cut off Trump’s rise with voters frustrated by the grinding nature of the U.S. economy and hungry for some kind of change of course, even if it’s delivered to them by an unconventional candidate they don’t really think is prepared for the presidency. Polls consistently show Americans view the country as on the wrong track and the economy as either stuck in the mud or getting worse. A POLITICO-Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health poll out this week showed that 56 percent of Americans believe the economy has stayed the same or gotten worse since the 2008 meltdown. The facts do not really support this, with unemployment down to 4.9 percent and incomes finally starting to rise significantly for middle-income earners. But many people still don’t perceive the economy as improving, something Clinton also tried to address Monday night, while also taking the opportunity to needle Trump on his business record. “Let’s stop for a second and remember where we were eight years ago. We had the worst financial crisis, the Great Recession, the worst since the 1930s,” she said. “That was in large part because of tax policies that slash taxes on the wealthy, failed to invest in the middle class, took their eyes off of Wall Street and created a perfect storm. In fact, Donald was one of the people who rooted for the housing crisis. He said back in 2006, gee, I hope it does collapse because then I can go in and buy some and make some money.” Trump did not even try to rebut this assessment, just as he did not deny paying little or no federal income taxes for years. “That’s called business,” he said about profiting from the housing market collapse. Clinton didn’t let up, diving again into her bag of statistics to rip Trump’s tax plan by citing studies showing Trump’s proposed corporate and individual cuts would “blow up the debt by over $5 trillion” and cost more than 3 million jobs. Trump also did not have much of a response for this attack, pivoting instead to the increase in the debt during Obama’s term and then simply stating: “I will bring back jobs. You can’t bring back jobs.” Clinton tossed in a favorable reference to the 1990s economy under President Bill Clinton, which saw 20 million new jobs created, and rejected Trump’s notion that Clinton signing the North American Free Trade Agreement was a disaster for the U.S. “I think my husband did a pretty good job in the 1990s. I think a lot about what worked and how we can make it work again,” she said. “Incomes went up for everybody. Manufacturing went up in the 1990s, if we’re actually going to look at the facts.” And on it went from there, Trump offering bold promises and generalizations but looking very thin on how he might deliver them. The Clinton campaign’s hope with these debates is that the remaining pool of undecided voters tempted by the thought of a major course change will look at Trump’s lack of specifics — and Clinton’s command of data and detail — and decide it’s not worth taking the risk. Clinton also had a zinger waiting for Trump when he ripped into her over her initial praise for the Trans Pacific Partnership agreement. “You called it the gold standard. You called it the gold standard of trade deals. You said it’s the finest deal you’ve ever seen,” he said. “And then you heard what I said about it and all of a sudden you were against it.” It’s a potentially powerful argument for Trump in the Rust Belt. But Clinton was ready. “Well, Donald, I know you live in your own reality, but that is not the facts,” she said. “The facts are — I did say I hoped it would be a good deal, but when it was negotiated, which I was not responsible for, I concluded it wasn’t. I wrote about that in my book before you even announced.”
Ted Cruz on Friday said he would vote for Donald Trump for president and that he would encourage others to do the same, reversing months of opposition to his bitter primary rival. "After many months of careful consideration, of prayer and searching my own conscience, I have decided that on Election Day, I will vote for the Republican nominee, Donald Trump," he wrote in a Facebook post. Story Continued Below Cruz said he endorsed both because of his primary pledge to support the party nominee, as well as his concerns about Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton. "Last year, I promised to support the Republican nominee. And I intend to keep my word," Cruz said. "Second, even though I have had areas of significant disagreement with our nominee, by any measure Hillary Clinton is wholly unacceptable — that’s why I have always been #NeverHillary." A Trump adviser said Trump and Cruz spoke after the endorsement. For months, Cruz had avoided endorsing Trump, his primary foe in an intensely personal race. People close to him were sharply divided on Friday over the decision, hours before he made his endorsement. “If he announces he endorses, it destroys his political brand,” said someone who had worked for Cruz's campaign. Steve Deace, a prominent conservative Iowa radio host who was a major Cruz backer, also tweeted Friday that the senator would endorse Trump. A spokeswoman for Cruz did not respond to multiple requests for comment. "This is gonna be a political disaster," Deace texted after Cruz made his decision official. "Sad. Unavoidable. Entirely self inflicted." Trump responded in a statement that he was "greatly honored" by the nod. "We have fought the battle and he was a tough and brilliant opponent," Trump said. "I look forward to working with him for many years to come in order to make America great again." Cruz had previously gone as far as to tell Republicans to “vote your conscience” at the Republican National Convention, rather than urging them to get behind the nominee. Since then, Cruz, who may face a primary challenge in his 2018 Senate reelection campaign, has come under mounting pressure to get behind Trump, though many Cruz loyalists see an endorsement as unacceptable. At the outset of the Republican primary, Cruz went out of his way to praise Trump, expecting that the real estate mogul’s support would crumble, and Cruz would be the beneficiary. But as the primary continued and Trump moved into an increasingly strong position in the race, Cruz sought to fashion himself as the conservative alternative to Trump, repeatedly describing his opponent as a liberal who had few differences with Hillary Clinton. The race turned increasingly personal between the two, with Trump attacking Cruz’s wife and seeking to link Cruz’s father to conspiracy theories about assassinating former President John F. Kennedy. On the day that he dropped out of the race, Cruz took his criticism of Trump to a new level, accusing him of being a “pathological liar,” a “serial philanderer” and an “utterly amoral” “bully.” The personal differences between the two of them, as well as Trump’s willingness to flaunt conservative orthodoxy that many Cruz loyalists embrace, has made supporting the nominee a nonstarter for many of the senator’s most committed backers. But slowly, other conservative leaders, including many who backed Cruz in the primary, have gotten on board with Trump, and have made clear publicly that Cruz should do the same. They view the election as a binary election between Hillary Clinton and Trump, rather than accepting the more nuanced stance that Cruz took at the convention. “I think he should give a nod of support,” said Tony Perkins, the head of the Family Research Council, who was previously an important Cruz backer. “I think a lot of folks that supported Ted feel that way. Given the choices before us, yeah, I would like to see Ted give his support to Trump at this point.” The initial calculation at the RNC from many who backed Cruz’s decision was that, assuming Trump went up in flames in November, Cruz would emerge from the election respected as one of the last principled conservatives, willing to serve as the final bulwark against a candidate who violated many of the values conservatives hold dear. Supporting Trump would tie Cruz’s fortunes more closely to his, a possible complication for Cruz, whose fans have long wanted him to look at running for president again in 2020. But there is a more urgent need to attend to: Cruz’s unwillingness to support Trump has become an issue in his home state as he prepares for Senate re-election. The morning after he refused to support Trump at the RNC, the Texas delegation breakfast broke out into chaos as delegates split over whether or not Cruz should support the nominee. Since then, Rep. Mike McCaul (R-Texas), a possible Cruz primary challenger for Cruz’s Senate seat, has been using the senator’s unwillingness to support Trump as a means of attacking Cruz. McCaul attacked Cruz on the Laura Ingraham Show this week for breaking his pledge to support the nominee, declaring he was “very angry” about the dissension. “He broke his word,” said McCaul, the wealthy chairman of the House Homeland Security Committee. The Texas senator has been gradually making moves to soothe his often poor relations with fellow senators since his primary loss, helping raise money for at-risk Republicans and donating $100,000 to the Senate GOP’s campaign arm. But many Republicans on Capitol Hill have prodded him to go further and hold his nose with an endorsement. While several Republicans said Cruz’s bloc of conservative voters could make the difference for Trump, others said any endorsement would be more about helping secure Cruz’s own political standing than Trump’s. “I don’t think endorsements matter,” said one Republican senator. Agreed Perkins, “At this point, I think it’s probably more beneficial to Ted than it is to Trump, to show that Ted is a team player. And look, there’s a lot of folks, like myself, [for whom] Donald Trump was not our first choice. But he is working hard to gain the support and confidence of conservatives, and the alternative is clear.” Of people close to Cruz who disagree with any indication of support for Trump, some say that voting for Trump — but attempting to distinguish between a vote and an endorsement, as senators such as Kelly Ayotte have done — might be forgivable. But a full-on endorsement, especially one that would entail campaigning for the Republican nominee, would be harder to stomach. Cruz’s move toward his former rival takes away the most prominent anti-Trump holdout in Congress, leaving Sens. Jeff Flake of Arizona, Susan Collins of Maine, Ben Sasse of Nebraska, Lindsey Graham of South Carolina, Mark Kirk of Illinois and Mike Lee of Utah as the remaining senators who either oppose or haven’t supported Trump. Few have shown any inclination to follow Cruz’s lead. “I’m against Hillary Clinton for president, that’s where I am,” Heller said Thursday. “We’ll go through the debate and see how it plays out.” Lee, Cruz’s strongest defender and closest friend in the Senate, indicated he has no plans to follow Cruz’s lead. In a statement, Lee said he is watching “each candidate's grasp of — and willingness to work tirelessly to restore — federalism and separation of powers. “I am always eager to support any candidate willing to make those structural constitutional protections a priority. In this race and in every other, I will continue to use the same criteria,” Lee said. But Trump has made some overtures to Lee, on Friday including him on a list of his potential choices for a Supreme Court nomination. Lee was not interested. Asked about a possible endorsement of Trump, Jason Johnson, Cruz’s chief strategist on the campaign, responded with what appeared to be a photo of himself, with his hand over his face. Matthew Nussbaum, Seung Min Kim and Shane Goldmacher contributed to this report.
Washington (CNN)Russia might be behind the hack of the Democratic National Committee, according to US officials and lawmakers -- but not Donald Trump. The Republican presidential nominee came up with many alternative possibilities at the first general election debate on Monday night. "It could be Russia, but it could also be China. It could also be lots of other people," he said during the first presidential debate. "It also could be somebody sitting on their bed that weighs 400 pounds." He also devoted a portion of his answer about cyberattacks to the precociousness of his 10-year-old son. "So we have to get very, very tough on cyber and cyber warfare. It is a huge problem. I have a son. He's 10 years old. He has computers. He is so good with these computers, it's unbelievable. The security aspect of cyber is very, very tough. And maybe it's hardly doable," he said. CNN's Reality Check vets the claims of the debate Rep. Adam Schiff, the top Democrat on the House Intelligence Committee, said maybe Trump is confused about where the hacker's "bed" lies. "My guess is if this guy weighs 400 pounds he's sitting somewhere in Russia right now," Schiff told CNN's Wolf Blitzer on "The Situation Room" Tuesday. "I just find this, like his statements about ISIS that played into Russian propaganda, really deplorable." And cyber experts say the remarks seem unaware of the seriousness of the threat. "I was pretty surprised during the debate -- there is no ambiguity here," former Obama administration cybersecurity official Chris Finan said. "Everybody knows who did it. So to suggest it was an individual -- and the other thing is -- these intrusion sets are fairly sophisticated," said Finan, now CEO at Manifold Technology. "To say it was an individual or lone actor or small group, that to me shows a lack of appreciation about the threat and how sophisticated and pernicious it is." So how on-target was Trump with his cybersecurity comments? Here are some expert perspectives. Could a 400-pound hacker have pulled the DNC breach off? The short answer is no, said Dmitri Alperovitch, co-founder of CrowdStrike, the cybersecurity firm that investigated and responded to the hack of the DNC. It's nearly impossible to know any hacker's weight. But one thing that is clear to experts like Alperovitch is that government-backed hackers are well-staffed and well-resourced, using very particular software, break-in tactics and cover-up techniques that act as a signature of each group. DNC hack: What you need to know In the case of the DNC, CrowdStrike discovered two groups inside the system, working unbeknownst to the other, which are well-known as Russian-linked hacking operations and have breached dozens or even hundreds of high-value targets like government agencies, high-level officials' offices and think tanks. Alperovitch said it was "pretty unlikely" an individual could have mimicked all the various ways that these groups are distinct, from the software to the "tradecraft." Let alone the other targets bearing the same signatures. There has been some official talk of Russian involvement, hasn't there? US officials have only pointed at Russia anonymously, not wanting to ruffle the delicate Moscow-Washington relationship at this point.o But US officials from President Barack Obama on down have warned about Russia efforts to interfere in the election through hacking. Two arrested for hacking US officials Director of National Intelligence James Clapper has been one of the more forward-leaning. "They see a US conspiracy behind every bush," Clapper said a few weeks ago when asked if the Russians wanted to disrupt the presidential vote. "They believe that we are trying to influence political developments in Russia, and so their natural response is to retaliate." Could an individual hacker still do damage? Most definitely. Beyond Russia and other nation-state attackers and financially motivated criminal operators, often organized in mafia-like gangs, there are also lone-wolf hackers. Experts divide them into categories like "hacktivists" and "script kiddies," opportunistic hackers motivated by notoriety or fame. Examples include Guccifer, a now-convicted Romanian hacker who recently pleaded guilty to hacking the accounts of the family of President George W. Bush and former Secretary of State Colin Powell. Lawmakers say Russia behind hacks (A character claiming credit for the DNC hack surfaced online going by "Guccifer 2.0," but Alperovitch said that was just an attempt to divert suspicion from the Russians as the Guccifer redux" has been proven to not natively speak Romanian.") In another case, two North Carolina men were arrested for allegedly breaking into the email accounts of CIA Director John Brennan and National Intelligence Director James Clapper. How do individuals go about their hacking? While carrying out an attack the level of the DNC hack requires skill and manpower that individuals don't possess, attacks like breaking a few email accounts is within the realm of a single hacker. Often the perpetrators use what's known as social engineering -- gathering clues about a person from their public life online and then using it to guess passwords or security questions to get into accounts and release the contents online. But that's still probably beyond the abilities of most 10-year-olds. 
President Obama painted Donald Trump as unprepared and temperamentally unfit to be commander-in-chief after the first presidential debate. "Anybody who was watching the debate, I think got a sense that you got really sharply-contrasting visions about where we should take the country. And I’m admittedly biased. I have worked with Hillary. I know her. She is well-prepared. She’s got the right temperament for the job," Obama said in an interview with "On Air With Ryan Seacrest." He contrasted that with what what he believes Trump has demonstrated. "The other guy doesn’t have the preparation, the temperament or the core values of inclusion and making everybody, you know, have opportunity that would take our country forward," he said. Obama described why he thinks this election is particularly important and why voters need to turn out. "Every election is a big election. This one’s especially big just because there’s such big differences between the two candidates, and people need to register to vote," he said. "There's only one candidate in this race -- Hillary Clinton -- who's actually qualified to do the job and make good decisions for us." The president expressed concern over Trump's stance on two issues he thinks will be pivotal to his daughters' generation --- nuclear non-proliferation and climate change. "I get worried when I hear somebody like Donald Trump start saying, 'Well, I don't necessarily know whether Japan or North Korea should be protected by us, maybe they should get their own nuclear weapon.' That shows somebody who doesn't pay attention to these issues and you don't necessarily want close to the nuclear button," he said. The president added, "When you hear somebody like Trump say he thinks this is a plot of the Chinese, it's a fraud and a hoax when 99 percent of scientists are saying, 'No we've got to do something about this. That worries me.'" Asked what he thinks when his name is mentioned in a debate, Obama said, "If I got heated about stuff that was said about me at this point, I would be even more in the grey than I already am. I've developed a pretty thick skin." 
Washington (CNN)With two months to go before Election Day, Democrats have the cash advantage in the race for the White House, but Republicans have the cash advantage in the race for the Senate. Presidential campaigns and their supportive super PACs filed new numbers Tuesday that continue to show Clinton's cash lead in the homestretch of the presidential race. Clinton's campaign raised $59.5 million and had about $68 million on hand at the end of August; Trump's raised $41.7 million and had $50.2 million on hand. Meanwhile, a cadre of Republican donors -- most prominently, Sheldon Adelson -- are keeping Republicans competitive in down-ballot races. Here are the five takeaways from the money race: Hillary Clinton is very dependent on a few billionaires Under-noticed in this campaign have been the very few Democratic billionaires who are responsible for Clinton's advertising machine: Priorities USA. The super PAC had a record-breaking month, collecting $23.4 million during summer's dog days. The bulk of the money is from a select few: Fred Eychaner and Daniel Abraham, who gave $3 million each, George Soros, who donated $2.5 million, Don Sussman, who kicked in another $2 million, and Laurene Powell Jobs, whose LLC contributed another $2 million. Those five people are responsible for a majority of the money that Priorities USA has raised, and their names have littered Democratic campaign finance reports for the entire 2016 race. Trump doesn't have donors of similar sizes, and that's why his super PACs have failed to keep pace. Only one new name appeared on Trump's PAC's reports: Cherna Moskowitz, who gave $1 million to a group run by close Trump allies (and billionaires) Bob and Rebekah Mercer. What's Clinton's money good for? Ads Clinton has enjoyed a fundraising advantage over Trump for the entire campaign, and it's allowed her to build an organization that Trump could not. The Democratic nominee spent almost $50 million last month -- way more than she spent during any other month -- and that's due to $33 million in "media buys." That's more than six times as much as they spent on payroll costs. And her campaign, joint fundraising committees and Priorities USA had $194 million on hand, meaning plenty of more ads are coming. She's still struggling with small donors: only $8.4 million of the money she raised last month if from donors who gave $200 or less. Trump is finally raising the big bucks Despite record spending in the month of August -- including a hefty amount on its digital firm -- Trump still entered the month with over $50 million on hand. Trump collected $12 million from small-dollar donors who gave directly to his campaign, and he himself added another $2 million to his own bid. $20.2 million came from his joint committees with the Republican National Committee. Trump finally began advertising in the month of August, and it's reflected in his campaign finance report. He spent almost $30 million last month, $11.5 million more than he spent in any other month. The return of Mike Bloomberg The former New York City mayor remains the most prominent political donor who hews to the center of the political aisle. His super PAC, Independence USA, has primarily focused on supporting candidates who support restrictions on firearms, and has emerged as a leading backer of Pennsylvania Sen. Pat Toomey. But he personally is backing the Democratic ticket for president. The billionaire last month made his largest donation yet to his group: another $8.5 million from his personal fortune. That's his largest check ever to the super PAC. Senate Republicans have the upper hand Thanks to $21.5 million from the Adelsons, groups backing Senate Republicans have more to spend in the homestretch than do those backing Senate Democrats. The Senate Leadership Fund, an allied group in New Hampshire, and the Koch brothers' super PAC, Freedom Partners Action Fund, raised $32.5 million in August. That also doesn't include various groups that aren't required to disclose their donors, such as the US Chamber of Commerce or other Koch nonprofit groups. And the Democrats? The main Senate groups -- Senate Majority PAC, Emily's List and the League of Conservation Voters -- took in only $20.5 million. Environmental activist Tom Steyer on Tuesday pledged another $15 million to his joint effort with labor unions to develop a coordinated ground game for the Democratic ticket. But here's what we do know now: The Democrats don't have an Adelson equivalent. Their main Senate donor last month is Facebook co-founder Dustin Moskovitz, who along with his wife gave $5 million of the $20 million he has pledged to spend in 2016. In the Senate cash race, Adelson is a game-changer. 
One of the victims wounded in a stabbing at a central Minnesota mall says the man who carried out the attack showed no emotion and his eyes looked blank. Ryan Schliep, one of 10 people who suffered wounds that were not life-threatening before the attacker was fatally shot, told WCCO-TV that the man "just walked right at me" before striking quickly and penetrating the skin of his scalp. "He looked just blank in the eyes like he wasn't even there," Schliep said shortly before being released from a St. Cloud hospital. Authorities are treating Saturday's stabbings at Crossroads Center Mall as a possible act of terrorism, in part because an Islamic State-run news agency claimed that the attacker was a "soldier of the Islamic State" who had heeded the group's calls for attacks in countries that are part of a U.S.-led anti-IS coalition. But it wasn't immediately known whether the extremist group had planned the attack or knew about it beforehand. St. Cloud Police Chief Blair Anderson said Monday the attack appeared to be the work of a single individual and there was no sign that the attacker, identified as 20-year-old Dahir Adan, was radicalized or communicated with any terrorist group. President Barack Obama said the stabbings had no apparent connection to weekend bombings in New York and New Jersey. Because Adan was Somali, leaders of the state's large Somali community acknowledged the prospect of a "long winter" for their people after the stabbings, but warned not to quickly accept the terrorism connection. "We cannot give ISIS and other terrorist organizations more air time and propaganda without real facts," said Jaylani Hussein, executive director of the Council on American-Islamic Relations' Minnesota chapter. Little is known about Adan, who was identified Sunday by his father, Ahmed Adan, and then by St. Cloud police Monday night. He had only a traffic ticket on his record, was apparently out of work after his job as a part-time security guard ended and hadn't enrolled in college since the spring semester. Adan was wearing a security guard's uniform during the attack. A spokesman for the family, Abdi Wahid Osman, read from a statement expressing condolences for the injured and anyone else who was impacted. "As we mourn the death of our son, Dahir Adan, who was very dear to us, we are in deep shock as everyone else is in the state of Minnesota," the statement said. Federal officials released no new information Monday on the investigation into the stabbing, which was stopped by an off-duty police officer just minutes into it. FBI Special Agent in Charge Rick Thornton has said authorities were digging into Adan's background and possible motives, looking at social media accounts and electronic devices and talking to people he knew. Minnesota has the nation's largest Somali population, an estimated 57,000 people. Both Anderson and Gov. Mark Dayton warned against a possible backlash due to the stabbings, especially in St. Cloud, where Somalis in the 65,000-resident city about 65 miles (104 km) northwest of Minneapolis have spoken about mistreatment in the past. "I implore the citizens of St. Cloud and the citizens of Minnesota to rise above this incident and remember our common humanity," Dayton said. "It's going to be tough times. We know it's going to be a long winter for this community," said Haji Yusuf, who is part of UniteCloud, a local group founded to tackle racial and ethnic tension in the city. Last year, St. Cloud school officials met with Somali parents, community elders and students after Somali-American students walked out to protest their treatment. One student had said Somali-Americans were called Islamic State members and had their headscarves pulled off, and a photo posted on social media of a Somali-American student who was using a wheelchair after breaking her leg with a caption that said she was "disabled in ISIS." Five years earlier, CAIR's Minnesota chapter asked for a federal civil rights investigation into allegations that Muslim students had been harassed at two St. Cloud high schools. A 2011 agreement resolved the case, but the U.S. Department of Education still was monitoring the case last year. In 2013, CAIR called on police in nearby Waite Park to reject a training program about Somalis because a flier unfairly suggested the activities of al-Shabab — a militant group in east Africa that has had success in recruiting Somali-Americans in Minnesota — are supported by most Muslims. If the stabbings are ultimately deemed a terrorist act, it would be the first carried out by a Somali on U.S. soil. Adan was employed by the security firm Securitas, and was assigned for a few months to an Electrolux factory near the mall, Electrolux spokeswoman Eloise Hale said. His father, speaking through an interpreter, told the Minneapolis Star Tribune that he was 22, but court records and a driver's license database showed his age as 20. Police also said he was 20. A spokesman for St. Cloud State University confirmed that Adan was a student majoring in information systems, but hadn't enrolled since the spring semester. Yusuf, who has spoken with Adan's parents, said Adan went to the mall to pick up an iPhone. Yusuf said Adan seemed happy when left the home, which was the last time his parents saw him. A person at the T-Mobile store where Yusuf said Adan had gone declined to comment or take a message for his supervisor. Five minutes after authorities received the first 911 call, Jason Falconer, a part-time officer in the city of Avon who was there shopping, began shooting the attacker as he was lunging at him with the knife, Anderson said, and continued to engage him as the attacker got up three times. Avon Police Chief Corey Nellis said Monday that Falconer owns a firing range and is the city's firearms instructor. "If I was going to ask anybody to fire ... live rounds in a crowded mall, I would trust his abilities next to anybody's," Nellis said. The mall reopened Monday after being closed Sunday. ——— Forliti reported from Minneapolis. Associated Press writers Steve Karnowski and John Mone contributed to this report from St. Cloud, Minnesota, and Jeff Baenen contributed from Minneapolis. ——— This story has been corrected to show that the Electrolux facility is near, but not in the Crossroads Center mall at St. Cloud. It also has been corrected to reflect that Adan's age to 20, rather than 22, and to reflect that Yusuf's group is UniteCloud, rather than OneCloud.
Nate Smith, executive director of the Texas Nationalist Movement, looked uncertain as a man identifying himself as an east Ukrainian resistance fighter pledged solidarity to Smith’s struggle for an independent Texas. Standing in a conference room in the Ritz Hotel in central Moscow on Sunday, Smith nodded noncommittally and handed over his business card. It wasn’t the only incongruous encounter taking place at the Ritz at what has been dubbed Moscow’s international conference of separatists, an eclectic Kremlin-funded gathering of organizations and sometimes wacky individuals pressing for self-rule for often unlikely territories. Amidst the heavy glitz of the hotel, Catalonian separatists and dissident Irish republicans listened politely to presentations from east Ukrainian rebels, Azerbaijani minorities and the thoughts of the self-proclaimed "King of Hawaii," who called in via video link. And among the few dozen activists comparing ideas for how to achieve self-determination, were two Americans campaigning for Texan and Californian secession from the United States. The conference, now in its second year, is funded largely by the Kremlin and organized by the Anti-Globalization Movement of Russia, a group that closely follows government positions. The movement says it is unconnected to the Kremlin, but the hotel conference was almost entirely paid for by a charitable fund founded by President Vladimir Putin, which provided close to $546,000 for the project, according to public records. The attendees, including the Texan delegate, had been offered free flights and accommodation. The conference’s organizers present it as a platform for marginalized groups, but its agenda overlaps with Kremlin efforts to promote Russia as an alternative guardian for global order, at the head of democratic movement opposed to alleged American imperialism.     “Our main goal is to create a multi-polar world,” the conference’s creator, Aleksander V. Ionov, told its participants. “Our president, Vladimir Vladimirovich Putin, is probably the main anti-globalist in the world.” Ionov himself, a relatively little-known businessman, has repeatedly met Syrian President Bashar al-Assad, whom Russia is backing militarily, saying the two discussed humanitarian aid and media activities two weeks ago. Ionov’s conference plays into Moscow’s own long-time policy of backing separatists in its former Soviet neighbors. While jailing and harassing separatist groups at home, Moscow has leveraged them abroad a pretext for military intervention, most recently fomenting the violent secessionist conflict in eastern Ukraine. A sizable presence of pro-Russian rebel supporters was visible on Sunday, while not a single Russian separatist group took part. All that and the anti-American flavor sometimes made uncomfortable listening for the groups less used to the atmosphere in the Kremlin’s orbit. “It’s kind of awkward I guess,” Smith said after one 30-minute denunciation of American inequity.   Smith’s group, the Texas Nationalist Movement, is campaigning for a referendum on whether Texas should exit the United States. Founded over 10 years ago, the group attracted some attention recently when it came within two votes of forcing the Texas state GOP to bring a debate on a secession referendum to the floor of the Republican convention. Smith said he was grateful for the chance to promote his campaign and was eager to clarify his attendance did not mean he was aligning with the Kremlin. “We’re here to have a dialogue. We’re not in agreement with all the groups that are here,” Smith said. “We’re here for very specific reasons. We came here to make a statement on behalf of the people of Texas.” It was a sentiment echoed by Louis J. Marinelli from the YES California Independence Campaign, there to get his message out about his plan to make the Golden State a nation. “We want to draw attention to our campaign,” Marinelli said. “We’re not signing an alliance with Russia or anything like that." The two secessionists’ urge for independence stems largely from a distaste with American foreign policy and a sense the U.S. has become dysfunctional. A gentle-mannered IT consultant married to a Russian, Marinelli is aiming for a secession referendum by 2019. “The U.S. government is so dysfunctional it can’t be repaired from within anymore, and if we were a separate nation running our own affairs, we could improve the quality of life for Californians,” Marinelli said. Both men were hoping for a Donald Trump victory in the U.S. presidential elections, banking on a surge in people looking to detach themselves from America. The U.K.'s recent "Brexit" vote to leave the European Union had also heartened many attendees. But why exactly the Kremlin had decided to pay to gather them in Moscow, few among the foreign attendees could say. Nor did they appear particularly interested. “I’m not here to make presumptions about potential reasons for this conference,” Smith said. However, the conference -- and its location in one of Moscow’s expensive hotels, within shouting distance of the Kremlin walls -- slots into a recognizable recent Russian strategy. Russia has been backing far right political parties in the West, in particular, reportedly funding France’s anti-European Union party, the Front National, with a $10 million loan. The practice echoes that of the Soviet Union, which secretly supported radical fringe groups around the world, but now coupled with elaborate disinformation campaigns from state media outlets. “It’s a school-book case,” said Peter Kreko, a Fulbright visiting professor at Indiana University who has studied Russia’s use of the far right. “The simple reason is that Russia is interested in dividing the Western world. The strategy is not to create new divisions but to take the most from divisions already there.” Kreko said the idea was to back groups hindering European integration and to undermine faith in Western-style liberal democracy. “The tool-kit is pretty much the same as in the Soviet Union. Any kind of movements that can cause chaos,” Kreko said, adding he thought the conference was also a prop for domestic propaganda that state media would use to paint Russia as a champion of democracy. Few of the conference attendees were concerned they might become Kremlin pawns, seeing it simply as a way to get their message out. “Everybody’s using everybody,” Marinelli said. “We’re using this conference for our own purposes. We want the attention so that we can get the word out, they want ..." he trailed off before finishing. “Everybody’s got their own agenda, right? So, that’s just the way it is.” For most of the attendees the main pull appeared to be the guaranteed presence of the media, attracted by the conference’s oddity. “I’ve talked to seven media [organizations] today. I've got to get my story out,” said Diarmuid Mac Dubhglais, international secretary for Republican Sinn Féin, a tiny Irish republican splinter group that supports the violent removal of British control over Northern Ireland. In any case, Mac Dubhglais said, he wouldn’t let “Vladimir himself” impose ideas on him. “I’m not going to start passing out propaganda when I go home and start marching Soviet-style," he said. Besides, he said, perhaps the Russian motive was altruistic. “Maybe in fairness, they might think the cause is just,” he said then paused, before adding: “I’m hoping that’s what they think."
(CNN)Customs and Border Protection officers put information about Ahmad Khan Rahami into a shared law enforcement agency database and sent a notice about him after interviewing Rahami at the airport when he returned from a year-long trip to Pakistan and Afghanistan in 2014, a US law enforcement official told CNN Tuesday. Rahami was flagged for secondary screening when he came back from the trip. It was not the first time Customs and Border Protection agents had pulled him aside for extra scrutiny after traveling to that region. The official said the information he provided about visiting his family was put into a database that can be accessed by other law enforcement agencies, noting this is routine procedure. Additionally, the official says Customs and Border Protection sent a report about Rahami to the FBI and other agencies in 2014 as someone who investigators should be aware of given his travel and the amount of time spent in areas associated with terrorist groups. A federal law enforcement official familiar with the information sent to the FBI said Rahami's information was part of a bulletin regarding a "batch" of people who traveled to high-risk areas. "He was not singled out," the official said. The notice was sent to the FBI before August 2014, when the FBI was alerted by a tip that Rahami's father called him a terrorist. The FBI would have had access to the information when they investigated the tip. Eventually the case was closed after the father downplayed the concern. The official cautioned these bulletins are "pretty common." A senior law enforcement official estimated that "several dozens" of these individual reports are produced a week. If Rahami had raised red flags during the actual interview FBI investigators would have been brought in for further questioning of him right there in the airport, the first official said. That did not happen, the official noted. The official explained that it was not what Rahami said in interview but the fact he'd traveled multiple times to this region of concern that prompted the bulletin The official said Rahami had certain rights as a naturalized US citizen and as a result could not be held longer unless there was good reason. The senior law enforcement official, explaining the process for secondary screening, said if additional concerns are raised during secondary screening, two additional steps can be taken. An interagency report with information about the traveler can be sent forward immediately to law enforcement and intelligence agencies or the information can be integrated into the Customs and Border Protection's National Targeting Center's weekly report. If the concern is more serious, the screeners can refer the traveler to an investigation by the Joint Terrorism Task Force and the FBI. Representatives from the task force are co-located at airports like JFK and Newark due to the high volume of travelers that are a concern. 
Washington (CNN)Rudy Giuliani blasted Hillary Clinton as "too stupid to be president" because she stayed with her husband after the Monica Lewinsky scandal. "She didn't just stand by him -- she attacked Monica Lewinsky, and after being married to Bill Clinton for 20 years, if you didn't know the moment Monica Lewinsky said Bill Clinton violated her and was telling the truth -- then you're too stupid to be president," the former New York City mayor and prominent Donald Trump surrogate told Elite Daily shortly after Monday night's debate. Trump told CNN's Dana Bash shortly after the debate concluded that he was "very happy that I was able to hold back on the -- you know, on the indiscretions with respect to Bill Clinton, because I have a lot of respect for Chelsea Clinton and I just didn't want to say what I was going to say." Giuliani said the GOP nominee's biggest mistake during the debate was being "too reserved and too gentlemanly." Had he been debating, Giuliani said, he would have "talked about what she did to Monica Lewinsky, what that woman standing there did to Monica Lewinsky." The Lewinsky scandal resulted in Bill Clinton being impeached on charges of perjury and obstruction of justice, though he was ultimately acquitted in the Senate. When news of the scandal first broke in 1998, Clinton led the White House's behind-the-scenes damage-control efforts and appeared on several news programs to defend her husband, blaming the allegations on a "vast right-wing conspiracy" that she said was part of a political effort to bring down the president. Giuliani, however, accused Clinton of "trying to paint her as an insane young woman." He did not offer any proof in his interview and a message left with the Clinton campaign seeking response was not immediately returned. Giuliani and Trump have both been married three times and engaged in extramarital relationships that have led to past divorces. But asked about Trump's hint that he could bring up Bill Clinton's infidelity at an upcoming debate, Clinton campaign manager Robby Mook told CNN's Alisyn Camerota on "New Day" Tuesday that the former first lady was "ready for anything." "This is -- it's such an obvious dodge. He spiraled out at the end of the debate and so, of course, he wants to bully. He wants to talk about the supposed indiscretions," Mook said. CNN's Dan Merica contributed to this report.
On the night of September 26, as the house lights dim in the Mack Complex at Hofstra University and the TV cameras go live, millions of Americans will be riveted to the scene. Will Donald Trump seem well prepared? Will Hillary Clinton’s commanding grasp of policy and nuance dazzle viewers? Will either candidate rise to the challenge and show voters that they have what it takes to be president? Experience suggests it’s hard to make a positive breakthrough—especially with two candidates so well known and so widely disliked. But what is possible is a serious unforced error. Story Continued Below Over the 56 years that presidential debates have been televised, one of their great legacies has been the sudden, public gaffe—a mistake live on TV that permanently cements the way voters see the candidate. Despite the hopeful aspirations of those voters who welcome a few hours of substantive deliberation on the major issues of the day, the truth is that these are televised performances. What the candidates say often matters less than how they look and what they do with their bodies: Every breath they take, every expression they make, and every emotion they convey can play a major role in determining how Americans evaluate their performances. And although debates don’t usually transform how most voters think of the candidates, they do confirm voters’ impressions—which matters on Election Day. For both candidates, this will be a particularly big challenge. Donald Trump is a larger-than-life presence who likes to intimidate, cajole and verbally bully his opponents by saying things long considered out of bounds—which could lead to an unforced error by Hillary Clinton. Hillary Clinton, who sometimes betrays an aversion to letting too much emotion show, has a steely temperament and stinging wit that could easily get under Trump’s skin, instigating him into losing control with the cameras rolling. If either of these happens, it will join the long line of memorable, campaign-changing moments that candidates fumbled into. 1. 1960: Nixon sweats while debating JFK Famously, the very first televised presidential debate offered early evidence that all future debates would be visual affairs. After eight years as vice president, Richard Nixon was running to inherit the White House from the enormously popular Dwight Eisenhower. His challenger was John F. Kennedy, the charismatic young Massachusetts senator whose eloquence and matinee-idol looks captivated much of the nation. On September 26, at the candidates’ first debate, Nixon proved to be in strong command of policy. But he looked terrible. Famously, prior to the debate, he declined to have any makeup applied to his face. But that decision was made worse by the fact that for much of the previous two weeks, Nixon had been away from the campaign trail nursing a knee infection. As a result, he looked peaked. From Richard Nixon sweating on camera during the first presidential debate to George H.W. Bush checking his watch before an audience question—here are some of the most prominent debate gaffes in U.S. history. During their televised rumble, Nixon could be seen sweating and, on camera, wiping his brow with a handkerchief. His pale color and five o'clock shadow didn’t help. All of which undercut his performance against Kennedy, who was a vision of youthful vigor. 2. 1976: Ford and Carter freeze in a moment of crisis A more dramatic moment occurred on September 23, 1976, when the sound system malfunctioned in Philadelphia’s Walnut Street Theater, forcing a 27-minute delay during the debate, during which President Gerald Ford and then-Governor Jimmy Carter awkwardly stood still on stage. The broadcast continued as the television crew worked furiously to fix the technical problems. Neither candidate wanted to move, fearing that it would somehow look bad to audiences at home, so instead they stood frozen in a comic parody better than anything that “Saturday Night Live” could imagine. Moderators Robert McNeil and Jim Lehrer kept talking as the candidates “stood helplessly like two Hollywood stand-ins,” wrote Jules Witcover in the Washington Post. Years later, Ford admitted that “I suspect both of us would have liked to sit down and relax while the technicians were fixing the system, but I think both of us were hesitant to make any gesture that might look like we weren’t physically or mentally able to handle a problem like this.” In the end, both men were diminished; they seemed less like leaders than deer caught in headlights. 3. 1980: Carter’s grim-faced critiques seem too self-serious In politics, brevity can be a virtue. During his only debate with Ronald Reagan in the fall of 1980, Jimmy Carter didn’t get that lesson. In front of a record-breaking 80.6 million viewers, Carter was hoping to paint Ronald Reagan as a creature of the far right—someone like Barry Goldwater, the GOP nominee whom Lyndon Johnson so successfully branded as an extremist some 16 years earlier. As Reagan sought to present himself as a more moderate, relatable Republican, Carter tried to forcefully punch back in the form of a lengthy and detailed monologue about health care and how Reagan had opposed Medicare in 1964. While Carter looked grim on the attack, Reagan grinned like a mildly disappointed father and shot back with just one phrase: “There you go again,” he said with a laugh. The line undercut Carter’s entire argument, making Reagan look like the bigger man. 4. 1984: Mondale lets Reagan’s one-liner negate a serious weakness During 1984’s first debate, Reagan, then 73, aroused concern when he seemed to have trouble remembering his answers or following the questions. He stumbled over his words and lacked clarity with each statement. His opponent, former Vice President Walter Mondale, was crisp and sharp. In contrast, Reagan rambled through his closing statement to the alarm of his advisers. Lou Cannon wrote that Reagan left the stage admitting to campaign adviser Stu Spencer “that he had flopped.” The Wall Street Journal’s headline the next morning captured the zeitgeist: “New Question in Race: Is Oldest President Now Showing his Age?” Fortunately for Reagan, he came back with a vengeance. In a later debate, when Baltimore Sun journalist Henry Trewitt asked Reagan if his age would prevent him from fulfilling the rigors of the presidency, Reagan had a quip for the ages: “I will not make age an issue in this campaign. I will not exploit, for political purposes, my opponent’s youth and inexperience.” The audience erupted in laughter, including Mondale, which completely undercut the seriousness of the underlying charge. 5. 1988: Dukakis seems cold in the face of a deeply personal question Perhaps the most shocking and controversial opening question in any presidential debate was posed by CNN anchor Bernard Shaw to Massachusetts Gov. Michael Dukakis at the second debate of 1988. Dukakis was widely seen as a technocrat, a man whose inner character remained a mystery to many voters. The night before the debate, at 2 a.m., Shaw thought of the question that could crack that shell and elicit passion from the candidate. And so he began the debate with it: “Governor, if Kitty Dukakis were raped and murdered, would you favor an irrevocable death penalty for the killer?” Reporters were shocked, but Dukakis seemed unperturbed. In a clinical and dispassionate manner, Dukakis simply said “No, I don’t Bernard, and I think you know that I’ve opposed the death penalty during all of my life. I don’t see any evidence that it’s a deterrent, and I think there are better and more effective ways to deal with violent crime.” It was as though Dukakis was talking about a stranger, answering in the same tone that a professor might use to explain a basic point of fact in the classroom. Voters were taken aback by how little passion the candidate seemed to have. “It was a question about Dukakis’s values and emotions,” his campaign director, Susan Estrich, later recalled. “When he answered by talking policy, I knew we lost the election.” 6. 1992: Bush checks his watch while an audience member asks a question During the 1992 campaign, few moments were more devastating to George H.W. Bush than his decision to look at his wrist watch in the middle of a town-hall debate with Bill Clinton and Ross Perot. Right before an audience member asked the candidates how the national debt personally affected the lives of the candidates and how they could relate to the economic challenges of average Americans, Bush was seen looking down to figure out how many minutes were left. “Only 10 more minutes of this crap,” Bush would later say he was thinking at the time. Checking the time would’ve been unflattering in a normal debate setup, but coming as it did—during a debate in which ordinary Americans posed questions to the presidential candidates—it seemed like Bush was bored and uninterested in hearing what real people had to say. For a candidate already under attack for not being concerned about domestic policy, his glance seemed to confirm everything that was said about him. 7. 2000: Gore sighs, eye-rolls and miscalculates in a confrontation with Bush Entering the debates in 2000, Vice President Al Gore and his supporters were pretty confident that they were up against a political lightweight in George W. Bush. Gore had been in high-profile debates before, and his team was confident that the debates would show American voters that Bush, a relative lightweight known to stumble over his words, lacked the clarity and gravitas needed to be president. During the first debate, Gore’s overdramatic attempts to emphasize how exasperated he was with Bush backfired big time. At several points, microphones caught Gore loudly sighing in response to Bush’s answers, which played into Republican arguments that he was arrogant and condescending. And as Bush criticized the Democrat’s plans for their “fuzzy math,” Gore was seen on the split screen rolling his eyes and shaking his head in frustration. At the third debate, a town-hall-style affair, one of the oddest moments of this or any other debate happened: Gore walked right up to Bush as he was speaking, as if to physically intimidate him. Looking up with an annoyed glance, Bush seized the moment, nodding his head with a smirk, and continuing on with his statement, making Gore’s action look odd as the audience laughed. Donna Brazile, who ran Gore’s campaign, believed that Gore won the debates on policy but “on mannerisms and the takeaway, he ended up losing … many of us remember the split-screen, and Al Gore was sitting there, rolling his eyes, perhaps, looking at George Bush, and basically he started to sigh.” 8. 2004: Bush cannot contain his irritation at Kerry After the first debate of the general election in 2000, President Bush came under criticism when he couldn’t contain how annoyed he was by some of the comments his opponent, Senator John Kerry, made about Bush’s record. Though Bush had benefited from the visuals of his 2000 debates against Vice President Al Gore, the critics weren’t so kind to Bush in 2004, when cameras caught him scowling, clenching his jaw and leaning tensely over his lectern, as he listened to Kerry speak. The Democratic National Committee didn’t wait long to pounce on the president. In their online video, “Faces of Frustration,” viewers were treated to a repeat of the split screen showing Kerry calmly speaking on the left side of the screen with Bush’s angry looks on the right side. *** Appearances are not the only thing that matters in the debates, of course. What the candidates say will be endlessly scrutinized with the media, while the quality of the one-line zingers, particularly in the viral age of Twitter, Facebook and YouTube, are important in shaping perceptions of the event. And on September 26, 56 years to the day since Nixon awkwardly sweated his way through the debate with JFK, we’ll see what happens.
A photographer who says he took the Skittles photo used by Donald Trump Jr. in a tweet on the "Syrian refugee problem," tells ABC News that he is himself a refugee. "I’m really really appalled by having my image, you know, on Twitter used against the refugees," said David Kittos, 48. Trump Jr., the eldest son of Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump, posted a graphic on Twitter featuring an image of a bowl of Skittles, with a caption equating Syrian refugees to poisoned candy, which sparked outrage among many on social media. “If I had a bowl of skittles and I told you just three would kill you. Would you take a handful?” the tweet's graphic says, "That's our Syrian refugee problem." David Kittos, 48, who told ABC News he took the photo and who has what appears to be an identical image posted on Flickr from 2010, said, "How someone could twist things, and I don’t know, use my image to compare some sort of poor refugee to a poison sort of Skittle, that is just really beyond belief."     Kittos, who said he lives in the United Kingdom and left Cyprus as a refugee when he was 6, claims that he was not asked permission for use of his photo. "I haven’t put the image for sale, and it was all rights reserved, so no, I wasn’t really expecting anyone to want to take it," Kittos said. "I have had stuff stolen before but when I got an email from some news website I was sort of really annoyed and disgusted to be honest." Kittos told ABC News he does photography as a hobby and took the Skittles photo while experimenting with different flash techniques in his living room six years ago, never expecting it to become part of a political campaign. The plight of refugees is an issue close to Kittos, who recalls fleeing Cyprus as a child. "We all had to kind of just take our stuff and run away. It was quite frightening for all people who had to do it, especially for the people who actually lost family and not just their belongings," he said. If he could talk to Donald Trump, Kittos said he would ask him to apologize to Syrian refugees. "But I don’t expect he will do that," he said. The Trump campaign responded to a question about the photo with a more general comment on the controversy over the tweet. "America has become less safe under Hillary Clinton and Barack Obama, and Clinton's planned 550 percent increase in Syrian refugees is a dangerous proposal that will put American lives at risk," the campaign's senior communications adviser, Jason Miller, said in a statement. "Speaking the truth might upset those who would rather be politically correct than safe, but the American people want a change, and only Donald Trump will do what's needed to protect us," the statement said.
Top Hillary Clinton aide Cheryl Mills received an immunity deal from the Justice Department in the FBI’s investigation into the former secretary of state’s private email server, records shown to Congress revealed Friday, re-injecting the email controversy into the presidential campaign just days before her first debate with Donald Trump. In addition to Mills, Clinton's former chief of staff at State, grants of partial immunity were also extended to former Clinton aide Heather Samuelson, who worked as State's White House liaison and later as a private attorney for Clinton and to John Bentel, who was director of the the Information Resources Management section in the secretary of state's office, lawmakers said. Story Continued Below The newly disclosed information brings to five the number of individuals known to have received some form of immunity in connection with the FBI probe, which ended with the bureau recommending that no charges be brought against Clinton or her aides for mishandling classified information. "This is beyond explanation. The FBI was handing out immunity agreements like candy,” House Oversight Chairman Jason Chaffetz (R-Utah) said Friday in a statement. “I've lost confidence in this investigation and I question the genuine effort in which it was carried out. Immunity deals should not be a requirement for cooperating with the FBI." The immunity grants to Mills and Samuelson were narrow, covering only their handover of laptops used in 2014, after Clinton left State, to conduct a review of the former secretary's emails to separate work-related messages from those purely personal in nature. The immunity came after the women were interviewed by the FBI and did not cover any of their statements. People familiar with the immunity offer said it was not related to the lawyers' testimony, noting that FBI Director James Comey said in July there was no evidence of a deletion aimed at frustrating the investigation. A lawyer for Mills and Samuelson, Beth Wilkinson, said she requested the immunity grants because of inter-agency disputes about whether some information in Clinton's emails was classified. "As the government indicated in these letters, the DOJ and FBI considered my clients to be witnesses and nothing more. Indeed, the Justice Department assured us that they believed my clients did nothing wrong. At all points my clients cooperated with the government’s investigation, including voluntarily participating in interviews with the FBI and DOJ," Wilkinson said in a statement. "The letters released to the Hill today only covered the computers that my clients had used in performing their legal work," Wilkinsion added. "Because of the confusion surrounding the various agencies’ positions on the after-the-fact classification decisions, I advised my clients to accept this letter from DOJ." Bentel, however, received immunity before speaking with the FBI, people familiar with the situation said. Former State employees told agency investigators Bentel brushed back their concerns about Clinton's email setup. Democrats on the House Oversight Committee stressed in a statement emailed to reporters that the immunity offers to Mills and Samuelson were "very limited." "These very limited immunity agreements did not extend to any testimony before Congress, statements to the FBI, or assertions to any other investigators," they said. The Clinton campaign attributed the information's release to the proximity of Monday's presidential debate. "House Republicans are trying to make something out of nothing by rummaging through the files of a Justice Department investigation that was closed months ago without any charges whatsoever, and leaking selective details three days before the first presidential debate," Clinton spokesman Brian Fallon said in a statement, noting that Mills and Samuelson cooperated fully with the FBI's inquiry and "had already given full interviews to the investigators." A top aide to Donald Trump's presidential campaign said word of the additional immunity grants underscored the recklessness of Clinton's conduct. "Revelations that three additional individuals, including Cheryl Mills, were granted immunity from prosecution in Hillary Clinton’s email scandal shows this was without a doubt a criminal scheme," Trump aide Jason Miller said in a statement. "At its heart, Clinton’s secret server was an end run around government transparency laws designed to hide corruption between the Clinton Foundation and her State Department, an arrangement which ultimately put our national security and sensitive diplomatic efforts at risk. No one with judgment this bad should be allowed to serve as president of the United States or hold any public office." Miller also suggested that the immunity grants were aimed at preventing Clinton from facing justice in the case. "What has become abundantly clear is that the Obama administration is protecting Hillary Clinton from accountability at all costs because she will keep the rigged system in Washington in place. In light of this development, Hillary Clinton must immediately come forward and promise the American people that none of these individuals will ever serve in any capacity in her administration," the Trump aide added. For weeks, House Republicans have been seeking the FBI's full file in the probe and, last week, issued a subpoena demanding the records. Republicans disclosed the immunity agreements just after learning about them in investigative records shown to congressional staff by the Justice Department on Friday. Immunity offers to witnesses are not made by the FBI, but by the Justice Department. A department spokesman declined to comment. A spokeswoman for the FBI had no immediate comment. It was previously disclosed that prosecutors granted immunity to former State Department computer specialist Bryan Pagliano and to a computer technician Clinton hired through a private firm, Paul Combetta of Denver-based Platte River Networks. The immunity deals for the two appear to be broader than those given to Mills and Samuelson, although no one in the probe is known to have received full immunity. Rachael Bade contributed to this report.
HEMPSTEAD, N.Y. — Score round 1 for Hillary Clinton. That’s according to The POLITICO Caucus — a panel of swing-state activists, strategists and operatives who watched the first debate here Monday night. The insiders’ bipartisan verdict: Clinton dispatched Donald Trump in their first of three nationally televised meetings. Story Continued Below Overall, roughly 80 percent of insiders — with equal numbers of Democrats and Republicans responding to the post-debate survey — said Clinton did the better job at the debate, including 99 percent of Democrats and 57 percent of Republicans. Only 21 percent — 1 percent of Democrats and 43 percent of Republicans — picked Trump as the winner. Democrats said Clinton was prepared and succeeded in provoking Trump — who began the debate speaking so quietly the audio engineers struggled to raise his volume to a comparable level in the debate hall but quickly became more animated in the face of Clinton’s attacks. “No contest,” said an Iowa Democrat — who, like all respondents, completed the survey anonymously. “Trump held it together for 16 minutes and fell apart.” “Trump melted down,” added a Florida Democrat. “This is bad for him. [It] confirms all the worries of swing voters.” Some Democrats predicted the debate would swing the momentum, which appeared to be with Trump, with public polls showing a tightening race. “Donald Trump exposed himself to be a clown,” added a New Hampshire Democrat, who also predicted “the polls will show dramatic movement in next 24 hours.” But a Florida Democrat countered that Clinton’s performance was unlikely to change fundamentally the trajectory of the race. “It is becoming a base turnout election, and she did a great job tonight of making the stakes in this election very clear,” the Democrat said. Among Republicans, the tally was closer — but that speaks to a divided party as much as actual ambivalence about which candidate performed better on Monday night. “Trump was an embarrassment,” an Iowa Republican said. “I'd hate to be the guy in the spin room lying about how Trump won the debate.” “It wasn't close,” a Virginia Republican added. “Sure, our tribal politics will force it to seem somewhat close, but even the most committed of Trump supporters know, deep down, that did not go well.” But there was a significant share of Republicans who thought Trump won — most of whom said Trump’s outside appeal could be the most memorable aspect of the debate. “Hillary Clinton sounded like every politician has sounded for the last half century. Donald Trump did not,” said an Ohio Republican. “This year that may just be enough.” “Neither candidate earned a single undecided vote,” a Nevada Republican added. “Clinton supporters will think she won. Trump supporters will think he won. Trump gets the nod because he did not completely implode.” Here are two other takeaways from the first debate: Clinton met expectations on Monday night, while insiders are mixed on Trump. The vast majority of all insiders, 88 percent, said Clinton met expectations going into Monday night. That includes nearly three-quarters of Republicans: One Florida Republican called Clinton “calm in the face of an insane person.” Insiders were more mixed on Trump, on the other hand. Overall, 55 percent of insiders said Trump met expectations: 40 percent of Democrats and 68 percent of Republicans. “There were no expectations,” said an Iowa Republican. “He got off to a great start, appeared reserved, but then he took the bait. The sneers and reactions when Clinton was speaking undercut his first impression.” But for some Republicans, meeting expectations wasn’t good enough. The expectations “were low,” said one Pennsylvania Republican. “He needed to exceed [them], and he didn't.” And a Virginia Republican said Trump did little to appeal to a key group of Republican-leaning voters whom Trump is repelling this year: white-collar whites. “He needs college whites, and he didn't connect,” the Republican said. Republicans are divided on the political impact of the debate. GOP insiders aren’t sure whether Trump is better or worse off after the Monday night debate. Asked whether Trump’s performance makes it more likely he wins the race, just 31 percent said yes — comparable to the 33 percent who said it doesn’t. A slim plurality, 36 percent, said the debate wouldn’t have a significant impact on Trump’s chances. The debate was “not fatal, but very definitely a missed opportunity,” said one New Hampshire Republican. "Neither of them made a persuasive case that they were more fit than the other to be president. At this point that advantages Trump," said an Ohio Republican. “Put plainly: he failed the presidential test,” a Virginia Republican added. “And hiding out on Fox News isn't going to fix it for him.” But despite — or perhaps because of — Trump’s unconventional debate style, some insiders said his message could resonate more than the pundits think in the immediate wake of the debate. “He spoke in a language that normal Americans understand,” a Virginia Republican said. “America is looking for something different,” a Colorado Republican added. “He is very different.” And some Republicans cautioned against reading too much into the first match-up. “There are two more debates to watch,” said a Virginia Republican. “Trump has more he can adjust, [while] Hillary is a fixed quantity as a virtual 30-year political incumbent. Trump will be more aggressive in the next two debates.” Among Democrats, it was more decisive: 60 percent said the debate made it less likely Trump becomes president, compared to 15 percent who said it makes it more likely and 25 percent who said it wouldn’t have an impact. “Trump wasn't presidential,” a Colorado Democrat said. “He needed to show restraint, and he failed. Tonight was his opportunity to show the country how he would govern, and he missed the opportunity.” These are the members of The POLITICO Caucus, not all of whom participated in this special survey: Colorado: Ryan Call, Laura Carno, Matt Chandler, Will Coyne, Adam Eichberg, Mark Ferrandino, Cole Finegan, Michael Fortney, Andrew Freedman, Ted Harvey, Craig Hughes, Owen Loftus, Pete Maysmith, Frank McNulty, Karen Middleton, Christopher Murray, BJ Nikkel, Josh Penry, Rick Ridder, Alan Salazar, Janice Sinden, Pat Steadman, Pat Waak, Steve Welchert, Taylor West, Roxane White, Rob Witwer Florida: Fernand Amandi, Scott Arceneaux, JP Austin, Tim Baker, Dennis K. Baxley, Slater Bayliss, Dave Beattie, Wayne Bertsch, Ron Book, Pamela Burch Fort, Jose Calderon, Kevin Cate, Kelly Cohen, Gus Corbella, Brian Crowley, Elizabeth Cuevas-Neunder, Justin Day, Judith Diaz, Nelson Diaz, John Dowless, Ryan Duffy, Jessica Ehrlich, Joe Falk, Alia Faraj-Johnson, Mark Ferrulo, Damien Filer, Marty Fiorentino, Rich Heffley, Nick Iarossi, David Johnson, Eric Johnson, Marian Johnson, Eric Jotkoff, Chris Korge, Jackie Lee, Susan MacManus, Beth Matuga, Fred Menachem, Jon Mills, Joe Mobley, Ben Pollara, Andrea Reilly, Steve Schale, April Schiff, Max Steele, Roger Stone, Richard Swann, Kevin Sweeny, Christian Ulvert, Steve Vancore, Ashley Walker, Andrew Weinstein, Andrew Wiggins, Ryan Wiggins, Rick Wilson Iowa: Tim Albrecht, Brad Anderson, Rob Barron, Jeff Boeyink, Bonnie Campbell, Dave Caris, Sam Clovis, Jerry Crawford, Sara Craig, John Davis, Steve Deace, John Deeth, Derek Eadon, Ed Failor Jr., Karen Fesler, David Fischer, Ben Foecke, Doug Gross, Steve Grubbs, Tim Hagle, Bob Haus, Joe Henry, Drew Ivers, Jill June, Lori Jungling, Jeff Kaufmann, Brian Kennedy, Jake Ketzner, David Kochel, Chris Larimer, Chuck Larson, Jill Latham, Jeff Link, Dave Loebsack, Mark Lucas, Liz Mathis, Jan Michelson, Chad Olsen, David Oman, Matt Paul, Marlys Popma, Troy Price, Christopher Rants, Kim Reem, Craig Robinson, Sam Roecker, David Roederer, Nick Ryan, Tamara Scott, Joni Scotter, Karen Slifka, John Smith, AJ Spiker, Norm Sterzenbach, John Stineman, Matt Strawn, Charlie Szold, Phil Valenziano, Jessica Vanden Berg, Nate Willems, Eric Woolson, Grant Young Michigan: Jill Alper, Saul Anuzis, Andrea Bitely, Lori Carpentier, Howard Edelson, Jordan Gehrke, Steve Hood, Darwin Jiles Jr., Joe Lehman, Dennis Lennox, Katie Packer, Ronna Romney McDaniel, John Truscott, Stephanie White, John Yob Nevada: Mac Abrams, Greg Bailor, Barbara Buckley, Yvanna Cancela, Bob Cavazos, Linda Cavazos, Jim DeGraffenreid, Andrew Diss, Peter Ernaut, Ryan Erwin, Chip Evans, Jay Gerstema, Oscar Goodman, Ryan Hamilton, Dan Hart, Pat Hickey, Zach Hudson, Jeremy Hughes, Megan Jones, Lindsey Jydstrup, Adam Khan, Peter Koltak, Roberta Lange, Sam Liberman, Laura Martin, Michael McDonald, Chuck Muth, Erven Nelson, Kristen Orthman, Neal Patel, Nick Phillips, Jon Ralston, Andres Ramires, Emmy Ruiz, Scott Scheid, Mike Slanker, James Smack, Paul Smith, Jack St. Martin, Mari St. Martin, Daniel Stewart, Brendan Summers, Riley Sutton, Robert Uithoven, Michelle White, Ed Williams, Heidi Wixom New Hampshire: Charlie Arlinghaus, Arnie Arnesen, Patrick Arnold, Rich Ashooh, Dean Barker, Juliana Bergeron, D.J. Bettencourt, Michael Biundo, Ray Buckley, Peter Burling, Jamie Burnett, Debby Butler, Dave Carney, Jackie Cilley, Catherine Corkery, Corriveau, Fergus Cullen, Lou D’Allesandro, James Demers, Mike Dennehy, Sean Downey, Steve Duprey, JoAnn Fenton, Jennifer Frizzell, Martha Fuller Clark, Amanda Grady Sexton, Jack Heath, Gary Hirshberg, Jennifer Horn, Peter Kavanaugh, Joe Keefe, Rich Killion, Harrell Kirstein, Sylvia Larsen, Joel Maiola, Kate Malloy Corriveau, Maureen Manning, Steve Marchand, Tory Mazzola, Jim Merrill, Jayne Millerick, Claira Monier, Greg Moore, Matt Mowers, Terie Norelli, Chris Pappas, Liz Purdy, Tom Rath, Colin Reed, Jim Rubens, Andy Sanborn, Dante Scala, William Shaheen, Stefany Shaheen, Carol Shea-Porter, Terry Shumaker, Andy Smith, Craig Stevens, Kathy Sullivan, Chris Sununu, James Sununu, Jay Surdukowski, Donna Sytek, Kari Thurman, Colin Van Ostern, Deb Vanderbeek, Mike Vlacich, Ryan Williams North Carolina: Don Davis, Francis X. De Luca, Anita Earls, Jonathan Felts, Tami L. Fitzgerald, Dylan Frick, Taylor Griffin, Robin Hayes, Morgan Jackson, Patsy Keever, Theresa Kostrzewa, Michael Luethy, Ray Martin, Thomas Mills, Melissa L. Reed, Chris Sgro, Paul Shumaker, Dee Stewart, Brad Thompson, Bruce Thompson, Charlie Wallin, Doug Wilson Ohio: Jerry Austin, Greg Beswick, Matt Borges, Erica Bruton, Tim Burke, Janet Carson, Jai Chabria, Martha Clark, Bob Clegg, Damareo Cooper, Jo Ann Davidson, Michael Dawson, Bill DeMora, Cindy Demse, Kathy Dicristofaro, Katie Eagan, Michael Gonidakis, Wes Goodman, Joe Hallett, Ian James, Melissa Klide Hedden, David Leland, Nick Martin, Rhine McLin, David Pepper, Molly Shack, Mark R. Weaver Pennsylvania: Chris Borick, Larry Ceisler, Valentino DiGiorgio, Jason Ercole, Dan Fee, Charlie Gerow, Marcel Groen, Leslie Gromis Baker, Mark Harris, Nan McLaughlin, Aubrey Montgomery, Christopher Nicholas, Nachama Soloveichik, David Sosar, Todd Stephens, Doc Sweitzer, David Thornburgh, Ray Zaborney Virginia: Ray Allen, Sandra Brandt, Marc K. Broklawski, Patsy Brown, Janet Carver, John Cosgrove, Brian Coy, Doris Crouse-Mays, Tom Davis, Julie Dime, Abbi Easter, Mike Farris, John Findlay, Joe Fitzgerald, Sean Harrison, Margo Horner, Robert Hurt, Gaylene Kanoyton, Chris LaCivita, Sue Langley, Frank Leone, Robert G. Marshall, Tucker Martin, Ed Matricardi, Susan J. Rowland, Peter Snyder, Susan Swecker, Jo Thoburn Wisconsin: Meg Andrietsch, Mary Arnold, Kevin Barthel, Mike Basford, Rebecca Bonesteel, Barry Burden, Terri Burl, Jim Camery, Patrick Guarasci, Robert Hansen, Gary Hawley, Marian Krumberger, Emily Nehring, Jason Rae, Brandon Scholz, John Zapfel Kristen Hayford contributed to this report.
Police escorted Green Party presidential nominee Jill Stein off Hofstra University’s campus this afternoon before tonight’s first presidential debate. Authorities encountered Stein on the college campus in Hempstead, New York, and asked the third-party candidate, who has not garnered enough support to participate in the debates, to show the proper credentials, which she could not do, police said. She was “nicely escorted” off the grounds around 2:30 p.m. Eastern time, a Nassau County Police Department spokesman told ABC News. Stein tweeted about the incident, saying she was on the campus “doing an interview” when police put her and her team “in a van” and escorted them off the school’s grounds. Earlier, Stein’s campaign said she obtained a credential to go in and do interviews at the media filing center in the early afternoon.  After being escorted from Hofstra campus for doing an interview, police put us in a van which was stopped not once, but twice. #debatenight pic.twitter.com/IgQJMoCNWZ  Stein had planned to challenge her exclusion from tonight’s event by hosting a rally outside the secured perimeter of the debate hall beginning, around 5 p.m. Eastern time. She said she will be live on Twitter’s Periscope app answering the same questions as Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton and Republican nominee Donald Trump on the debate stage. Stein’s campaign said she will not “risk arrest” this time, because there is an outstanding warrant for her arrest over her involvement in a recent protest against a controversial pipeline project in North Dakota. Still, her campaign spokeswoman Meleiza Figueroa said they will attempt to get the “spirited demonstration … as close to the gates as possible." In 2012, Stein and her running mate were arrested outside Hofstra University when they tried entering the premises during a presidential debate between President Barack Obama and then–Republican nominee Mitt Romney. ABC News’ MaryAlice Parks and Jordyn Phelps contributed to this report
Washington (CNN)Green Party presidential nominee Jill Stein was escorted off the Hofstra University campus Monday after her prearranged media interviews because she didn't have credentials to be there. Stein's campaign told CNN that she was at the university doing press interviews and was escorted off after an interview with MSNBC. "We were on our way to an interview with @MSNBC when we were stopped by Hofstra security and Nassau County police just now. #debatenight" she tweeted. The Nassau County Police Department told CNN that Stein failed to provide the proper credentials at the university, which led to her being escorted off campus. "She was on the college campus, we asked to verify for proper credentials, she did not have them, and she was nicely escorted off the campus," a police department spokeswoman said. Stein told MSNBC in an earlier interview Monday that she would try to get on the debate stage despite failing to meet the requirements needed to participate. "Well, what I am really hoping to accomplish is what the American people are hoping to accomplish, which is to open up the debates so we have a fair and inclusive debate at a time where the American people rejected the two establishment candidates at record levels," she said. "They have a right not only to vote -- they have a right to know who we can vote for." Stein, along with Libertarian candidate Gary Johnson, failed to qualify for the first presidential debate. The candidates needed to make a 15% polling threshold across several major national surveys in order to qualify for the debates. The commission determined that the polling averages for the candidates had Stein at 3.2% and Johnson at 8.4%. CNN's Samantha Reyes contributed to this report.
Washington (CNN)Rep. Trent Franks backed Ted Cruz during the GOP presidential primary, but he now has a message for the Texas Republican: Get in line behind Donald Trump. "Any person in this party that does not support Trump at this point is increasing the chances of Hillary Clinton becoming president and destroying the Constitution," Franks said. On the other side, Cruz backers say that the first-term senator should stick to his guns and withhold an endorsement -- or risk angering his own supporters who detest Trump. "I have five rules for political endorsements," said Steve Deace, an Iowa radio talk show host who was an outspoken Cruz backer during the primary. "And Cruz endorsing Trump violates every single one of them." Less than two months until Election Day, Trump has once again put Cruz in a bind. As Trump's poll numbers rise and now is neck-and-neck against Clinton, the GOP nominee's backers are looking for every last ounce of support to showcase that there is momentum and energy behind his campaign. If Trump falls short of Clinton by a narrow margin, Trump's backers are bound to blame holdouts like Cruz for failing to do more to help their party. Yet if Cruz backs Trump now, he'll be accused of political opportunism and anger his core supporters who hailed his controversial speech at the Republican National Convention where he pointedly declined to endorse his party's nominee. It would mean embracing a man who during the primaries taunted the senator with the nickname "Lyin' Ted," suggested Cruz wasn't eligible to be president due to his Canadian birthplace, and speculated that Cruz's father was involved in the JFK assassination. Cruz risks getting little credit for backing Trump belatedly, while turning off the anti-Trump wing of the party that is bound to become more vocal -- and potentially more powerful -- if Clinton wins the White House. "He's in a box," said one senior Senate Republican. Yet, Trump has hired key Cruz allies, including campaign manager Kellyanne Conway and spokesman Jason Miller. And in a sign of a thawing of relations, Trump on Wednesday expressed support for a Cruz-backed, Internet-related proposal in government funding talks in the Senate. Cruz tweeted his appreciation for Trump. But when the Senate dropped the language from the government funding bill Thursday, the Texas Republican stayed mostly quiet in the chamber -- a departure from his usually outspoken style. In recent days, Cruz has been making comments of the GOP nominee that are emblematic of the tightrope he's trying to walk. He is declining to say if he would formally offer his endorsement of Trump, but argued that Clinton should never be elected president. In effect, he's trying to show that he is willing to help the party without formally giving his blessing to Trump. "My focus is on defeating Hillary Clinton and helping preserve a Senate Republican majority," Cruz told CNN. "Because we need a federal government that is devoted to defending the Constitution, to defeating radical Islamic terrorism and keeping this country safe." Asked if that meant he could endorse Trump before November, Cruz added: "I've given you my answer." A Cruz aide told CNN that the senator has not made a decision yet on whether to endorse Trump but has never ruled out the possibility, even if he previously called the GOP nominee a "serial philanderer," "utterly amoral," and "a narcissist at a level I don't think this country's ever seen. "He thinks about it every day," Cruz's former campaign Jeff Roe, who was Cruz's campaign manager, told reporters at a Bloomberg event this week. "I'm hoping there's still time for him to come forward, or I think he and all the other people you named will be left in the rear view mirror of the Republican Party moving forward," Texas Lt. Gov. Dan Patrick, a Republican, told radio talk show host Laura Ingraham this week. Working with fellow senators The back-and-forth comes as Cruz is trying to showcase a more collaborate style in the Senate in recent weeks. After calling his colleagues part of a corrupt "Washington cartel," criticizing their convictions and battling them over policy and tactics for three years, he has, in the words of one of his colleagues, made "nice." He transferred $100,000 over to the National Republican Senatorial Committee recently. And next month, he is joining the senior Texas senator, John Cornyn, to headline two fundraising events in Houston and Dallas for GOP senators up for reelection, including Missouri Sen. Roy Blunt, Iowa Sen. Chuck Grassley, North Carolina Sen. Richard Burr, New Hampshire Sen. Kelly Ayotte and Pennsylvania Sen. Pat Toomey. "We're working on that together," Cornyn said. Cruz himself may need help from his fellow lawmakers in two years. He faces a possible 2018 Senate primary challenge from Texas Rep. Michael McCaul, the chairman of the House Homeland Security Committee, who has increasingly made an issue of Cruz's failure to endorse Trump. "I mean, [Cruz] pledged to support him," McCaul told Ingraham this week. "He broke his word." CNN's Theodore Schleifer contributed to this report.
When Donald Trump was asked by debate moderator Lester Holt last night how he would prevent cyberattacks against the United States, the Republican nominee had an opportunity to hammer Hillary Clinton on her use of a private email server and her handling of classified information as secretary of state. Instead, Trump suggested that a 400-pound hacker could have targeted the Democratic National Committee, accused Democratic officials of mistreating Sen. Bernie Sanders’ presidential campaign and praised his 10-year-old son’s “unbelievable” knack for computers.     The exchange was one of several missed opportunities for Trump in Monday’s presidential debate, according to congressional Republicans who tuned in to the much-anticipated matchup. “I wish Trump would’ve hit some of the softballs a little harder,” said Rep. Dave Brat, R-Va., who watched the debate with colleagues. Republicans expressed frustration that Holt did not ask any questions about the Clinton Foundation or the Benghazi attacks while challenging Trump on his record on the Iraq War and real estate career. But lawmakers said the New York businessman should have taken every opportunity to bring up those issues, which have dogged Clinton’s presidential campaign. “She might as well have emailed the Russians her email address!” Rep. Daniel Webster, R-Fla., exclaimed Tuesday about Clinton’s use of a private email server. A recent Washington Post/ABC News poll found that just 36 percent of voters see Clinton as honest and trustworthy, compared with 45 percent for Trump. Trump, who has never run for public office, held limited debate practice and did not take part in any mock debates, according to campaign advisers, while Clinton was still preparing as late as Monday afternoon. Some top Republicans praised Trump for effectively making his case to American voters. “I saw Hillary Clinton give a polished, well-rehearsed defense of the status quo,” House Speaker Paul Ryan, R-Wis., told reporters Tuesday. “I saw Donald Trump give a spirited voice to those of us who don’t like the status quo.” Trump, Ryan continued, showed “for 90 minutes he could go toe to toe with Hillary Clinton.” Sen. John McCain, R-Ariz., the 2008 Republican presidential candidate, said the debate “was very interesting.” While many Republicans gathered to watch the debate in Washington, it wasn’t required viewing for everyone. “I was on an airplane,” Sen. Marco Rubio, R-Fla., told reporters. Rep. John Katko, R-N.Y., who is in a tough re-election race in upstate New York, also declined to answer questions about the debate Tuesday. ABC’s Ali Rogin contributed.
Washington (CNN)The National Rifle Association is returning to the defense of Donald Trump in the closing weeks of the presidential campaign, a reminder of how fervently the gun-rights group has backed the Republican nominee on television. The NRA is launching a $5 million TV ad campaign Tuesday, the group says, meant to turn out pro-Second Amendment voters at a time when Trump is being attacked for his language about firearms. The gun lobby has aired $7.7 million in television time on Trump's behalf, support that makes it the second-most active pro-Trump advertiser in the general election. But it had not been on the airwaves since late last month. The NRA's Political Victory Fund is tasked with spending half the money on five swing states -- Ohio, Nevada, Virginia, North Carolina and Pennsylvania -- while its Institute for Legislative Action, its lobbying arm, is spending the second-half on national cable. All of the money is going to a harrowing ad that shows what the NRA says would happen if Hillary Clinton appoints her chosen justices to the Supreme Court. "She'll call 9-1-1. Average response time? 11 minutes," says the narrator as a sleeping woman is startled by nighttime footsteps. The woman runs to a nearby safe to grab her weapon, but it's empty. "Don't let Hillary leave you protected with nothing but a phone." The advertisements targets rural voters in battleground states who might be Democrats or disillusioned Republicans, according to Jennifer Baker, an NRA spokeswoman. "It is designed to run up the score with those Trump voters," she said. The NRA's chief political adviser Chris Cox said the ad "underscores" how Clinton's position on guns creates "one set of rules for her, and a different set of rules for the rest of us." Trump has emerged as a proud spokesman for gun rights, though he has at times invited controversy. On multiple occasions, Trump has been attacked for encouraging gun-owners to incite violence against Clinton, though Trump's campaign has said he is being misinterpreted. "I think her bodyguards should drop all weapons. Disarm immediately," Trump said in Miami last week. "Take their guns away, let's see what happens to her." 
Washington (CNN)The battle over gun rights returned to the nation's capital Tuesday, as a federal appeals court took up a challenge to a restriction that requires applicants for a license to carry a concealed firearm to demonstrate a "good reason" to fear injury to his or her person or property. "This is the most important question in the Second Amendment today," said Adam Winkler of UCLA School of Law. "Whether people can carry guns in public and under what conditions is a major battleground." Lawyers for District of Columbia called the license restriction an "important public safety law" and argued before a panel of the US District Court for the District of Columbia that the law should be allowed to remain in effect pending appeal. "This case is in its infancy," said Holly M. Johnson, an assistant attorney general for the District. But challengers asked the court to block it, arguing that "very few people" will be able to demonstrate that they are eligible for the permit. The three judges hearing the challenge were all nominated by Republican presidents. Judge Thomas Griffith, a George W. Bush nominee, asked by far the most questions on the bench. He noted there is a "long history" of courts sustaining bans on concealed carry, but, joined by Judge Stephen Williams, a Ronald Reagan appointee, he repeatedly questioned the scope of the DC permit requirement. More than once he asked about someone who lived in a dangerous neighborhood but had never been attacked who might not qualify for the permit. Griffith asked whether someone had to be "attacked first." Griffith noted that only a handful of other states have similar laws. The third judge, Karen Henderson, a George H. W. Bush nominee, did not ask a question. One of biggest cases since Heller Eight years ago, it was another Washington gun ordinance that triggered a landmark Supreme Court opinion -- District of Columbia v. Heller -- that held for the first time that the Second Amendment protects an individual's right to bear arms. The opinion capped off a decades-long debate on whether the right applied only in connection to service in a state militia. Back in 2008, the law at issue concerned a total ban on handguns in the home. Tuesday's case deals with weapons outside the home. Gun rights advocates thought that Heller -- penned by the late Justice Antonin Scalia -- would encourage courts to strike down restrictions across the country. That didn't happen. Instead, many courts relied upon a different part of Scalia's opinion where he cautioned that the Second Amendment should not be understood as conferring a "right to keep and carry any weapon whatsoever in any manner whatsoever and for whatever purpose." Meanwhile, the Supreme Court has declined to take up any follow-up cases. How Scalia will be replaced has become a major issue in the presidential race. Donald Trump has pledged to appoint conservative justices in the mold of Scalia. Trump's GOP primary rival, Ted Cruz, consistently name-checked the Heller decision. Hillary Clinton has advocated for stronger gun control laws. Meanwhile, President Barack Obama's nominee for the bench, Judge Merrick Garland, waits on the sidelines. The DC law at issue in Tuesday's case is based on similar provisions in New York, Maryland and New Jersey. Several plaintiffs are challenging the law, including Matthew Grace, who says he was denied a permit in 2016 because he had failed to show a "good or proper reason" to support his request for a license. He owns four lawfully registered handguns and seeks to carry them outside the home for self-defense. Grace's case and a similar one brought by different plaintiffs split two different district court judges reviewing the law. The United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia will hear both appeals on Tuesday. "The District of Columbia has spent the last four decades trying to drain the Second Amendment of any meaning," Charles Cooper, a lawyer representing Grace and other plaintiffs, argued in court papers. Cooper objects to the fact that DC officials have given themselves the power to decide "on a case-by-case basis" whether an applicant has "good reason" to obtain a license to carry a concealed gun. He says that such a power is "categorically irreconcilable" with the Second Amendment. "Nearly a decade after Heller, the District of Columbia still refuses to treat the right to bear arms as a genuine constitutional right," he said. In their briefs, lawyers for the District of Columbia point out that Washington is "unique" in that it is filled with thousands of high ranking federal officials, and diplomats and it hosts hundreds of heavily attended events annually including political marches and protests. Citing Supreme Court precedent, they argue that the "Second Amendment preserves the ability of local jurisdictions to devise solutions to social problems that suit local needs and values, and that is precisely what the Council has done through the 'good reason' standard." DC is supported by lawyers for the Brady Center to Prevent Gun Violence, who emphasize that from 2014 to 2015, the homicide rate in the District increased 54%. "The District may meet or surpass that tragic record in 2016," Jonathan Lowy, an attorney for the Brady Center, argued in briefs. He pointed out that in one DC area -- Ward 7 -- homicides have tripled so far this year. "It is critical that law enforcement maintain its longstanding authority to prevent the rampant carrying of guns in public places," Lowy said in an interview. "It would be an extraordinary and radical shift for a court to find that law enforcement has no authority to reasonably regulate the carrying of hidden handguns in public." But the National Rifle Association counters that while DC officials are "rightly concerned about violent crime," the "Constitution affords them considerable discretion in addressing the problem. " "The Second Amendment's protection of the 'right of the people to keep and bear arms' necessarily takes certain policy choices off the table." NRA's lawyer Paul Clement argued in court briefs. "Municipal leaders, no matter how well-intentioned, cannot simply enact any gun control law that they deem to be reasonable." 
Washington (CNN)Former "Miss Universe" Alicia Machado struck back Tuesday against insults hurled at her by Donald Trump, saying that he was "aggressive" and "really rude." Machado, who represented Venezuela in Trump's 1996 "Miss Universe" competition said that Trump called her "Miss Housekeeping" and "Miss Piggy" when she gained weight after winning the beauty pageant. "I know what I left with him and he knows, too. And he was really aggressive. He was really rude. He was a bad person with me," she told CNN's Anderson Cooper on "AC360." "That is the story that I need to share with my community. We cannot accept no more insults for my Latin community. No more insults for the women. I know very well Mr. Trump and I can see the same person that I met 20 years ago." At the presidential debate on Monday, Clinton referenced Machado to make a bigger point to Trump about his public treatment of women -- which has become a key campaign issue that hits on his vulnerabilities with both Hispanics and women. "And one of the worst things he said was about a woman in a beauty contest -- he loves beauty contests, supporting them and hanging around them -- and he called this woman 'Miss Piggy,' then he called her 'Miss Housekeeping' because she was Latina," Clinton had said. She continued: "Donald, she has a name. Her name is Alicia Machado. And she has become a US citizen and you can bet she is going to vote this November." READ: 'Miss Universe' tearfully thanks Clinton for defense against Trump's 'Miss Piggy' remarks Cooper also asked Machado about reports that she was accused of driving a getaway car from a murder scene soon after the "Miss Universe" pageant. "There are reports that Trump surrogates tonight have been referencing and been pointing to ... about an incident in 1998 in Venezuela where you were accused of driving a getaway car from a murder scene. You were never charged with this. The judge in the case also said you threatened to kill him after he indicted your boyfriend for the attempted murder. I just want to give you a chance to respond these reports," Cooper said. Machado responded: "He can say whatever he wants to say. I don't care. You know, I have my past, of course everybody has a past. And I'm no saint girl. But that is not the point now ... (Trump) was really rude with me, he tried to destroy my self esteem. And now I'm a voice in the Latin community. I'm in a great moment in my life and I have a very clear life. And I can show my taxes." Earlier Tuesday, Trump refused to back down from his criticism of Machado, telling "Fox and Friends" in an interview that she had "gained a massive amount of weight and it was a real problem." "She was the winner and you know, she gained a massive amount of weight and it was a real problem. We had a real problem," Trump said. "Not only that, her attitude, and we had a real problem with her, so Hillary went back into the years and she found this girl -- this was many years ago. And found the girl and talked about her like she was Mother Theresa. And it wasn't quite that way but that's OK. Hillary has to do what she has to do." 
Washington (CNN)New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio said Thursday that Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump is wrong in his assessment of stop-and-frisk, a policy that allows police officers to stop and pat down individuals they deem suspicious. "Donald Trump talks about stop-and-frisk like he knows the facts," de Blasio told CNN's Alisyn Camerota on "New Day." "He has had no experience with policing, no experience with public safety." Trump touts stop-and-frisk practice amid black outreach "He should really be careful because if we reinstituted stop-and-frisk all over this country, you'd see a lot more tension between police and communities," added the mayor, a Democrat who is supporting Hillary Clinton for president. If elected, Trump said Wednesday at a Fox News town hall that he hopes to take the controversial policy nationwide to help stem "violence in the black community." "One of the things I'd do ... is I would do stop-and-frisk. I think you have to," Trump said. "We did it in New York, it worked incredibly well and you have to be proactive and, you know, you really help people sort of change their mind automatically." Trump's comments came in response to an audience member's question about reducing "black-on-black crime." But many people in New York's black community have opposed the practice arguing that New York's police disproportionately used the policy to target and harass people of color. After ongoing protests of the policy, a federal judge ruled in 2013 that the NYPD's stop-and-frisk policy violated citizens' constitutional rights. However, the judge did not order an outright ban on the practice, but called for outside oversight and reform. The city under Mayor Michael Bloomberg appealed that ruling, but those efforts were dropped under de Blasio's administration, and the city is participating in an ongoing reform and oversight process, which is supervised by a federal monitor. CORRECTION: An earlier version of this story misstated whether New York City is appealing the federal judge's 2013 ruling on stop-and-frisk. The city appealed the ruling at the time, but has since dropped that effort and is participating in an ongoing reform and oversight process. 
(CNN)Hillary Clinton forced Donald Trump onto defense over his temperament, refusal to release his taxes and his past comments about race and women during a fiery debut presidential debate Monday -- a potentially pivotal moment in a tight election campaign. Clinton, who has seen her dominance of the presidential race fade in the weeks since the Democratic convention, delivered a strong performance in which she demonstrated a command of policy and a sense of humor, smiling through some of Trump's strongest attacks. She delivered the best zinger of the night in response to criticism from Trump for staying off the campaign trail recently. "I think Donald just criticized me for preparing for this debate," she said. "And yes, I did. And you know what else I prepared for? I prepared to be President. And that is a good thing." Trump came out swinging at the beginning of the debate, and made some effective points on the economy and jobs -- some of the aspects of his outsider presidential campaign that have struck a chord with many Americans. But the debate highlighted Trump's tendency to make false claims as he made inaccurate statements on everything from laws regarding policing, his support for the Iraq War and his contention that Clinton was behind the so-called birther conspiracy. CNN's Reality Check Team vets the claims at the first debate Appearing in the "spin room" after the debate to talk to journalists, Trump said he was happy with his performance. "It went better than I ever thought," he told CNN's Dana Bash. A CNN/ORC poll of debate watchers released after the event found 62% felt Clinton won compared to 27% for Trump. The poll suggests the debate audience was a bit more Democratic than the public as a whole, about on par with the Democratic tilt in the audience that watched the first debate in 2008 between Obama and John McCain. One of the most powerful moments of the debate came when the conversation focused on the so-called birther debate following Trump's recent acknowledgment that President Barack Obama was born in the US -- a fact that has been evident for years. With Trump standing just a few feet from her, Clinton blasted him for perpetuating a "racist lie." "He has a long record of engaging in racist behavior," Clinton said as Trump shook his head. Trump hit back, noting Clinton's tough critiques of Obama during their bitter 2008 primary battle. 'Holier than thou' "You treated him with terrible disrespect and I watch the way you talk now about how lovely everything is ... it doesn't work that way," he said. "When you try to act holier than thou, it really doesn't work." As the debate ended, Clinton hammered Trump over his treatment of women. "This is a man who has called women pigs, slobs and dogs," Clinton said. She accused Trump of calling a Latina contestant in a beauty contest "Miss Piggy" and a housekeeper because of her ethnicity, seemingly throwing Trump off as he twice asked "Where did you find this?" Who is Alicia Machado? Former Miss Universe said Trump called her Miss Piggy Clinton repeatedly sought to correct Trump's statements -- going so far as referring viewers to fact checks on her website -- as she aimed to portray him as out of touch with the complexities of the American economy. "I know you live in your own reality," she told Trump. Clinton and Trump opened the debate on a positive note by shaking hands before stationing themselves behind their podiums at Hofstra University on New York's Long Island. Their spouses, former President Bill Clinton and Melania Trump, also greeted each other before taking their seats in the debate hall. From there, the drama quickly unfolded. An increasingly angry Trump slammed Clinton for putting her plans to fight ISIS on her website -- and thereby tipping off America's enemy. "Well, at least I have a plan to fight ISIS," Clinton responded, referring to his previous statements that he has a "secret" plan to destroy the terrorist group. Battling over taxes Clinton also hit Trump over his refusal to release his tax returns. "Why won't he release his tax returns?" Clinton asked. "Maybe he is not as rich as he says he is," she went on. "Maybe he is not as charitable as he claims to be," "Maybe he doesn't want the American people to know that he has paid nothing in federal taxes." Clinton pressed Trump on the issue, saying "There is something he is hiding." Trump replied that he would release his taxes when Clinton made public 33,000 emails that were deleted from her private email server. When Clinton said that Trump had paid no federal income tax in some years, Trump replied "That makes me smart." Clinton also set about Trump's business record, pointing out that he had called himself "The King of Debt" and accusing him of "stiffing" thousand of contractors who did work for his business. When the debate turned to racial issues and crime, Clinton said that it was important for police to work together with local communities to restore trust. Trump accused Clinton of refusing to say the phrase "law and order" and bemoaned the state of inner cities. He said that African-Americans and Hispanics were "living in hell." "You walk down the street, you get shot," Trump said. Clinton rebuked Trump for painting "such a dire picture" of black communities. Campaign at a critical point Trump and Clinton are facing off with the campaign at a critical point, as the race is a dead heat just 43 days before Election Day. A CNN/ORC poll released Monday found Trump edging Clinton 42% to 41% in the crucial battleground state of Colorado among likely voters in a four-way race. In Pennsylvania, another key state, the poll found Clinton in a virtual tie against Trump among likely voters at 45% to 44%. The former secretary of state is relying on both states to help pave her way to the 270 electoral votes needed to win the White House. Nationally, CNN's Poll of Polls finds Clinton and Trump neck-and-neck 44%-42%. Debate prep The rivals spent the day preparing for their big battle. Clinton participated in mock debates with her tart-tongued former aide Philippe Reines playing Trump. In one practice debate, Reines assumed the character of the unpredictable nominee by praising Clinton for her role as a pioneer for women, campaign sources said. Reines even wore the kind of signature red tie that Trump favors and adopted his characteristic hand gestures in a bid to fully prepare Clinton for her unpredictable foe. The Republican nominee has watched videos of Clinton, but his preparation has been less intense than his opponent's, in keeping with his more freewheeling style. He did not hold mock debates, for instance, with someone standing in for Clinton. CNN's Dana Bash, Dylan Byers and Sara Murray contributed to this report
The top official in the country’s largest police union tweaked Donald Trump on Wednesday for leaping to blame the police officer who shot an unarmed black man in Tulsa, Oklahoma. The Fraternal Order of Police endorsed Trump last week, and that endorsement still stands, said Jim Pasco, the group’s executive director. But of Trump, said Pasco, "he must be mindful of the due process rights and presumption of innocence accorded to all, including police officers.” Story Continued Below Trump has been reaching out to black voters in recent weeks, and on Wednesday, the Republican presidential nominee said he was “very, very troubled” by Tuesday’s shooting of Terence Crutcher by Officer Betty Shelby, and suggested her inexperience was to blame. "Now, did she get scared? Was she choking? What happened? But maybe people like that, people that choke, people that do that, maybe they can't be doing what they're doing, okay? They can't be doing what they're doing,” Trump said at a church in Cleveland Heights, Ohio. "I watched the shooting in particular in Tulsa. And that man was hands up,” Trump continued. “That man went to the car, hands up, put his hand on the car. I mean, to me, it looked like he did everything you're supposed to do, and he looked like a really good man." The Fraternal Order of Police boasts 330,000 members, most of whom are rank-and-file cops, from all over the country. Last week, its national board voted to endorse Trump, based on members’ votes at the state chapter level. Trump’s law-and-order message and unequivocal support for police in other recent confrontations between cops and black men have made him popular with law enforcement, so his criticism of Shelby was an unusual departure. Clinton has sharply criticized the killings of both Crutcher and Keith Lamont Scott, whose death in Charlotte, N.C., prompted protests even as police said he was armed. Clinton said that such killings should “become intolerable” and touted the need for reform on Wednesday, and the day before she spoke about “implicit bias” in the context of the Tulsa incident. That prompted Trump campaign manager Kellyanne Conway to attack Clinton Wednesday morning, saying on Fox News, “It’s just unbelievable that she would do that before we even know the facts, the details. I think that’s an overpoliticization of a situation where we don’t know the facts.” Conway’s remarks came before Trump’s own suggestion that the officer choked.
Hillary Clinton’s suggestion that Donald Trump’s rhetoric is treasonous and a recruiting tool for the Islamic State is beneath someone who’s running for the U.S. presidency, the Republican presidential nominee said Tuesday. “Her claim that my opposition to radical Islamic terrorism is a recruiting tool — what? How does that have to do with…” Trump began. “I’m being tough. Why is that a recruiting? I’m much tougher than her on this problem, this horrible situation, but she goes around saying it’s a recruiting tool.” Story Continued Below Clinton on Monday hinted that the real estate mogul may be committing treason by “giving aid and comfort to our adversaries” — the constitutional definition of the term — and said that he “is being used as a recruiting sergeant in and for the terrorists.” During a rally in High Point, North Carolina, on Tuesday afternoon, Trump suggested that Clinton was given her recruiting attack line by an advertising firm. “You know, somebody gave her that from Madison Avenue. You know what Madison — that’s advertising,” Trump said. “They gave her that from — they said let’s call it a recruiting tool. But why? Because I’m tough? It’s a recruiting tool?” Clinton’s rhetoric “demonstrates a level of ignorance about the terror threat,” Trump added. “That really is disqualifying for a person seeking the presidency. When she says my opposition to radical Islamic terror provides aid and comfort to the enemy, we know that Hillary Clinton has once again demonstrated that she’s really unfit for office. Her comments are not only reckless but beneath the dignity of the office that she seeks.”
Mark Cuban will be trolling his business rival Donald Trump during the first presidential debate. The NBA’s Dallas Mavericks owner tweeted that he'll be sitting front row for the first faceoff between Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton, referring to the Monday night debate as the "Humbling at Hofstra."  Just got a front row seat to watch @HillaryClinton overwhelm @realDonaldTrump at the "Humbling at Hofstra" on Monday. It Is On !  The Clinton campaign confirmed it did invite Cuban and that his ticket is "one of the best seats we have available" at Hofstra University in Long Island, New York. “I’m excited to see what happens, but I really don’t know what to expect," Cuban told ABC News today at the red carpet premiere for the ABC show "Shark Tank." "Obviously, I’m a not a Trump fan. I am a Clinton fan," Cuban said. "I think she’d make a great president. I don’t think he’s got the skill set. Let’s put it this way, if he came on 'Shark Tank,' I wouldn’t make the investment. I just don’t see him as being capable in the least bit.” Cuban officially endorsed Clinton for president on Twitter on July 29 and introduced her and running-mate Sen. Tim Kaine at their campaign rally the next day in Pittsburgh. During an appearance on the Netflix show "Chelsea," Cuban said he even offered to play the role of Trump in Clinton's mock debates. Cuban said he emailed someone on the campaign but never heard back. He has emerged as a critic of Trump, questioning whether the New York real estate mogul is actually worth $10 billion, as Trump has claimed, and calling on the Republican presidential nominee to release his taxes. “What he’s done well is put his name on big buildings. ... He’s good at that. Now, whether or not that makes him a billionaire, I don’t know,” Cuban said of Trump in a June interview on 77 WABC’s “Bernie and Sid Radio Show” in New York City. “He’s not transparent enough for us to know that.” Cuban trolled Trump recently by offering $10 million in exchange for an interview on Trump's policies.  .1) @realDonaldTrump $10mm to the charity of YOUR choice if you let ME interview you for 4 hrs on YOUR policies and their substance.         Cuban called Trump "probably the best thing to happen to politics in a long time" in a statement last year on Cyber Dust, a private messaging app Cuban created. In September of last year, Cuban gave Trump the American Airlines Center in Dallas, where the Mavericks play, free of charge for one of his biggest rallies during the fall cycle. At that Sept. 14 rally last year, Trump called Cuban "a great guy" and thanked him for allowing him to use the arena. Back in May, during the veepstakes, Cuban said on ESPN Radio's “Capital Games” podcast that he's "wide open" to being a running mate for either candidate. But the relationship between Trump and Cuban quickly soured.  Cuban, in an interview with EXTRA June 21, unloaded on Trump: "It’s rare that you see someone get stupider before your eyes, but he’s really working at it. ...You have to give him credit. It’s a difficult thing to do, but he’s accomplished it." Cuban went on to explain the reasoning for his 180 on Trump. “He sent me an email when I started picking on him. … What happened was I really didn’t like Ted Cruz, so I started helping Donald, tried to encourage him, because I thought he’d be, and to this day thought he’d be a better candidate than Ted Cruz. ... But at some point, you’ve got to start learning and understanding the issues, you know?” he said in that interview. “Donald has been at this a year but you don’t look at him and say, ‘Wow, he’s gotten so much smarter on this topic or that topic.' In fact, you look at him and say, ‘What the hell are you talking about?' That’s not good for America.” Cuban, 58, told CNN while campaigning with Clinton in his hometown of Pittsburgh on July 30, "Donald initially — I really hoped he would be something different, that as a businessperson, I thought there was an opportunity there. But then he went off the reservation and went bat---- crazy."  Cuban and Trump, 70, have been rivals for some time. Before the campaign kicked off, the two would get into frequent Twitter spats. Back in 2012, Cuban dared Trump to shave his head for charity, offering to pay $1 million if Trump went through with it. Trump subsequently accused Cuban of “trying to use me to get publicity for himself," before, months later, saying, Cuban “has less TV persona than any other person I can think of. He’s an arrogant, crude, dope who met some very stupid people.”  Dummy @mcuban is at it again trying to use me to get publicity for himself!   .@mcuban has less TV persona than any other person I can think of. He’s an arrogant, crude, dope who met some very stupid people...   Sorry folks, but Donald Trump is far richer and much better looking than dopey @mcuban! 
(CNN)One pilot died and another was injured Tuesday when an Air Force U-2 Dragon Lady crashed shortly after takeoff in northern California, the U.S. Air Force said. The crash occurred about 9:05 a.m. north of Sacramento in Sutter County; TV images showed a brush fire. The aircraft had been assigned to 1st Reconnaissance Squadron at Beale Air Force Base, east of Marysville, and was on a training mission. The crash occurred near the Sutter Buttes mountain range. The pilots ejected from the aircraft. The incident is under investigation. CNN affiliate KCRA-TV said people told the station's Mike Luery they saw two parachutes carrying people and a third with equipment. The U-2 Dragon Lady "provides high-altitude, all-weather surveillance and reconnaissance, day or night, in direct support of U.S. and allied forces," according to an Air Force fact sheet. Beale is the home of the 9th Reconnaissance Wing and houses the U-2 Dragon Lady aircraft. U-2 history In 1996, a U-2 plane from Beale "crashed into the parking lot of the Oroville Mercury Register after declaring an inflight emergency 15 minutes after take off," KCRA reported. A pilot ejected before the crash and was found dead. A civilian also died. A U-2 spy plane was involved in one of the most dramatic incidents of the Cold War. In 1960, a U-2 was shot down over the Soviet Union during a reconnaissance mission. The American pilot, Francis Gary Powers, spent 21 months in a Moscow prison. He was returned to the United States in 1962 after a spy exchange. CNN's Salim Essaid contributed to this report.
Even as U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry has renewed his plea for government and opposition forces to stop fighting in Syria, the country's city of Aleppo was pounded overnight and Friday morning by intense bombing. Among the victims were 12 members of the same family, including six children, who were killed by airstrikes in the village of Bashkateen in Aleppo's western countryside today, said the U.K.-based Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, which attributed the strikes to Syrian government forces. The family was internally displaced, having moved to Bashkateen from another Syrian town, activists said. In east Aleppo, at least 27 people, including two children from one family, were killed by Russian and government airstrikes, according to the observatory. Many were injured and others are missing, the observatory said. Even in this war-weary city, last night's airstrikes were frightening. “My wife and daughter didn’t sleep all night. We were petrified. The sound of the explosions is much worse than usual,” an east Aleppo resident told ABC News. Airstrikes continued Friday morning, with three out of four Syrian Civil Defense centers under fire, according to a tweet by the civil defense.  3 of the 4 @SyriaCivilDef centers in Aleppo city targeted this morning. 60 air strikes in East Aleppo pic.twitter.com/g5seYilDbY The Aleppo Media Center posted photos on Twitter that it said showed damage after attacks on Aleppo's Qaterji neighborhood.  ???? ?????? ??? ????? ?????? ???? ?????? ?? ???????? ???? ????? ?????? ????? ??? ????? 7 ????? ? 6 ???? ????? ?????.#AleppoAMC pic.twitter.com/zzMHOVj6Tv Activists claim that the Syrian government and Russia have used napalm, phosphorous and cluster bombs in attacks on Aleppo since the Syrian military declared Monday that the cease-fire had ended. ABC News has not been able to independently verify these claims.   One out of only two water-pumping stations in Aleppo was hit overnight, according to local activists. The two stations are under the control of forces opposed to the Syrian government but provide water for both rebel-held eastern Aleppo and government-held western Aleppo. The attacks Thursday and Friday followed an announcement from the Syrian military that it was launching an offensive against eastern Aleppo and offering evacuation corridors for civilians. In the statement, the military urged civilians to stay away from “locations of armed terrorist groups.” Residents said the government's move is part of a deliberate policy of forced displacement.   Meanwhile, eastern Aleppo is still waiting for aid, which was supposed to reach the besieged area during the U.S.-Russia-brokered cease-fire. The truce was broken Monday when an attack on an aid convoy in western Aleppo left at least 21 people dead, including several aid workers. The United Nations has 40 trucks with aid ready to enter eastern Aleppo. The aid has been sitting by the Turkish border since the beginning of last week and is still waiting by the border in Syria customs area. Once the U.N. gets the green light, the first convoy carrying a month's worth of wheat flour for more than 150,000 people will be sent to Aleppo, according to the U.N.’s Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. The shipment will be followed up by a delivery of enough food rations to feed 35,000 people for a month. “The recent upsurge of violence in east Aleppo is obviously a concern for us. However, we are standby,” David Swanson, spokesman for the U.N.’s humanitarian affairs office, told ABC News. “As humanitarians on the front line we are ready to move. It is now up to the politicians to make this a reality.” The distance from the Turkish border to east Aleppo is only some 40 miles, but the journey could take about four to five hours. Up to 275,000 people in eastern Aleppo are in need of humanitarian aid. Aid workers have not been able to reach the besieged area since clashes between the Syrian government and armed rebel groups started July 7. Around 13.5 million people in Syria are in need of humanitarian assistance, while 4.8 million have fled their country and 6.1 million are internally displaced, according to this month's figures from the U.N.'s humanitarian affairs office.
Speaker Paul Ryan on Thursday refused to take a position on Donald Trump’s controversial proposal to increase the use of stop-and-frisk tactics to reduce crime in African-American communities such as Chicago. During a Fox News town hall taped Wednesday, the real estate tycoon said law enforcement should increase its use of stop-and-frisk to curb "black-on-black crime." Story Continued Below “I would do stop-and-frisk,” Trump told Sean Hannity. “We did it in New York, it worked incredibly well. And you have to be proactive.” Ryan — who said earlier this week he hopes the House can pass criminal justice reform during the lame-duck session — deferred when asked about Trump's statements. “I haven’t given enough thought to it,” the Wisconsin Republican said, later adding: “I’m not a Judiciary guy so I would defer to [Judiciary Chairman] Bob Goodlatte about the constitutionality of police tactics. I can’t speak to that.” The New York City Police Department’s stop-and-frisk practices were ruled unconstitutional by a federal court in the summer of 2013 because they were found to be racially discriminatory. Trump's pitch came on the heels of more violence in Charlotte, North Carolina, Wednesday evening, during protests that followed the recent killings of two black men by police in Tulsa, Oklahoma, and Charlotte. North Carolina Gov. Pat McCrory declared a state of emergency and one civilian was reported to be on life support after being shot during a protest. On Thursday, Democrats slammed Trump's suggestion. “Donald Trump is a national embarrassment and I’m looking forward to Nov. 8 when this long national nightmare will end,” Rep. Hakeem Jeffries (D-N.Y.) said when asked about Trump’s stop-and-frisk idea. “He constantly throws out things that have no basis in reality.” “The notion that stop and frisk had anything to do with the improving public safety numbers in New York is ludicrous and Donald Trump needs to check his facts," Jeffries added. Another New York Democrat, Rep. Gregory Meeks, said Trump's rhetoric was really about mobilizing his base, not appealing to black voters. “This is supposed to be his alleged roll out to get closer and get more African American votes," Meeks said. "What Donald Trump is really doing, and he’s done it throughout, he’s tried to present a stereotype of African Americans that fits the description of some of the individuals who support him who are deplorable so that they can turn out in this vote.”
Washington (CNN) Vigo County, Indiana, is used to getting its way in presidential elections. Since 1956, no presidential candidate has won the national popular vote without winning this county. So when people talk about bellwether counties, this is what they mean. It's not exactly representative of the rest of the country, but in its own way, Vigo County has followed national political trends more than anywhere else. Population Look, a bellwether Representation Popularity Top searches Who's searching? Trending Searches by candidate 
Washington (CNN)Donald Trump was asked by a member of a Fox News town hall audience this week what he would do to reduce violent crime in the country's inner cities. "Right, well, one of the things I'd do, Ricardo, is I would do 'stop-and-frisk.' I think you have to. We did it in New York, it worked incredibly well and you have to be proactive and, you know, you really help people sort of change their mind automatically. You understand; you have to, in my opinion. I see what's going on here. I see what's going on in Chicago; I think stop-and-frisk, in New York City, it was so incredible, the way it worked." Stop-and-frisk is a type of aggressive policing that allows -- some say encourages -- officers to detain a person on virtually any type of vague suspicion, search that individual without a warrant and arrest the person if any kind of illegal substance or weapon is found. It grew out of the tough policies of New York Mayor Rudy Giuliani, now a vocal Trump supporter and trusted adviser, under the theory that aggressive enforcement of even minor laws would lead to a reduction of violent crime. Proponents of stop-and-frisk argue that it would be especially effective in getting illegal guns off the streets. Critics of the program questioned its constitutionality. They also pointed to the fact, documented in several studies, that the policy falls heaviest on black and Latino men. But is Trump right that stop-and-frisk "worked incredibly well?" It is clear that crime rates plunged in New York during Giuliani's time in office, as well as the terms of his successor, Michael Bloomberg, who ramped up the stop-and-frisk program. What's less clear is the policy's impact on the lower crime rate. The number of stops in the city rose dramatically from 97,296 in 2002 to 685,724 in 2011, a seven-fold increase, according to data compiled by the New York Civil Liberties Union based on police reports. But the number of homicides did not fall in proportion to the soaring number of stops, dropping from 587 in 2002 to 515 in 2011. Moreover, the NYCLU also found that in the more than 5 million stops between 2002 and 2013, guns were found in only 0.2% of the cases. Other violent crimes also fell during this time period. Assaults were down 13%, robberies declined 27% and rape declined 35%, according to City-Data.com. But none of these drops came close to corresponding with the huge increase in stop-and-frisk cases. New York's stop-and-frisk policy was found to be unconstitutional by a federal judge in 2013 and current Mayor Bill de Blasio vowed to end it in 2014. The newly elected mayor dropped the city's appeal of that decision. That decision elicited cries from some proponents that it would lead to a surge in violent crime. However, except for an uptick in 2015, the city's homicide rate continued its downward trend, reaching historic lows in the first quarter of 2016. 
"For 30 years you’ve been doing it, and now you just started thinking of solutions.” — Donald Trump Trump has said at least three times that Hillary Clinton has been working on trade issues, and other national policy issues, for 30 years. But as Clinton said, it hasn’t been “quite that long.” In 1986, Clinton was Arkansas first lady, and her involvement on trade policy would have been limited at best. Her first major role in national politics was as First Lady, when former President Bill Clinton won his first presidential race in 1992.
Hillary Clinton on Tuesday said she is “appalled” that Donald Trump has not apologized to President Barack Obama after spending years questioning his birthplace. “Everything that I believe in, I want to bring to the White House. I wanna build on the progress that President Obama has made during a very tumultuous time,” Clinton told host Steve Harvey on the radio program “The Steve Harvey Morning Show.” “I mean, I’m appalled that Donald Trump will not apologize to the president and to the country for spending years questioning his citizenship and attempting to delegitimize him. And President Obama and Michelle Obama, they’ve kept their heads high. Like Michelle says, when they go low, we go high. And we gotta stay high. We’ve gotta stay focused.” Story Continued Below Trump on Friday made a much-hyped announcement regarding the conspiracy theory the now-Republican presidential nominee began pushing years ago. His statement, however, lacked an apology and falsely pinned the blame on Clinton for igniting the so-called “birther” issue. “Hillary Clinton started the ‘birther’ controversy,” Trump said, though fact-checkers have found no connection between the conspiracy theory and Clinton or her presidential campaign. “I finished it. Barack Obama was born in the United States, period. Now we all want to get back to making the United States great again.” Clinton was itching to hammer Trump during the interview, which began with a remark about the importance of voter registration and the threat of a Trump presidency before transitioning into light topics like what Clinton's and Harvey's grandchildren should call them (Clinton laughed at Harvey’s pitch for what his grandkids should call him — “Big Pimpin’” — and said her granddaughter calls her “Grandma” and former President Bill Clinton “Pop-pop”). “Oh my gosh, can I have the whole hour?” Clinton said when asked what separates her from Trump. “I think it really comes down to our visions and our values. You know, I have a vision where we continue to pursue equality and justice and opportunity for everybody.”
The Obama administration Monday is calling on cities and counties to rethink their zoning laws, saying that antiquated rules on construction, housing and land use are contributing to high rents and income inequality, and dragging down the U.S. economy as a whole. City zoning battles usually are fought block by block, and the president's involvement will create friction, particularly among environmental groups and the not-in-my-backyard crowd. But the White House jawboning is welcome news to many others, including mayors and builders increasingly foiled by community opposition to development. Story Continued Below The White House published a “toolkit” of economic evidence and policy fixes to help local political leaders fight back against the NIMBYs that tend to hold sway over municipal zoning meetings. “In more and more regions across the country, local and neighborhood leaders have said yes in our backyard,” the paper states. “We need to break down the rules that stand in the way of building new housing.” The prescriptions call for more density, speedier permitting and fewer restrictions on accessory dwelling units such as basement and garage apartments. The plan rejects some of the arguments made by environmentalists, labor unions and other liberal constituencies that have stood in the way of development and endorses changes long sought by builders and the business community. “When unnecessary barriers restrict the supply of housing and costs increase, then workers, particularly lower-income workers who would benefit the most, are less able to move to high-productivity cities,” said Jason Furman, chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers. “All told, this means slower economic growth.” Zoning policy might seem picayune for a president, but eight years after the foreclosure crisis left the country littered with empty homes, the country is facing a critical housing shortage in its most vibrant job centers. The result is soaring rents, growing income inequality and sputtering economic growth nationwide. By one estimate, barriers to development in major cities have shaved as much as $1.95 trillion a year off U.S. economic growth. “It’s important that the president is talking about it,” said Mark Calabria, director of financial regulation studies at the Cato Institute. “Local restrictions on housing supply are a crucial economic issue. I would say it’s one of the top 10.” There’s not much the White House can do beyond talk. The administration’s 2017 budget request includes $300 million in grants to help mayors update zoning rules, and the Department of Transportation has begun weighing plans for housing growth and affordability before approving funding for certain transit projects. Despite a growing consensus among economists that slow-growth policies of the 1970s are hurting job and income growth, many elected officials continue to face local opposition to liberalized development. Earlier this year, environmentalists and labor unions quickly shut down a plan by California Gov. Jerry Brown that would have made it easier for developers to build apartments and condominiums. The proposal got nowhere, despite the support of mayors, businesses and the White House. The case illustrates the steep road to change and the need for high-profile jawboning, Calabria said. “Normally governors don’t like to get involved in local land-use decisions,” Calabria said. “And if you have a president talking about it, that’s unusual.”
Washington (CNN)President Barack Obama on Tuesday tapped the highest-ranking US diplomat in Cuba as the first ambassador to the island in more than 50 years. But deep opposition among some senators means it's nearly impossible he'll be confirmed before the President leaves office. Jeffrey DeLaurentis has served as the United States' charge d'affairs in Havana since 2014, overseeing the reopening of the US Embassy there and helping shepherd in a new era of US-Cuba ties. Obama wrote in a statement that elevating DeLaurentis' title to "ambassador" was a "common sense step forward toward a more normal and productive relationship between our two countries." "There is no public servant better suited to improve our ability to engage the Cuban people and advance US interests in Cuba than Jeff," Obama wrote. DeLaurentis was long expected to be named to the ambassador post, but critics of Obama's Cuba policy have remained steadfast in their opposition to any nomination. Cuban-American Republican Sens. Ted Cruz and Marco Rubio have been among the most vocal critics, saying the Castro regime is still violating basic human rights. In a statement Tuesday, Rubio wrote that "rewarding the Castro government with a US ambassador is another last-ditch legacy project for the President that needs to be stopped." "This nomination should go nowhere until the Castro regime makes significant and irreversible progress in the areas of human rights and political freedom for the Cuban people, and until longstanding concerns about the Cuban regime's theft of property and crimes against American citizens are addressed," Rubio wrote. Confirming DeLaurentis is yet another entry on a White House to-do list for Congress that seems destined to go unfulfilled, at least before November's elections. Among the other items: confirming Obama's Supreme Court nominee Merrick Garland and ratifying the Trans-Pacific Partnership trade deal. Obama became the first sitting US president to visit Cuba in a half-century earlier this year. The last US ambassador to serve in Havana left the post in 1960 at the beginning of Fidel Castro's rule. The President has insisted that 50 years of enmity with Cuba hadn't yielded results for either Americans or Cubans, and maintains that a new approach will better serve both populations. "We only hurt ourselves by not being represented by an ambassador," he wrote in his statement Tuesday. "If confirmed by the Senate, I know Jeff will build on the changes he helped bring about to better support the Cuban people and advance America's interests." 
(CNN)A trail of clues provided by a Washington Post reporter and his readers led Univision anchor Enrique Acevedo to Donald Trump's shimmering golf resort outside Miami earlier this week. There, Acevedo found something that has elicited both shock and mystery within the political world: a portrait of Trump that the Republican nominee reportedly paid for using money from his charitable foundation. "A lot of people have been looking for this painting," Acevedo wrote Wednesday. The search was prompted by David Fahrenthold, the Washington Post reporter who has been investigating the Trump Foundation. In a story published Tuesday, Fahrenthold reported that the real estate mogul had used money from the Trump Foundation to purchase a $10,000, four-foot-tall acrylic painting of himself at a charity fundraiser. Fahrenthold had already reported that Trump used the foundation's money to buy another portrait of himself, one that was six-feet-tall and cost $20,000. Experts say each purchase was possibly illegal. The Trump campaign did not respond to a request for comment. Following the report Tuesday, an eagle-eyed Twitter follower notified Fahrenthold that a photo on TripAdvisor showed the portrait hanging at the Trump National Doral Resort near Miami. The resort happens to be mere blocks from Univision's studios. Acevedo, who said he's been following Fahrenthold's reporting for weeks, reserved a room late Tuesday night at the hotel using points from his personal credit card. "I didn't want to give Univision's money to one of Trump's businesses," he said. Acevedo eventually located the painting at the entrance of the Champions Bar & Grill insider the resort, marking the latest triumph in Fahrenthold's intrepid and collaborative reporting. "I consider it a very small contribution to David's phenomenal reporting," Acevedo told CNN in an email. Fahrenthold, for his part, disagrees. "Enrique deserves 99.9 percent of the credit for that find, since it was he who figured out how to get on the property (by booking a room), and then how to find the photo itself," he told CNN in an email. Fahrenthold's reporting was cited in a speech last week by President Barack Obama, who compared the Clinton family foundation with Trump's foundation. "One candidate's family foundation has saved countless lives around the world," Obama said. "The other candidate's foundation took money other people gave to his charity and then bought a six-foot-tall painting of himself." When he learned of the President's comment, Fahrenthold put in another request to his readers. "Reminder," he tweeted, "I am still looking for this portrait." The next day, he had a lead from a Washington Post reader who had shipped the painting to another one of Trump's golf clubs in Briarcliff Manor, New York. "This all happened because of social media," Fahrenthold told CNN in the email, saying he hoped the TripAdvisor photo would motivate a Florida reporter to track it down. "Enrique did just that -- although, it turns out, I had underestimated how much work this would actually take," he said. 
(CNN)As Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton prepare to square off Monday night in their first debate, the expectations are clear: Political bloodsport in primetime. The 2016 race has been notably nasty, with Trump assuming the attack dog role campaigns have traditionally outsourced to running mates and surly surrogates. Clinton too has shown a willingness to blitz Trump -- though in less graphic terms -- during speeches and interviews on the trail. But does the current election season represent a new low in American politics? History says no -- and a group of historians interviewed by CNN agree. Exhibit A: "That hideous hermaphroditical character, which has neither the force and firmness of a man, nor the gentleness and sensibility of a woman." Exhibit B: "Around him, as the candidate for the highest office in the gift of the people, the most corrupt, the most designing and the most dangerous of the community rally." Exhibit C: "We are Republicans, and don't propose to leave our party and identify ourselves with the party whose antecedents have been rum, Romanism, and rebellion." Presidential candidates, their campaigns and supporters have been slinging mud since the Founding Fathers were jockeying for power in the aftermath of the revolution. The contests of the 19th century routinely descended into cesspools of public deviance, racism, and religious and personal slander. "The machinations, the backstabbing, the hideous caricatures and slurs were just devastating," historian Joan Waugh told CNN. "It was a bloodsport," she said. "I have to laugh, when I'm not weeping, at the utter abysmal ignorance of the way that politics and the history of politics is often reported. As if nothing today has ever happened before." 1800: 'That hideous hermaphroditical character' The first race of the new century was a rematch of the 1796 contest, pitting President John Adams, a Federalist, against Thomas Jefferson. In American politics in those early days, the parties were less important and the candidates didn't campaign much in person, mostly allowing partisan allies and hired hands to do the dirty work. And there was none more foul than Jeffersonian hatchet man James T. Callender. In a pamphlet titled, "The Prospect Before Us," the Scottish immigrant described Adams as a "hideous hermaphroditical character, which has neither the force and firmness of a man, nor the gentleness and sensibility of a woman." (For his trouble, Callender would eventually be convicted of violating the Sedition Act and jailed, only to be freed when Jefferson took office.) Candidates in this era operated under both social and statutory constraints. It was considered unseemly to seek votes or speak ill of the opposition. And the Sedition Act made it illegal to write or print anything "malicious" about the government -- especially its President. "Famously, when a guy in a bar, half-drunk, said that John Adams had a fat ass -- which is also factually true -- the guy was put in jail," Pulitzer Prize-winning historian Edward J. Larson told CNN. "So you had to watch what you said directly about Adams. You could get away with saying anything you wanted about others in the Federalist party." While the Jeffersonians feared Adams was fixing to dispense with the American experiment in favor of something like the British monarchy, the Federalists were equally convinced that Jefferson would effectively open the borders to foreign radicals and clamp down on religion. As one Massachusetts newspaper put it, electing "the infidel Jefferson" would mean "our churches will be prostrated, and some infamous prostitute, under the title of the Goddess of Reason, will preside in the Sanctuaries now devoted to the worship of the Most High." Of course, none of it was true. "Jefferson was not an atheist," Larson explained. In fact, the Virginian and Adams "had almost identical religious viewpoints. They were both Unitarians. Adams' religious viewpoints were almost indistinguishable from Jefferson's and they knew that. They had been close friends." Their relationship would last another quarter century, until they died on the same day -- July 4, 1826. 1828: 'The skunks of party slander' In the first -- but not final -- American campaign drama widely considered to have sent one of its central characters to an early grave, another incumbent Adams was defeated in an electoral rematch from four years earlier. Like in 1800, the 1824 contest had gone to the House of Representatives. John Quincy Adams fared better than his father, winning the presidency over Andrew Jackson by obtaining the support of House Speaker Henry Clay in what opponents called the "corrupt bargain" -- Adams would name Clay his secretary of state. This did not sit well with Jackson, a hard-bitten man who was orphaned as a teen and made his name in combat against the British and then by leading a violent campaign against Native American tribes. He would spend the next four years plotting his revenge. "The campaign of 1828 was very nasty, a campaign in which supporters of Andrew Jackson called John Quincy Adams a 'pimp' (the rumor, started by Jackson allies, was that Adams during his time as the US minister to Russia had provided female companionship for the czar) and supporters of John Quincy called Jackson and his wife 'polygamists' because they had married before her divorce came through," said CNN presidential historian Tim Naftali. Kerwin Swint, an author and professor at Kennesaw State University, recalled it being particularly hard on the Jackson family. "Andrew Jackson's mother was caricatured as a common prostitute that the sailors brought over for the benefit of the English Navy," he said, while Jackson himself "was called a murderer, a traitor, and mentally unstable." Adams dismissed the vile tone of the campaign, chalking up the slurs to those "skunks of party slander." The President, though, was not so high-minded that his associates didn't accuse Jackson of being illiterate, while mocking his poor spelling skills and keeping up attacks on his wife, Rachel. The harsh spotlight wore on her and, as many historians agree and Jackson then believed, probably had a hand in killing her. "I would rather be a doorkeeper in the house of God than live in that palace in Washington," she is said to have told friends as the campaign turned ugly. Rachel Jackson died on Dec. 22, 1828, likely of a heart attack. She would be buried on Christmas Eve, before her husband's inauguration. At her funeral, Andrew Jackson is widely reported to have told fellow mourners, "I can and do forgive all my enemies. But those vile wretches who have slandered her must look to God for mercy." Her tombstone at the Hermitage, Jackson's home in Nashville, read in part: "A being so gentle, and yet so virtuous, slander might wound but could not dishonour." 1860: 'Stephen in search of his mother' "At political rallies in (Abraham) Lincoln's era, people got drunk, they had fist fights, they threw excrement, they attacked horses, they screamed and shouted and cursed -- did I mention they drank; they drank a lot -- and it was not exactly a festive atmosphere," the historian and Lincoln scholar Harold Holzer told CNN. "It was a scary atmosphere." In the years before the public flocked to see heavyweights in the ring or on the gridiron, many would bring their booze and off-hours aggressions to campaign rallies -- drunken parades and parties that made little mention of the candidates, who rarely if ever attended. Lincoln in particular steered clear of the trail, as outright campaigning was still considered unbecoming of a future chief executive. So when one of the four candidates in the 1860 race, the Democrat Stephen A. Douglas, announced he was going to travel from Chicago to New Hampshire, by way of New Orleans, to visit his sick mother, political opponents and the partisan press drew their daggers. "Douglas made a speech every time the train stopped for water and coal," Holzer said. And for that, "he was mocked brutally as a momma's boy, as 'little Steven in search of his mother,' insulting his independence, his manhood, making him look like a pipsqueak -- which he was -- so he was personally assailed." The broader sweep of the 1860 campaign was much darker. Conspiracy theories and race hate were the prevailing the themes in a four-way showdown that left the Democratic Party in shambles and cleared the way for the first shots of the Civil War just a few months later. The table had been set by a Supreme Court decision three years earlier, in 1857's Dred Scott decision, when it declared that African Americans could not be US citizens. The ruling aggravated tensions between the northern and southern states, leading many to believe that, as Holzer put it, "Douglas was in cahoots with President James Buchanan and Chief Justice Taney to make slavery legal, national, and perpetual." This was not quite true. Douglas despised Buchanan and considered the Scott decision a political misstep. But Honest Abe knew how to throw an elbow and seized on anxieties in the north over a federal government conspiring to expand slavery across the continent. Douglas tried to turn the tables, as Holzer explained, by saying "that Lincoln wants whites to be able to marry blacks, blacks to serve on juries, blacks to have equal rights, blacks to have the vote, blacks to have white servants and all these things that are supposed to send shivers of horror into the white community." The political cartoons of the day helped stoke the fiction. Appearing mostly on pamphlets and in saloon windows, they were often crude and deeply racist. In one titled "The political quadrille: Music by Dred Scott" (above), all four candidates danced with their perceived objects of their interest -- Lincoln with a black woman, John C. Breckinridge with President Buchanan (or "Buck" the goat here), Douglas with an Irishman and Constitutional Union party candidate John Bell, with a Native American, suggesting that he is a Nativist, or anti-immigrant. Lincoln would rout all three, winning the presidency with 1.87 million votes, nearly 500,000 better than the runner-up Douglas. But less than two months after the election, South Carolina voted to secede from the union. Six more states would follow before Lincoln was sworn in as the 16th president of a rapidly dissolving United States on March 4, 1861. 1872: 'The Home Stretch' The second post-Civil War election pitted President Ulysses S. Grant against a challenger from within his own party: the audacious abolitionist and New York Tribune publisher Horace Greeley. The 1872 campaign turned on the fight over Reconstruction in the South and with the Democratic party still hopelessly divided, the Liberal Republicans -- a breakaway GOP group that favored amnesty for erstwhile Confederates -- formed the base of the electoral opposition. But as the campaign neared, they faced one minor hurdle: no one wanted their nomination. Enter Greeley, "a very strange and eccentric figure" by historian Waugh's account. "He always wore this long white waistcoat and his hair was a mess." "He was no one's idea of their standard-bearer," Waugh added, but that he would be -- and with it, the target of relentless attacks by his former friends and the cartoonist Thomas Nast. Greeley became a figure of fun early on, and unflattering caricatures, in essay or cartoon form, followed him throughout the campaign. The press behaved like a band of cruel teenagers, wondering aloud -- as in one Evening Post editorial -- "how many men are there of character and reputation who may be counted among his friends? If there be any at all, they are very few -- so few that it is difficult to recall their names." Rallying around him instead, the piece continued, were "the most corrupt, the most designing and the most dangerous of the community." "They accused Greeley of all kinds of really whacko things," Swint said. "He was a vegetarian, which was seen as weird. Horace Greeley today would be a New Age guru kind of character. He was also easy to lampoon. He had a large puffy face, and big steel-rimmed glasses." In a pamphlet titled "Horace Greeley Unmasked," Springfield Republican writer Samuel Bowles is quoted suggesting the candidate's "perversity of temper and openness to flattery" made him an easy mark for treacherous operators. Greeley also suffered at the nimble hand of Nast, the Harper's Weekly cartoonist, who skewered the candidate savagely for months. In his now infamous illustration, "We Are On the Home Stretch," a waylaid Greeley is seen, belly up, on a stretcher, defeated and being returned home to his home in Chappaqua, New York. The drawing would prove dramatically prescient. At the end of October, days before the election and a week after the cartoon was published, Greeley's wife died of consumption. Her husband would follow her to the grave a month later, on November 29, before the electoral college could fully register his votes. 1884: 'Ma, Ma, Where's My Pa?' The called him "Grover the good." But for all the work Grover Cleveland did in cleaning up corruption during his time as the sheriff of Erie County, mayor of Buffalo and governor of New York, the Democrats' nominee in 1884 led a less tidy personal life. A brief relationship with the widowed Maria Halpin in the early 1870s had yielded a child, but hardly a father. "It became the story of the day, glorified through the media. There was no smoking gun or direct testimony, all they had were accusations and circumstances. And of course he did know Halpin, and she named her son, his last name, Cleveland," Swint said. "He did admit to having an affair with her" and paid some child support. The Republicans took aim, calling Cleveland a deadbeat dad while dragging Halpin and the child into the muck. "There is a famous cartoon (above) of Cleveland walking down the street and a woman carrying a baby saying, 'Ma, Ma, where's my Pa?,'" Swint said. "So a lot of was visual. In the days before TV advertising, photos and illustrations in newspapers (carried more weight)." The rhyme took hold and became a rallying cry for supporters of Cleveland's opponent, James G. Blaine, who sang it in the streets and during campaign events. Unfortunately for Blaine, where Cleveland's issues were mostly the stuff of gossip, the Republican's own misdeeds well-documented -- literally. During his time as speaker of the House from 1869 to 1875, Blaine had in a series of letters articulated the precise details of his self-dealing, which mostly included pushing laws to benefit the railroad companies who, in turn, dished him stock in their growing operations. One particular missive was marked with the now familiar request, "Burn this letter!" The recipient failed to meet the request and the nominee was soon being taunted by Cleveland supporters as "Blaine, Blaine, James G. Blaine, the continental liar from the state of Maine!" As one Cleveland backer rationalized, the candidates' personal and professional failings, respectively, had made the choice an easy one. "We are told that Mr. Blaine has been delinquent in office but blameless in public life, while Mr. Cleveland has been a model of official integrity but culpable in personal relations," the supporter said. "We should therefore elect Mr. Cleveland to the public office for which he is so well qualified to fill, and remand Mr. Blaine to the private station which he is admirably fitted to adorn." It would get worse for Blaine, who ran into more recognizable trouble when one of his allies in New York, the Rev. Samuel Burchard, introduced the candidate with an infamous assault on the Irish community -- effectively calling them drunks and, in what many considered an insult then, Catholics. "We are Republicans," he said, "and don't propose to leave our party and identify ourselves with the party whose antecedents have been rum, Romanism, and rebellion." Blaine did not utter a word of protest, his silence helping to solidify political antipathies that endure to the present day. Cleveland would win a narrow popular vote but cruise to victory in the Electoral College. His supporters did not disappoint either, finally returning the "Ma, Ma, where's my Pa?" chant with a sharp answer: "Gone to the White House, ha ha ha!" 
What emerged, though, was in format and outward appearance similar to debates past -- two people behind lecterns -- only this time featuring what appeared to be a seasoned politician and a political novice. And it was Trump, expected to earn points for style, who at times seemed rattled, one of several distractions related less to the content of what he said than the manner in which he delivered it. The give and take didn't make for a sterling night, necessarily, as political theater. But for those who concluded that hosting "The Apprentice" would ready Trump for this sort of exercise, well, it turns out those are very different muscles than the ones he had to put to use on Monday night. Clinton, clearly, came into the debate with a strategy that she prosecuted almost without deviation: The goal was to appear unflappable, relaxed and almost dismissive of Trump's statements, while working in a few well-practiced zingers. That included pointing out that she had prepared for the debate, which offered a stark alternative to some of Trump's riffing, disjointed answers. There were also some effective ad-libs, such as when she reacted to a rambling Trump response by saying, "Just listen to what you heard." Related: One thing Clinton and Trump didn't debate: the debate itself Trump, by contrast, having faced multiple rivals during the primaries, looked uncomfortable in this one-on-one format. With so many people on stage during the primaries, his attacking style could stand out; here, having to share the spotlight only with Clinton, it was harder to employ that hit-and-run tactic. He interrupted Clinton repeatedly -- at first to get in points, but as the debate progressed those interruptions increasingly felt like fits of pique, as if all the attack ads she's running against him (which he referenced) had gotten under his skin. Trump's sniffling, which persisted throughout, also provided a distraction -- not a big deal, in theory, but the kind of thing teed up to be ridiculed in real time on social media. Trump's attempts to steamroll through certain exchanges created some problems for the third person in this mini-drama, Lester Holt. Holt, the "NBC Nightly News" anchor, had perhaps the most unenviable task one could imagine, given all the hand-wringing that preceded it and the Tuesday-morning quarterbacking that's sure to follow. Holt acquitted himself well enough, occasionally fact-checking Trump's statements -- usually when he sought to deny direct quotes that had been attributed to him -- and pressing him for specific answers. Those few moments when he challenged the candidate likely won't sit well with Trump's most ardent supporters, but Holt at least avoided the notion that the moderator should be some sort of potted plant who asks questions and completely gets out of the way. To that extent, his performance offered a measure of redemption for NBC News. Trump's impulse to look for one-liners also let him down when Clinton hammered him for not releasing his tax returns. When Clinton suggested that he might be hiding the fact that he hadn't paid any federal taxes, he interjected, "That makes me smart," a quip that was both ill considered and potentially problematic for him in the days ahead. Related: NBC looks to Lester Holt for debate win after 2016 mishaps Indeed, if Trump is the more practiced performer, it didn't show. Clinton maintained an appearance of calm while Trump spoke, occasionally smiling but looking intent and engaged. Trump adopted a steely-eyed squint in the early portion of the debate -- somewhere between Clint Eastwood and Chuck Norris -- but seemed less energetic as the evening wore on. Prior to the debate, MSNBC's Rachel Maddow noted that presidential debates are "the most unpredictable, the least scripted" of all major political events. As TV insiders know, reality television really isn't unscripted, and those programs benefit from the input of producers and editors in shaping storylines and the way characters are presented. In this first debate, anyway, Clinton stuck to her script, and Trump generally looked like he could have used a more detailed one.
Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump will debate for 90 minutes on Monday. But the winner likely will be determined in the first half-hour. That’s when Al Gore first sighed, Mitt Romney knocked President Barack Obama on his heels, and Marco Rubio, earlier this year, glitched in repeating the same talking point — over and over and over. It’s when Gore tried, unsuccessfully, to invade George W. Bush’s space, Richard Nixon was first caught wiping away sweat with a handkerchief (during the moderators’ introductions!) and Gerald Ford in 1976 made the ill-advised declaration that, “There is no Soviet domination of Eastern Europe.” Story Continued Below Veteran presidential debate coaches and campaign strategists say the tone and trajectory of general election debates have long been set in their opening minutes, and that the explosion of real-time spin and Twitter groupthink has only accelerated the trend. And so, as Clinton and Trump square off Monday at Hofstra University before a national audience that is expected to shatter viewership records, the pressure will be especially intense right at the start. “You have your maximum audience at its most impressionable stage in the first minutes of the debate,” said Mari Maseng Will, a veteran Republican debate coach who served as communications director in the Reagan White House. Campaigns now specially design one-liners for those crucial opening minutes and map out plans to pivot to safer ground if the early questioning veers into rockier political terrain, such as, say, classified emails for Clinton or charges of misogyny for Trump. In a sign of the warp speed in which debate storylines can form, BuzzFeed in 2012 famously posted a story with the headline, "How Mitt Romney Won the First Debate," only 42 minutes into the first Obama-Romney clash in Denver. Kevin Madden, then a senior Romney adviser, said the campaign could see the conventional wisdom hardening among the chattering class online in real time. “It was clear Romney was going to be declared the winner no matter what happened in the other 60 minutes, barring any big mistakes,” Madden said. (Romney fell victim to this, too, when he spent the first half of his final encounter largely agreeing with Obama and was portrayed as overly “passive.”) Debate pros, much like courtroom lawyers, have a name for this: “the primacy effect.” It’s the idea that whatever is heard first is likely to be what is best remembered. “In debates and in trial work, there’s the doctrine of primacy,” said Judd Gregg, who played Gore in Bush’s mock debate preparations in 2000 and John Kerry in 2004. “If you do a good job — or a really bad job — it will stay with the viewer.” How long, exactly, Clinton and Trump have to form that first impression is the subject of, well, some debate. Todd Graham, a presidential debate junkie and director of debate at Southern Illinois University, where his teams have won five national championships, estimated that candidates have about 45 minutes. “The first half of the debate is absolutely the most important,” Graham said. Examples are plentiful. Reagan’s classic 1984 line, “I am not going to exploit, for political purposes, my opponent's youth and inexperience,” came just before the halfway point. In 2000, Gore began making off-camera sighs and split-screen smirks in the opening minutes of the first general election debate, expressions of exasperation that would come to define his bouts with Bush. Bush, meanwhile, quickly landed lines about Gore’s “phony numbers” and, later, “fuzzy math” that would be endlessly repeated. Then, early in their third debate, Gore physically approached Bush in an act of intimidation that backfired at the town-hall style debate. Bush glanced over and gave Gore a quick, dismissive nod that drew laughs from the crowd as Gore gamely still tried to corner Bush on obscure specifics. “What about the Dingle-Norwood bill?” Gore demanded, before eventually retreating to his chair. Bush never answered. He didn’t need to. The early minutes proved critical in some of this year’s primary debates, too. In February, Chris Christie’s campaign-crushing retort to Rubio’s repeating of a talking point — “There it is. The memorized 25-second speech. There it is, everybody” — came fewer than 20 minutes into the two-hour debate. Rubio never recovered that night, or the rest of the campaign. Curt Anderson, chief strategist for Bobby Jindal, who appeared in the so-called undercard debates, said the bias toward the beginning was striking. “There’s this whole Twitterverse dynamic where it’s decided in the opening minutes. It’s not rational or fair, and you can bitch all you want about it, but you have to adjust and deal with it,” he said. By the end, Jindal’s team designed its debate strategy around landing its weightiest punches early. In the most extreme of cases, an entire debate’s storyline can be sealed after a single question. In 1988, the very first question asked of Michael Dukakis was whether he would support the death penalty if his wife were “raped and murdered.” Without any visible emotion, he said he would not. (“When he answered by talking policy, I knew we had lost the election,” Dukakis’ campaign manager would later say.) In the 2012 primaries, CNN opened a debate by asking Newt Gingrich about allegations that he had once wanted an open marriage. “I think the destructive, vicious, negative nature of much of the news media makes it harder to govern this country, harder to attract decent people to run for public office. And I am appalled that you would begin a presidential debate on a topic like that,” Gingrich bellowed to thunderous applause. Two days later, Gingrich, who had been left for dead politically after losing Iowa and New Hampshire, won the South Carolina primary. There are other practical reasons why early minutes matter most: Voters can change the channel, and reporters have to start crafting their stories. “Reporters are lazy, and they have deadlines, and those two things combined — they don’t have all night,” said Graham, who said he watches and reads post-game punditry and “95 percent of people are talking about what happened in the first 45 minutes.” In 2012, Rentrak, which tracks television viewership, found that the average home watched only two-thirds of the first debate, though there was no precipitous drop-off over time. But by the third debate, the company reported “the audience just didn’t stay tuned in as long.” There have been key moments late in presidential debates, or course. Reagan’s “There you go again” quip to Jimmy Carter in 1980 came late. George H.W. Bush glanced down at his watch when, deep into a 1992 debate, a voter was asking him a question. And Lloyd Bentsen’s infamous slapdown of Dan Quayle — “I knew Jack Kennedy, Jack Kennedy was a friend of mine. Senator, you are no Jack Kennedy” — came in the waning minutes of the 1988 vice-presidential debate. With Trump’s general unpredictability and his reported disdain for full 90-minute dress rehearsals at a lectern, he certainly could tire, slump or lash out late. Notably, Trump never debated one-on-one in the primary, and all those contests included commercial and bathroom breaks that are absent from the formal fall debates. Meanwhile, Clinton, in a 2007 primary debate, suffered a late blow after she took two different positions on drivers’ licenses for illegal immigrants in the closing minutes. “I can't tell whether she was for it or against it,” Obama pounced. But historically, it has been the first third to half of debates that prove decisive. “Attention spans wane,” said Brett O’Donnell, a Republican debate coach who has worked with past presidential candidates, including Romney, George W. Bush and John McCain. “They’re really set in the first 30 minutes, and you never get a second chance at a first impression.”
Well over 80 million people tuned in to see Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump face off, setting a new record in the sixty year history of televised presidential debates. According to Nielsen, the debate averaged a total of 84 million viewers across 13 of the TV channels that carried it live. Many millions also watched the debate via live streams on the web. Nielsen's 84 million total counts people who watched via traditional TV channels at home. People who watched the debate at parties, bars, restaurants, and offices were not counted. Neither were C-SPAN viewers. This means the actual total audience is even higher. On the TV side, CNN and other cable news channels saw big increases over past election years. So did the broadcast networks. NBC had the biggest audience overall, partly because "NBC Nightly News" anchor Lester Holt was the moderator of the debate. Upwards of 18 million people watched the debate on NBC. ABC drew 13.5 million viewers, CBS drew 12.1 million, Fox News drew 11.4 million, CNN drew 9.9 million, the Fox broadcast network drew 5.5 million, and MSNBC drew 4.9 million. The debate was also a hit on Spanish language television, attracting 2.5 million viewers on Univision and 1.8 million on Telemundo. Trump may have been the ratings magnet, but Clinton may have been the beneficiary of the ratings bump. By Tuesday there was a media consensus that Clinton had prevailed in the debate. The debate viewership number to beat was 80.6 million, set back in 1980, when Jimmy Carter and Ronald Reagan debated just once before the election. More recently, the first Obama-Romney debate in 2012 averaged 67 million viewers. Detailed Nielsen data confirms that viewership stayed high the entire time. Contrary to some speculation, there was not a big drop-off after the first 30 minutes of the 98-minute debate. The vast majority of viewers kept watching until the very end, a fact that the Clinton campaign celebrated on Tuesday. Earlier story: Ratings expectations for first Trump-Clinton debate are sky high Anticipation for the Clinton-Trump meeting had been mounting for months. Television industry executives were anticipating a total audience somewhere between 80 and 100 million. There will be two more debates between the candidates in October. On Monday night Twitter said the first face-off was the "most tweeted debate ever." Given the rapid growth of streaming options, it was almost certainly the most streamed debate ever, as well. Various live streams on YouTube together registered more than 2.5 million simultaneous viewers. Live streams on other sites also reached millions of people. On both Twitter and Facebook, Trump was a livelier subject than Clinton. Twitter said the "final share of conversation around the candidates on stage" was 62% for Trump and 38% for Clinton. On Facebook, the results were even more lopsided, with Trump earning 79% share of conversation and Clinton having the remaining 21%. Being talked about isn't necessarily a good thing for a candidate. Most commentators gave Clinton the edge over Trump after the debate. Still, the post-debate coverage on TV focused on Trump, partly because of surprising and confounding comments he made on stage. CNN's reality check team investigated 26 claims made by Clinton and Trump and found that Trump made a greater number of misleading statements.
Donald Trump defended his long-running questioning of President Barack Obama's birthplace during Monday's presidential debate, while Hillary Clinton called it a "racist lie" that "can't be dismissed that easily." During a segment on racial healing, Trump repeatedly praised himself for pushing the president to produce his long-form birth certificate in 2011. The document proved Obama was born in Hawaii. Story Continued Below "I think I did a great job and a great service not only for the country but even for the president in getting him to produce his birth certificate," Trump said. As moderator Lester Holt tried to ask Trump what he would say to Americans worried about the racial dimensions of birtherism, Trump cut off the question and said: "I say nothing, because I was able to get him to produce it." The Republican nominee also insisted that it was Clinton associates who first tried to peddle false rumors that Obama was born in Kenya. He further pointed to Clinton's tough Democratic primary clash with Obama in the 2008 presidential race in claiming that she had treated the president with disrespect. Clinton used the exchange to raise reports of how, back in the 1970s, some of Trump's properties were sued for racial discrimination because they would not rent apartments to African Americans. "He has a long record of engaging in racist behavior. And the birther lie was a very hurtful one," Clinton said. "Barack Obama is a man of great dignity. And I could tell how much it bothered him and annoyed him is that this was being touted and used against him." Trump retorted by saying his company had settled "the suit with zero -- no admission of guilt." He also insisted that he's formed strong relationships with African Americans "over the last little while."
Two months after snubbing Donald Trump at the Republican convention, Ted Cruz is now praising the GOP presidential nominee for inserting himself in Congress' eleventh-hour negotiations over a government funding bill. On Wednesday, Trump urged congressional negotiators to delay a U.S. handoff of the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers, a private-sector, nonprofit organization that manages Internet domain names. And that was enough to prompt Cruz to laud Trump — whom he pointedly declined to back in July when he urged Republicans to "vote your conscience." Story Continued Below "Appreciate @realDonaldTrump’s support of our efforts to keep the internet free," Cruz tweeted on Wednesday afternoon. "And we appreciate @tedcruz appreciating @realDonaldTrump. Over to you, @jeffroe," responded Trump campaign manager Kellyanne Conway, referring to Cruz's former campaign manager. And those warm words came after Roe suggested at a Bloomberg event that Cruz may be rethinking his withheld endorsement. "I think he’ll have an answer before Election Day." Roe said, according to Texas Tribune reporter Patrick Svitek. "To be honest ... watching Donald run a better campaign lately has been helpful to him." Cruz has made blocking the ICANN transition his central focus of the fall and has urged Republicans to include a rider blocking the action in a must-pass spending bill this month. GOP leaders have been generally supportive of the effort, and negotiators are increasingly likely to include some delay in the government funding measure, which will fund federal agencies through Dec. 9. "It's still being worked," said Senate Commerce Chairman John Thune (R-S.D.). "I don't think it probably resolves anything beyond Dec. 9." On Tuesday, the Senate voted to advance legislation that will eventually become the funding bill. Cruz voted no.
Several protesters and a dozen police officers were injured, and about five people were arrested after violent protests erupted after a deadly police shooting in Charlotte, North Carolina, on Tuesday.    Officers in riot gear deployed tear gas into a crowd of protesters after individuals targeted police cruisers, ABC affiliate WSOC-TV Charlotte reported. Early this morning the unrest raged on as a group of people blocked traffic on Interstate 85. A live video feed from a WSOC-TV helicopter above the scene appeared to show people removing items from the backs of trucks on the highway.   The scene on I-85 appeared to devolve into looting, with people pulling items from tractor-trailers and burning boxes. A group of people attempted to break into a Walmart, WSOC-TV reported, and scattered when police arrived at the scene. At least seven civilians were transported to a local hospital, and a handful were treated.    The shooting took place Tuesday afternoon after officers arrived at an apartment complex in Charlotte at about 4 p.m., searching for a suspect who had an outstanding warrant, a police statement said.    Police said the man fatally shot, identified as Keith Lamont Scott, was not the suspect officers sought but had exited from a vehicle with a firearm and the officers believed he posed an imminent deadly threat. Scott's family quickly challenged the police account of the shooting, saying that he was not armed and that he was holding a book and waiting for his son to be dropped off from school, WSOC-TV reports.    Detectives say they recovered at the scene the firearm they believe Scott was holding at the time of the shooting, WSOC-TV reported. Charlotte's Mayor Jennifer Roberts tweeted that "the community deserves answers and full investigation will ensue" and asked for calm as investigators work the case.    Police identified the officer involved in the shooting Brentley Vinson, who has been employed with the Charlotte-Mecklenburg Police Department since July 21, 2014, and is assigned to the metro division. Per standard procedure with any officer-involved shooting, he has been placed on paid administrative leave, police said. As night fell in Charlotte, protesters blocked off a busy road and chanted "Hands up, don't shoot!"  CMPD killed a disabled man today A video posted by Juan Lenin (@ho0zythinkyiz) on Sep 20, 2016 at 5:02pm PDT  Both Vinson and Scott are African-American, a police source told WSOC-TV. This is a breaking news story. Check back for updates.
NEW YORK — Regardless of who wins this November, the next U.S. president should stand united with Europe against Russian aggression, including Moscow's interference in other countries' elections, Latvia's foreign minister said Monday. Edgars Rinkēvičs' comments to POLITICO come as Americans face two stark choices in the White House race: Republican Donald Trump, who has spoken in friendly terms of Russian President Vladimir Putin, and Democrat Hillary Clinton, who has pledged to get tough on the Kremlin. Story Continued Below In an interview on the sidelines of the U.N. General Assembly in New York, Rinkēvičs steadfastly declined to say who he'd prefer win the upcoming election — "The choice of the American people will be made this November," he said. "Whatever that choice is it must be respected." But he emphasized that U.S. willingness to join Europe in standing up to Russia in recent years through sanctions and other means was a policy that should continue. "We should understand the kind of values we all share across both sides of the Atlantic are under attack from many actors" including "countries that really want to challenge the current state of the world, the revisionist countries," Rinkēvičs said. The Latvian diplomat noted that several European countries, including France and Germany, are holding important federal elections next year. Russia is believed to be quietly supporting far-right parties in some European states, including through financial aid. Kremlin-backed hackers also are suspected of staging digital attacks on the U.S. election infrastructure this year. And Russia's state-supported media clearly favors Trump. Trump has said that, if he's elected, the U.S. may not come to the military aid of Baltic states (Estonia, Lithuania and Latvia) if they are attacked by Russia if the three small countries have not paid their fair share to NATO. The Baltics have protested such comments, saying they are increasing their defense spending and pointing out that a common defense is at the heart of the NATO alliance. The Baltic states worry that Russia, which invaded and annexed a piece of Ukraine in 2014, is trying to re-establish the Soviet sphere of influence, including through manipulation of elections. "We do see that money is often used in Europe," Rinkēvičs said of the Russia methods. "The same sometimes happens with direct and indirect ways this country also tries to influence our internal political life."
Former Virginia Gov. Bob McDonnell, whose conviction on corruption charges was overturned by the Supreme Court last June, told MSNBC’s “Morning Joe” on Friday that “I’ve got my PhD in suffering.” “You learn more in life through suffering than you do success, and I’ve learned a lot,” the former Virginia governor told host Mika Brzezinski. Story Continued Below McDonnell, once considered a candidate to join the 2012 Republican presidential ticket as Mitt Romney’s running mate, was convicted in 2014 on 11 corruption-related felony counts stemming from the over $175,000 in gifts and loans the former governor and his wife accepted from Virginia businessman Johnnie Williams. Those gifts included vacations, designer clothing and a Rolex watch. But McDonnell contended that those gifts and loans had never prompted him to provide any special treatment for Williams. On Friday, McDonnell said “there was never any quo” in the quid pro quo case that the prosecution built against him. The governor’s conviction was overturned unanimously by the Supreme Court last June. Chief Justice John Roberts, who wrote the court’s opinion in the decision, said prosecutors had relied on a “boundless interpretation of the federal bribery statute” and added that “setting up a meeting, calling another public official, or hosting an event does not, standing alone, qualify as an ‘official act.’” McDonnell admitted that the case had been difficult on his family but also noted that four of his grandchildren were born during the legal process surrounding his case. Two of them, he said, were born shortly after court hearings and all of their births “were a sign to me there is a bright future on the other side of this and things are going to be okay.” He said that even though he complied with Virginia’s laws, he regretted taking “my eye off the ball” in monitoring what gifts his family members had received. He also admitted that accepting a business loan from Williams was “a big red flag” and “probably not good judgment on my part.” “I'm glad to be vacated, but I have done a deep dive of my entire life, 62 years. What have I done right, wrong? How can I be a better person?” he said. “So now that I'm on the other side of it, I think it's been an experience worth going through. I'll be a better person.”
President Barack Obama joked Thursday that actor Morgan Freeman couldn’t make it to a White House ceremony for National Medals of the Arts and Humanities recipients because he “undoubtedly is off playing a black president again.” “He never lets me have my moment,” the president added once the laughter subsided. Story Continued Below Obama also quipped that Thursday’s medal recipients included NPR host Terry Gross “and a whole bunch of people who Terry Gross has interviewed.” Legendary comedy writer and director Mel Brooks got top billing at the ceremony, which also honored chef Jose Andres, jazz musician Wynton Marsalis and author Sandra Cisneros, among others. “As Mel Brooks once said to his writers on 'Blazing Saddles,' which is a great film, ‘Write anything you want because we’ll never be heard from again. We will all be arrested for this movie,’” the president said in his introductory remarks. “Now to be fair, Mel also said, a little more eloquently, that every human being has hundreds of separate people living inside his skin and the talent of a writer is his ability to give them their separate names, identities, personalities and have them relate to other characters living within him,” Obama continued. “And that I think, is [what] the arts and humanities do: They lift up our identities and make us see ourselves in each other.”
Trump is saying "yes" to Fox News almost every day but saying "no" to most other major networks and news organizations -- a highly unusual strategy for a presidential nominee. He called into "Fox & Friends" on Monday morning, he is booked on "The O'Reilly Factor" Monday night, and he has another town hall with Sean Hannity coming up on Wednesday. Rousing the base instead of reaching out to undecided voters may ultimately pay off for Trump. If nothing else, it limits the candidate's exposure to hard-hitting questions -- while fueling frustration among journalists. Trump's surrogates continue to say that he is more accessible than Hillary Clinton, but that is no longer true. Newt Gingrich knocked Clinton at a Trump rally on Monday afternoon by saying "she doesn't do press conferences." But Clinton has taken questions from reporters at half a dozen press conferences in the past two weeks, including as recently as Monday morning. These sessions, while relatively short, have been plentiful, while Trump has not held a press conference since July. Trump beat reporters are starting to make noise about the drought — especially since Trump made Clinton's eight-month period without press conferences into a major campaign talking point. "It's been more than 50 days since Donald Trump held a press conference," David Martosko of The Daily Mail tweeted Monday. Trump's recent TV appearances, on "The Dr. Oz Show" and "The Tonight Show," made news, but not in journalistic settings. The Washington Post's Robert Costa had a newsmaking interview with Trump last week. But that's the exception to the rule. The New York Times last had an interview with Trump about a month ago. Trump last appeared on CNN in late August. Because Anderson Cooper challenged Trump about the candidate's muddled stance on immigration, The Post's Callum Borchers concluded that "it didn't go very well" for Trump. "It went so not well, in fact, that you have to wonder whether his campaign will decide it's best to dodge the likes of Anderson Cooper and Chuck Todd — or, for that matter, Chris Wallace and Bret Baier — and stick to softball sessions with Sean Hannity and the 'Fox & Friends' crew," Borchers wrote afterwards. Trump's last time on NBC was the "Commander in Chief Forum" on September 7. Moderator Matt Lauer was widely criticized for his light touch with Trump. Related: Behind the scenes, NBC execs concede Matt Lauer forum performance was "disaster" The candidate's last time on ABC was a short interview with David Muir on September 6. His last time on CBS was a "60 Minutes" sit-down with Lesley Stahl on July 17. Trump does have another CBS interview in the works, a campaign spokeswoman said. TV networks are agitating for more interviews with both Trump and Clinton. The difference between the two is that Trump previously had a reputation for calling in to morning shows and sitting down with interviewers all the time. This accessibility also once extended to his traveling press corps. "Trump used to be very, very accessible to the press. At the beginning of his campaign, he was extremely accessible," CNN politics reporter Jeremy Diamond said on Sunday's "Reliable Sources." "You could catch him for quick interviews on the way in and out of rallies. And that has really changed." Diamond said "he is less accessible I think, in many regards, than Hillary Clinton at this point." Trump's campaign declined to comment Monday on its media strategy. Republican communications strategist Ron Bonjean said most candidates in Trump's position would be "trying to reach a a broader general election audience." "However, most Americans already know Trump as a household name and he doesn't need to diversify his interviews for additional exposure," Bonjean said. "Trump is protecting himself from less friendly journalists while getting out his message at the same time even if it is to a more conservative audience." This conservative-focused media strategy is also gaining attention among Trump's critics. "He pretty much exclusively appears on Fox News now," Judd Legum, editor of the liberal news site ThinkProgress, tweeted on Monday. Trump's relationship with Hannity is perhaps the best symbol of how the candidate gets out his message on his own terms. Trump has taped numerous town halls with the conservative commentator. According to TVNewser, Wednesday's town hall will focus on "issues and concerns surrounding African-Americans this election cycle." According to Nielsen data, only 1.5% of Hannity's 2 million nightly viewers are African American. Overall, at any given time of day, about 2% of Fox News viewers are African American.
When Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump take the debate stage at Hofstra University on Long Island in New York tonight for the highly anticipated first presidential debate of the general election, Gary Johnson will be watching on television some 30 miles away in Twitter's Chelsea office in Manhattan — armed only with a Twitter handle. The campaign for the Libertarian Party nominee is hoping to interject his voice into the debate from the sidelines through an aggressive Twitter and media strategy. Both Johnson and his running mate, former Massachusetts Gov. Bill Weld, will be live-tweeting throughout the evening. "Govs. Johnson and Weld will be making themselves available to the media, watching the debate with great interest, and will be anxious to point out how a third voice, representing millions of independent voters disenfranchised by the Republican and Democrat parties, would better serve the American people," campaign communications director Joe Hunter told ABC News in a statement. He added, "They will be respectful and not interested in any grandstanding for the cameras or inappropriate 'protests.'" Green Party candidate Jill Stein will be challenging her exclusion from the debate by holding a rally outside the secured perimeter of the debate hall. However, her campaign says she will not "risk arrest," given that there is an active warrant for her arrest because of her involvement in a recent protest against a controversial pipeline project in North Dakota. In 2012, she and her running mate were arrested outside Hofstra University when they attempted to enter the grounds during a presidential debate between President Barack Obama and then–Republican nominee Mitt Romney. Instead, she plans to be live on Periscope during the debate, answering the same questions that are lobbed at Clinton and Trump on the debate stage. Johnson failed to qualify for the first presidential debate after he fell short of the 15 percent polling threshold for for inclusion set by the Commission on Presidential Debates. His recent national polling average stands at 9 percent, with the most recent ABC News/Washington Post poll published over the weekend putting him at 5 percent. Although he previously said it would be "game over" for his campaign if he failed to qualify for the debates, he now says that it is "an ongoing process" to try to reach the 15 percent threshold for subsequent debates this fall. In an interview on ABC News' "This Week" on Sunday, Johnson criticized the Commission on Presidential Debates over its formula for deciding who is included in the debates, saying that the panel is "made up of Republicans and Democrats that just have no intention whatsoever in seeing anyone other than a Republican or Democrat on the debate stage." Johnson's campaign is touting an online petition that has garnered over 1 million signatures in support of Johnson's inclusion in the debates. ABC News' MaryAlice Parks contributed reporting. 
Washington (CNN)ISIS is suspected of firing a shell with mustard agent that landed at the Qayyara air base in Iraq Tuesday where US and Iraqi troops are operating, according to several US officials. The shell was categorized by officials as either a rocket or artillery shell. After it landed on the base, just south of Mosul, US troops tested it and received an initial reading for a chemical agent they believe is mustard. No US troops were hurt or have displayed symptoms of exposure to mustard agent. US officials said Tuesday that additional testing had definitely concluded that a mustard agent was not used in the attack. Last week, another official had said the agent had "low purity" and was "poorly weaponized." A second official called it "ineffective." A US defense official said troops had gone out to look at the ordnance after it landed. Based on seeing what they thought was a suspect substance, two field tests were conducted. The first test was positive and the second was negative, the official said. The substance is now being sent to a lab for further examination. Decontamination precaution US troops involved in the incident went through decontamination showers as a precaution. No troops have shown any symptoms of exposure, such as skin blistering. CNN has reported on previous instances where ISIS has fired rounds with mustard agents in Iraq and Syria. "I don't know of a case like this where it was proximate to US forces like this before," said one military official, noting that "potentially" the rocket round was "within hundreds of yards" of the US forces and "within the security perimeter" of the base. The US officials said they "had expected" that ISIS might try use chemical weapons as US and Iraqi forces push towards Mosul in an effort to take the city back from ISIS. Several hundred US troops are using the base as a staging area for supporting Iraqi forces. All of this has led the Pentagon to assess on a preliminary basis that it was ISIS that fired at the base, since the terror group has been making mustard agent for some time. In the course of its air campaign against ISIS, US airstrikes have hit several locations the US believes are production sites for mustard agent. US officials emphasized that mustard agent is relatively easy to produce, and they continue to hit suspected manufacturing sites when they find them. US troops are routinely outfitted with protective gear in the event of a chemical weapons attack. CNN's Ryan Browne contributed to this report.
Concerns about New York and New Jersey bombing suspect Ahmad Khan Rahami's intentions were raised to authorities by his father and a neighbor more than once over the past years, ABC News has learned. Two years ago, Rahami's father told the FBI that his son was interacting with "bad people" overseas and a concerned citizen in the neighborhood told authorities that Rahami's associates may have been trying to procure explosives, sources told ABC News. The FBI first became aware of Rahami in the summer of 2014, when local law enforcement contacted the agency's New Jersey field office about him, sources said. A dispute at the Rahami home had brought local law enforcement to the house at that time. A neighbor told the authorities he overheard Rahami's father calling his son a "terrorist," according to a U.S. official. In addition, the neighbor said Rahami’s father had expressed concern his son may be in contact with people overseas who were collecting explosives, ABC news was told. The FBI then opened a so-called "Guardian" file on Rahami, initiating a process to determine whether Rahami had any links to terrorism or other criminal activity and whether a more formal investigation was warranted. The assessment of Rahami produced no clear evidence or indications of radicalization, and at one point his father recanted his claims, sources said. Rahami was not placed on any U.S. terrorism watch lists. Speaking to reporters today outside of his New Jersey home, Rahami's father said he "called the FBI two years ago" about his son. "I told them you got a connection with this guy," he said, without offering any further information.   The FBI interviewed Rahami’s father after New Jersey officials compiled complaints and sent them a suspicious activity report. He told the FBI that his son had traveled to Pakistan and was interacting with "bad people," according to sources. Rahami's father also told the FBI his son had injured and beaten members of his immediate family -- but a grand jury declined to file charges against him. However, Rahami's father later told the FBI he didn't mean to suggest his son was a terrorist, but that he was hanging out with "undesirables," the U.S. official said. At a press conference Monday, the head of the FBI's field office in New York, Bill Sweeney, noted that the FBI had previously received "a report of a domestic incident," adding that "the allegations [were] recanted." However, Sweeney did not address terrorism-related allegations. It’s unclear if the FBI or other law enforcement agencies interviewed Rahami in 2014. As in most suspicious activity report cases they review, the FBI found no significant derogatory information in Rahami's case, sources told ABC News. In a statement today, the FBI acknowledged that in August 2014 they "initiated an assessment of Ahmad Rahami based upon comments made by his father after a domestic dispute that were subsequently reported to authorities." "The FBI conducted internal database reviews, interagency checks, and multiple interviews -- none of which revealed ties to terrorism," the statement said. One source emphasized that only a single report came to authorities related to Rahami. Had more reports come in, authorities would have looked further at him, the source said, adding that the FBI does not have the resources to put every subject of a suspicious activity report under full-time surveillance. "We should not be keeping people under surveillance indefinitely" when there is no solid reason, another U.S. official said, adding that doing so would violate Constitutional rights. "Our job together is to find those needles in a hay stack," FBI Director James Comey recently told lawmakers. "In fact, our job is harder than that, it's to find pieces of hay in that haystack that may become a needle and disrupt them before they move from consuming to acting on that [online] poisonous propaganda." The FBI’s ability to assess potential terrorists came under intense scrutiny after Florida native Omar Mateen opened fire in Orlando’s Pulse nightclub in June, killing 49 people and injuring scores more. In May 2013 the FBI had obtained sufficient information to open a preliminary investigation into Mateen — coworkers told authorities that Mateen had made terrorism-related comments at work. But after ten months of investigation, including two interviews with Mateen, the FBI determined there wasn’t enough information to indicate he was "possibly a terrorist," as FBI Director James Comey put it after the Orlando attack. Two months later, in July 2014, the FBI took another look at Mateen because his name "surfaced" in a separate terrorism investigation, Comey told reporters. Mateen was interviewed again, but authorities found no reason to continue tracking him.
Former Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld defended his endorsement of GOP nominee Donald Trump, when prodded, by suggesting that the Republican nominee is “not untruthful.” Rumsfeld, who served as defense secretary under Presidents Gerald Ford and George W. Bush, offered his reasoning on supporting Trump over Hillary Clinton in an interview with MSNBC that aired Thursday: “I look at it and say, I don’t agree with either of them 100 percent of the time, but who do I think would be best for the country, and what do I think is acceptable?” Story Continued Below “Maybe not preferred. But acceptable, as opposed to what’s unacceptable, and I think truthfulness and believability and,” Rumsfeld said, pausing before concluding: “Truthfulness is important.” MSNBC’s Stephanie Ruhle followed up, asking, “You think he’s truthful?” “I think he's not untruthful,” Rumsfeld elaborated. “And I think she is.” According to recent polling, both candidates face the perception among many voters that they are dishonest, and Clinton has grappled with voters’ belief that she is untrustworthy, fueled by criticisms over her use of a private email server as secretary of state. But Trump, too, has repeatedly made false statements on the campaign trail, to the point that some critics have accused him of propagating conspiracy theories. He only last week backed down from his false claim that President Barack Obama was not born in the United States. Ruhle also asked Rumsfeld about reports that former President George H. Bush plans to vote for Clinton, rather than Trump, in November. Rumsfeld said he’s not surprised, and asked why, Rumsfeld replied, “He’s up in years.” “So are you,” Ruhle said back. Rumsfeld elaborated: “He's up in years, and he obviously comes from a totally different cut than Donald Trump, and he gets his choice.”
Hillary Clinton on Wednesday lamented the deaths of two African-American men this week by police officers, calling such killings “unbearable” and adding that they need “to become intolerable.” Clinton’s remarks on the shootings, one in Tulsa, Oklahoma, and the other in Charlotte, North Carolina, came at the top of a speech that was billed as focusing on economic issues. But the former secretary of state told the Orlando, Florida, crowd that she felt compelled to address the news of the day. Story Continued Below “There is still a lot we don’t know yet about what happened in both incidents. But we do know that we have two more names to add to a list of African-Americans killed by police officers in these encounters,” she said. “Look, I know I don’t have all the answers. I don’t know anyone who does. But this is certain: Too many people have lost their lives who shouldn’t have.“ Clinton bemoaned not just the two police-involved deaths from this week, but also violence against police that occurred last week in Philadelphia and Tuesday night in Charlotte. She balanced calls for an end to the killings of black men at the hands of law enforcement with praise for the police departments that handled a mass-stabbing attack in Minnesota and explosions in New York and New Jersey over the weekend. “I’ve spoken to many police chiefs and other law enforcement leaders who are as deeply concerned as I am and as deeply committed as I am to reform. Why? Because they know it is essential for the safety of our communities and our officers,” she said. “I’ve also been privileged to spend a lot of time with mothers who have lost children, and young people who feel that, as far as their country’s concerned, their lives seem disposable. We’ve got to do better. And I know we can. And if I’m elected president, we will.” From there, Clinton returned to her speech’s stated topic: “building an economy that works for everyone, not just those at the top.” She called for the inclusion of more women in the labor force, improved access to affordable education, and immigration reform, which Clinton said would help families and be a boon for the U.S. economy. But the former secretary of state spent the bulk of her speech calling for improved economic opportunities for Americans with disabilities, a group she said is “too often invisible — overlooked and undervalued.” As president, Clinton said she would seek to advance employment opportunities for those with disabilities and make higher education more accessible to them as well. She also called for the ratification of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. “Men and women, boys and girls who have talents, skills, ideas and dreams for themselves and their families, just like anybody else. Whether they can participate in our economy and lead rich, full lives that are as healthy and productive as possible is a reflection on us as a country,” she said. “And right now, in too many ways, we are falling short. We’ve got to face that, and do better, for everyone’s sake. Because this really does go to the heart of who we are as Americans.”
(CNN)Voters using Google to research candidates in competitive House races this year might not realize that the "voter guide" that pops up in their browser is actually funded by a House Republican political group. The new digital tactic has frustrated Democrats who claim the site gives the appearance of being non-partisan when it instead presents GOP attack lines. The campaign manager for LuAnn Bennett, a Democratic candidate in Northern Virginia who is challenging GOP Rep. Barbara Comstock, found "voterguide2016.com" when he was searching his boss' name. While the layout and biographical information was fairly straightforward, the language on the campaign matchup immediately resembled GOP talking points. The "Need to Know" section describes Bennett's record as "making promises she doesn't keep, like promising to build a preschool and daycare center with green space and a playground for the DC community. However, she never completed it." The "On the Issues" area proclaims Bennett supported "President Obama's nuclear deal with Iran, even though it allows Iran, a state sponsor of terrorism, the ability to eventually produce its own nuclear weapons." On Comstock the site describes the freshman lawmaker as "an independent leader" and lists several issues that are top items on the minds of voters in the area: "Opioids, traffic congestion, Metro funding -- Barbara has been in the thick of today's public policy debates." At first glance the "voterguide2016.com" website looks like a neutral source. It features pictures of candidates of both parties in more than two dozen districts, with maps and sections labeled "trending" and "candidates." It doesn't specify that a "Republican" created it. But if you scroll all the way down to the bottom you find in small print the initials for the party committee that indicate it is a biased webpage -- "Paid for by the NRCC and not authorized by any candidate or candidate's committee. www.nrcc.org" The NRCC is the Capitol Hill-based National Republican Congressional Committee, the main political arm for House Republicans. Democratic campaigns in roughly eight swing House races realized that the GOP strategy involved not only creating the site, but also buying geo-targeted Google search terms to drive people to it. When voters in these districts type in candidate names the search engine lists this Republican generated page at the top of the results. It's not against any rules, but Democrats who reviewed the sections and what is designed to look like analysis on the site told CNN the tactic was "misleading and underhanded." Robert Howard, spokesman for Bennett's campaign, criticized Comstock's party for the strategy, telling CNN, "Without a record to stand on and an agenda more in line with Trump than her constituents, it's no shock she and her allies would resort to deceiving voters with a fake website." But according to advertising strategists this approach is a natural extension of how the parties already use contrasting messages. Outside advocacy groups regularly prepare voter guides to give to voters to specify which candidates back their causes. "Over 40% of all digital advertising is search. It would be silly to ignore this, whether you are selling soap or political candidates," one leading digital ad strategist, who is not affiliated with either political party, told CNN. The NRCC's "independent expenditure" or "IE" arm is responsible for the site not the committee itself, according to one senior Republican source. This separate group uses millions to run ads and support GOP candidates but cannot coordinate with the NRCC or individual campaigns. No one from the IE would talk to CNN about what they are spending on the site or why they chose to use the model it on a voter guide. Independent expenditure groups are established by both party committees and frequently produce some of the more negative political ads during the campaign season. They give the candidates and the party some cover because while they can't talk directly about their content, they can mimic messaging to help reinforce how races are framed. Katie Martin, spokeswoman for the NRCC views the new website as part of the broader effort to reach voters, telling CNN Republicans are "constantly working to find new, creative, and innovative ways to target voters online." Many House candidates on both sides already establish websites to attack their opponents. But when they buy the domain name election laws require that they disclose the campaign is behind the effort. For example, the Bennett campaign bought "stoptrumpcomstock.com" which links the GOP congresswoman to Donald Trump, the GOP presidential nominee, who is unpopular in the district. Democratic campaign operatives maintain that this particular voter guide site is in a different category because it is an attacking candidates under the premise that it is presenting unbiased information without making it clear that one political party is paying. Martin, not surprisingly, disagrees, telling CNN, "While Democrats might cry foul because they want to continue to hide from their records, the NRCC is happy to make their positions known in a smart and completely transparent way digitally." It's unclear how much traffic the site will get, and whether it will translate into actual votes in November. Democrats will have to decide whether it's worth shifting money out of ad budgets earmarked for television commercials on local stations, which are the most expensive line item with the broadest reach, or to counter with their own digital response. 
New York (CNN)President Barack Obama worked to calm Americans' jitters Monday after a series of attempts at mass violence, suggesting that yielding to fear amounted to a win for terrorists. During two appearances in New York, Obama praised the swift work of law enforcement authorities looking into duel bomb attacks in New York and New Jersey over the weekend. And he urged Americans to follow the lead of residents here by not submitting to fear. "I think it is important to remember what terrorists and violent extremists are trying to do. They are trying to hurt innocent people, but they also want to inspire fear in all of us, and disrupt the way we live to undermine our values," Obama said. "We all have a role to play as citizens in making sure that we don't succumb to that fear. And there is no better example of that than the people of New York and New Jersey." "Folks around here, you know, they don't get scared. They are tough, they are resilient, they go about their business every single day. And that kind of toughness and resoluteness and a recognition that neither individuals nor organizations like ISIL can ultimately undermine our way of life," Obama said. "That's the kind of strength that makes me so proud to be an American." The President was speaking Monday morning from a hotel in midtown Manhattan, where he's attending his final United Nations General Assembly meeting. Two miles south, in Chelsea, investigations were still piecing together evidence following a bomb explosion in a dumpster Saturday night, which injured dozens. RELATED: NY, NJ bombings: Suspect wounded, arrested after shootout; 2 officers hit The attack appeared linked to another explosion in Seaside Park, New Jersey, and a series of pipe bombs found in a backpack Sunday night in Elizabeth, New Jersey. A third incident in Minnesota, where a man stabbed nine people before being shot, is being investigated separately as a "potential act of terrorism," Obama said. Monday afternoon, Obama said he'd spoken with law enforcement officers who helped apprehend Ahmad Khan Rahami, a suspect in this weekend's bomb attacks in New York and New Jersey, and hailed their actions as heroic. He also said he phoned an off-duty officer who neutralized the attacker in Minnesota. "It's just one more reminder of the skill and sacrifice and what they put on the line every single day to make sure we're safe," Obama said following talks with Iraq's prime minister Haider al-Abadi. An ISIS wing claimed responsibility for the Minnesota attack, though Obama avoided pinning any specific motivation on the attacks during his appearances on Monday. He did, however, insist his administration was going after the terror group aggressively to prevent any further violence. "We will continue to lead the global coalition on the fight to destroy ISIL, which is instigating a lot of people over the internet, to carry out attacks," Obama said, using the administration's term for the Islamic State group. "We are going to continue to go after them. We're going to take out their leaders, we're going to take out their infrastructure." Following his talks with Abadi, Obama conceded retaking Iraq's second largest city from the terror group would be difficult. "This is going to be challenging," Obama said of long-held plans to liberate Mosul. "We feel confident that we will be in a position to move forward fairly rapidly." "It will be a tough fight...This is going to be hard, this is going to be challenging," Obama continued, adding he would support and assistance from other countries and from US lawmakers. 
Iranian President Hassan Rouhani on Wednesday expressed confidence that the landmark nuclear deal between his country and a group of world powers will be able to weather the volatile U.S. election season. MSNBC's Chuck Todd asked Rouhani whether he'd rather work with Hillary Clinton or Donald Trump, citing comments they've made on the nuclear deal. Rouhani said, "Of course, throughout the atmosphere of presidential elections in the United States, candidates can bring up any topic that they see best suits the needs of their campaigns. But the reality remains that when the joint comprehensive plan of action was passed based on the United Nations Security Council resolution 2231, and it was approved unanimously, that became an international agreement." Story Continued Below Trump has repeatedly criticized the Iran nuclear deal, calling it a "bad deal" and previously said he would tear it up. He's also called the Obama administration incompetent over it. Clinton, on the other hand, has said she would respect the deal, yet be cautious in dealing with Iran, in what's come to be known as her "distrust and verify" strategy. "No one can say here or there that I don't accept this agreement, I want to renegotiate it. This has purely an electoral effect for some," Rouhani said.
Hillary Clinton holds a narrow lead over Donald Trump among likely voters in North Carolina, a New York Times Upshot/Siena College poll released Thursday morning shows. With just 47 days to go until November’s general election, the former secretary of state leads the Manhattan billionaire in a head-to-head matchup by two points, 45 percent to 43 percent. That advantage for Clinton sits within the poll’s 3.6 percentage point margin of error. Story Continued Below But in a three-way race that also includes Libertarian Gary Johnson, Clinton and Trump are tied at 41 percent. The former New Mexico governor polled at 11 percent. Jill Stein, the Green Party candidate for president, is not on the ballot in North Carolina. Support for the two major party candidates breaks down largely along racial lines, with Trump leading Clinton among white likely voters, 56 percent to 30 percent. The former secretary of state holds a formidable advantage with the state’s African-American population, leading 91 percent to 4 percent. The Times’ poll was released one day after a Fox News poll of North Carolina showed Trump with a five-point lead over Clinton, an advantage that sits outside that poll’s margin of error. The Fox News poll also showed incumbent GOP Sen. Richard Burr with a 6 point lead over Democrat Deborah Ross and a 3 point lead for Republican Gov. Pat McCrory over his Democratic challenger, North Carolina Attorney General Roy Cooper. But the Times’ poll puts Democrats ahead in both the Senate and gubernatorial race. It shows Ross with a 4 point lead, 46 percent to 42 percent, and Cooper with a 6 point lead, 50 percent to 42 percent. The New York Times poll was conducted with Siena College from Sept. 16-19, reaching 782 likely North Carolina voters via landlines and cell phones. The poll’s margin of error was plus-or-minus 3.6 points.
Hillary Clinton's campaign announced late Friday that it was postponing a trip by the Democratic nominee to Charlotte scheduled for Sunday. "After further discussion with community leaders, we have decided to postpone Sunday's trip as not to impact the City's resources," Clinton communications director Jennifer Palmieri wrote in a statement. "She will plan to visit Charlotte next Sunday, provided circumstances allow." Story Continued Below The rescheduling comes after Charlotte Mayor Jennifer Roberts made a public plea to Clinton and Donald Trump to delay any campaign trips to the city in light of their "very stressed resources." Clinton's campaign had announced the trip earlier Friday. Palmieri added: "Her prayers are with the people of Charlotte during these difficult times." Donald Trump wasted no time in responding to Clinton's reversal on social media, accusing his opponent of trying to "grandstand" and calling her initial decision to go to Charlotte "dumb." "Crooked Hillary's bad judgement forced her to announce that she would go to Charlotte on Saturday to grandstand. Dem pols said no way, dumb!" the Republican nominee tweeted late Friday. Trump was reportedly considering traveling to Charlotte next week following the presidential debate Monday, but has not elaborated on those plans. He incorrectly identified Clinton's initial trip as scheduled for Saturday. Protests have erupted in Charlotte since Keith Lamont Scott was shot dead by police Tuesday afternoon. The outcry over yet another officer-involved killing of a black person, days after an officer in Tulsa, Oklahoma, shot and killed Terence Crutcher, who was unarmed and had his hands up when he was fatally struck, turned violent late Wednesday into Thursday morning, prompting North Carolina Gov. Pat McCrory to issue a state of emergency. Earlier Friday, the Democratic presidential nominee called on police to release the video of the shooting — after Scott’s family had released its own cellphone video recorded by Scott’s wife, Rakeyia Scott. “Charlotte should release police video of the Keith Lamont Scott shooting without delay. We must ensure justice & work to bridge divides,” she wrote on Twitter, signing her message with “-H” to denote it came from her, not her campaign.
John McCain has made 3 million voter contacts in Arizona. Rob Portman marshaled 500 college interns to make phone calls and knock on doors in Ohio. And Pat Toomey barnstormed 26 Pennsylvania counties this summer in a bus plastered with the words “security, prosperity, independence.” Then there’s Richard Burr. Story Continued Below Republicans are privately fretting that the laid-back Burr isn’t campaigning aggressively enough for his third Senate term and potentially risking a GOP seat that the party should otherwise have in the bag. But — in his usual easygoing form — Burr brushed off any concerns about national Democrats spending at least $6.7 million to unseat him — a forceful play to make a red-leaning state competitive less than two months before the election. “It’s great. I think anytime they waste money it saves my colleagues from having it go after them,” Burr smirked when asked of Democrats’ money blitz. “Am I complaining that the last [Quinnipiac] poll had me up 6? No! I’m probably in better shape than we dreamed.” The Senate Intelligence chairman risks getting caught flat-footed against a relatively unknown opponent in North Carolina, which has become a major target for Democrats eyeing the White House, Senate and the governor’s mansion in Raleigh. But Burr comes by his laid-back attitude honestly — quirks and all. He doesn’t wear socks, except on certain Thursdays. He’ll bring his own lunch to caucus meetings to save a few bucks on the catered food and sometimes walks around the Capitol chowing on grits. And he drives a ramshackle convertible Volkswagen Thing in rain, sun and snow despite the inoperable roof, leaving it in areas that could not even under the most charitable definition be called a parking spot. The car is covered with bumper stickers, including one supporting conservative Democratic Sen. Joe Manchin of West Virginia. “The best way to describe Richard is to look at the car he drives,” said Sen. Lindsey Graham (R-S.C.), a longtime friend. “He’s a workhorse, not a show horse. If you don’t believe me go look at his car. Which is a piece of crap.” But no matter how well-liked Burr is, he’s in a competitive race against Democrat Deborah Ross, a former state representative who has sneaked up on Burr and trails by about 3 points according to averages of recent polls. And national Democrats are going after him because Ohio has essentially been conceded to the Republicans, Florida is exceedingly expensive and they are searching for any path to the majority. The race is viewed as an essential piece of either party’s majority: if Democrats can’t take advantage of Burr’s vulnerability, party honchos will kick themselves for leaving a winnable seat on the table. And if Republicans were to lose in North Carolina, it would presage a bad night for them on Nov. 8. Plus, the state’s environment is rapidly deteriorating around Burr. GOP Gov. Pat McCrory appears the most vulnerable incumbent governor, Donald Trump is being badly outspent by Hillary Clinton and the GOP’s so-called bathroom law is now denying the state prized NCAA tournament events. Burr again declined to take a position on the controversial law, known as HB2, last week. “The state is on fire,” Ross said in a telephone interview. “North Carolina has the most statewide races that are the closest in the entire country right now.” The political landscape is threatening enough, but GOP insiders say Burr has exacerbated the problem by never deviating from his lax demeanor. Burr says this is his last political campaign ever -- but Republicans privately say it’s hard to tell how much he cares about the outcome. “In this environment you would prefer to have all of your candidates running terrified, and no one would say that he is doing that,” said one top Republican strategist. “He’s not working as hard as he should,” added another. Burr attended a Senate Republican fundraiser on Sea Island, Ga., as his colleagues spent the past weekend campaigning. Burr “should have been in North Carolina,” said a third Republican strategist. The senator himself said that national Republicans don’t understand his strategy. His aides said he did 26 events in the first three weeks of August, though at one of them he told The Associated Press that he doesn’t become a candidate until the Senate goes on recess in October. Was that a mistake? “Absolutely not. Has my campaign been running? Yeah it’s been running. When do I have time to go down and be a candidate? I’ve got a full-time job up here,” Burr said. “What I was trying to say was, I go out and do Senate business, don’t come up and ask me campaign questions. Because I’m not a candidate, I’m doing official business.” The 60-year-old Burr is something of a throwback on Capitol Hill, a longtime friend of former House Speaker John Boehner (R-Ohio) who views politicking a distant second to the daily ins-and-outs of being a powerful Intel chairman. A national sales manager for a lawn equipment distributor before entering politics, Burr ran unsuccessfully for Congress in 1992, but won a House seat just two years later and served there for a decade before running for the Senate in 2004. Burr is boosted by the fact that he’s well-respected by Democrats — the biggest diss that Democratic senators can come up with is that he’s not well-known in the state. In a September Suffolk poll, Burr was unknown by 13 percent of respondents, but Ross was worse off with 45 percent of them saying they’d never heard of her. Still, he led by 3 points in that survey, and Ross has more room to grow her support. “The more they see of her, the more they’re going to like her,” said one Democratic senator. “I don’t know the state of his campaign, I just know there’s a lot of persuadables in North Carolina.” The most stunning sign of GOP hand-wringing is an $8.1 million ad buy reserved by the Senate Leadership Fund — more than the group is spending on races in the traditional battlegrounds of Nevada and Pennsylvania. And according to Republican officials, pro-Trump forces have reserved only $3.2 million in ads in the state, while pro-Clinton forces have reserved $21.2 million. Republicans supporting Burr and the candidate himself, however, have about $20 million in ads scheduled to run this year, compared with about $9 million for Democrats. And Burr has a built-in money advantage, with $7 million on hand to Ross’ $2 million at the end of June, and is now up on TV. But Burr has been hampered by another troubling statistic: Ross outraised him the past two quarters, a major accomplishment for a candidate in a first-time race and a troubling one for a longtime politician. Democrats say they have benefited from Ross’ obscurity; had former Sen. Kay Hagan (D-N.C.) or former Rep. Heath Shuler (D-N.C.) got in the race, Burr may have been startled into an overwhelming show of force early on. But now in the midst of the sprint to November, Ross is in serious contention. “She’s very good. She’s very sharp,” said Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee Chairman Jon Tester of Montana. “The next seven weeks are critical, but she’s a great candidate and she’s absolutely in the mix. Seven weeks is a long time, but I think that long time helps her a lot.” Republicans read things another way -- that they will use the next seven weeks to stir up inflammatory pieces of Ross’ record, which includes running the state’s American Civil Liberties Union, opposing a sex-offender registry and efforts to ban flag burning. GOP Sen. Thom Tillis of North Carolina called her a “no-compromises ultraliberal” – and Republicans said after they are done with her, voters will figure she’s too left for the red-leaning state. “That state is competitive. It is a must-win for us,” said National Republican Senatorial Committee Chairman Roger Wicker (R-Miss.). “We’re going to spend a lot of money pointing out the shortcomings of Ms. Ross, of which there are many, too numerous to mention for the rest of the [election]. And I know that some of our friends have stated publicly that they intend to do that.” Wicker himself refused to concede that Burr isn’t working hard enough. And worries about Burr in Washington strategy rooms is nothing new. His first Senate campaign in 2004 was characterized by his lone ranger style as he bombed around the state, often alone, to events, Republicans recounted. By 2010 he’d done little to elevate his stature, yet cruised to reelection as part of the tea party wave with the same relaxed demeanor. “This happens every six years,” remarked a fourth top GOP operative. This year, though, is different. The DSCC’s commitment is a major development in the race; Burr faced essentially no attacks from outside groups in 2010. And the presidential tossup in combination with Burr’s under-the-radar stature means he’s likely to lose his seat if Clinton bests Trump. Yet Burr is as carefree as ever, moseying through the Capitol halls alone, without aides or talking points to dispense. And since he’s not listening to campaign officials, Republicans have no other solution other than to trust that he knows what he’s doing. “That sometimes makes the experts uneasy,” said Rep. Richard Hudson (R-N.C.).
Cleveland Heights, Ohio (CNN)The controversial boxing promoter Don King used the N-word while introducing Donald Trump during an event Wednesday at a church. King, who is black, said the word as he argued that African-Americans cannot achieve success by emulating white people, as they will remain "negroes." "If you're poor, you are a poor negro -- I would use the n-word -- but if you're rich, you are a rich negro. If you are intelligent, intellectual, you are intellectual negro. If you are a dancing and sliding and gliding n***** -- I mean negro -- you are a dancing and sliding and gliding negro," King said, laughing along with the crowd after the slip-up. "You're going to be a negro 'til you die." Trump, who was already smirking as he listened to King, didn't change the expression on his face, but turned slightly uncomfortably to his special counsel Michael Cohen and the church's pastor, Darrell Scott, who head up Trump's diversity coalition. Trump, who said he personally invited King to introduce him, was sitting in a chair onstage just a few feet away from King when he uttered the word. Taking the stage moments later, Trump called King a "phenomenal persona" and said: "Ah, there's only one Don King." During his speech, King praised Trump as "fearless," "courageous and brave" and said he believed Trump would "take this system apart" and "create a whole new system." "The system is corrupt, the system is rigged, the system is sexist, the system is racist," King said, arguing that Trump would bring the country "back to inclusiveness." King's mere presence at Trump's side is controversial: King was convicted of second-degree murder for stomping a man to death in 1966. The governor of Ohio later pardoned King for the crime in 1983. John Lewis calls for election observers at polling places this November Wednesday's moment came as Trump pitched himself as a president who would help bring jobs and safety to impoverished minority communities during the event at Scott's church. There, Trump was flanked by a number of his prominent black surrogates, including Ben Carson and former "Apprentice" star Omarosa Manigault. Later, as Trump fielded questions from Scott on a range of issues affecting religious and minority communities, King stood on stage by Trump, interjecting infrequently to shout about the "system." Warily eying King, Manigault suggested King take a seat, but the boxing promoter declined. Moments later, as Trump's supporters gathered around him to pray for Trump, King grabbed Trump's wrist and raised their arms above their heads, as he would with a champion boxer. Trump appeared to let his hand go limp, and then, unsure what to do, closed his hand to make a fist. Just a few hours later, King flew with the real estate mogul aboard Trump's plane to his rally in Toledo, Ohio, where he introduced GOP vice presidential nominee Mike Pence. 
The preliminary numbers are in, and they suggest that the first presidential debate of 2016 between Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump will be the most watched debate going back decades. With the first presidential debate of 2012 averaging 70 million viewers, last night is looking like a massive night for TV news. The numbers from all the channels will be made available by Nielsen over the course of the day. All told, the early numbers continue to show that 2016 just seems to keep getting better for TV news channels. And with the presidential campaign nearing its final stretch, the first forecasts are coming in for just how good the Trumped-up 2016 presidential campaign has been to them. With the 2016 election’s pivotal events delivering record ratings moments every few months (highest rated primary debate, highest rated primary election night coverage, etc), CNN and Fox News are poised to have the most-watched years in their respective histories, stretching back to 1980 for CNN and 1996 for Fox News. MSNBC has a chance to do so as well. Many networks reported that they’d “sold out” their first debate night early, and are expecting the same for the next three. Story Continued Below And that means money. According to data from media and communications data firm SNL Kagan, a division of SMP Global Market Intelligence, the three major cable news networks are set to make nearly $2 billion in ad revenues, and the three main business networks are set to add another $458 million in ad revenue from just the 2016 calendar year. “We’ve been outselling our election packages for a year now,” said Katrina Cukaj, EVP of Portfolio Sales & Client Partnerships for Turner Ad Sales, which includes CNN. “We are close to selling out for the rest of the [election related] days; there is very high demand. Very high.” Fox News is expecting a “multimillion dollar revenue night” when all the money is counted. According to the Wall Street Journal, CNN is selling debate and election night ad packages with minimums of $800,000 to $1 million, with 30 second ads for the presidential debates going for more than $55,000. Other cable news channels are selling similar bundled ad packages. And those kinds of numbers take into account that there are no ad interruptions during the debate – all those ads are sold against pre- and post-game analysis and panels. “There is considerably higher demand in this election cycle with higher price points compared to the other election cycles,” an NBC source said. According to SNL Kagan, CNN, Fox News and MSNBC will combine for approximately $1.96 billion in gross ad sales in 2016. Compare that to $1.72 million in calendar year 2015 (which saw a number of high-profile primary debates), and $1.56 million in calendar year 2012, the last presidential election year. The ad revenue makes sense when you look at the numbers. The first Republican debate in August of 2015 brought in a record-breaking 24 million viewers for Fox News. Fox News’ March debate in Detroit, Michigan averaged just under 17 million viewers. Through March and April, big primary nights would draw an average of 10-12 million viewers across cable news and on 10 p.m. broadcast specials. Those sorts of ratings are typically reserved for major sporting events like NFL games, or huge hit shows like NCIS. This election cycle has been delivering them with regularity, even if they are spread out across a number of channels. The election is also broadening the types of advertisers who are hoping to catch the eyeballs of the big election audiences. Cukaj said she’s seen an uptick in entertainment and movie advertisements. “Movie studios and entertainment has been very, very active in these big election events, they enjoy the nice big ratings these live events do,” Cukaj said. Fox News EVP of advertising sales Paul Rittenberg told AdWeek “there's substantially more demand from [advertisers] who didn't used to buy a lot of news; we even have a beer [company].” That company is Tecate, which was running a debate-specific ad about a “wall” on Fox News, Univision and Telemundo during the pre and post-debate shows. (In fact, the wall never came up in the debate.) Among the entertainment advertisers is Epix, which aired a faux-cable news segment before last night’s debate, featuring cable news regulars Michael Steele, Amy Holmes and Barney Frank. CNN had to run a gold banner over the “segment” to ensure viewers knew it was not CNN content. For the broadcast networks, the 2016 campaign has largely been a boon, even if election-related programming has occasionally competed with or preempted more lucrative entertainment and sports programming (at $200,000 per 30 second spot, the debate programming would be very similar to what standard entertainment fare would bring in). Still, this broadcast season, news programming has been one of the few bright spots, with most entertainment and sports programming seeing ratings declines compared to last year. The broadcast networks CBS and NBC are selling 30 second ads for more than $200,000 each, according to the Journal. Advertising rates for the presidential debates may not be as high as some primary debates were, as they do not have commercial breaks, so all ads run before and after the debate when the channels are doing pre- and post-debate analysis (in case you were wondering why there is so much of it, the answer is: inventory!) For the networks, that eats into valuable prime-time real estate, where entertainment programming can command higher premiums. There’s another reason debates like the one last night aren’t quite as valuable as they could be: Scarcity, or lack thereof. With the debate airing on more than 10 TV channels, and streaming on hundreds of websites, the audience will be massive, but highly fragmented. In fact, despite the massive 2016 haul, the picture for television news continues to be bleak. For one thing, news networks these days are making less than half their money from advertising, so "big years" don't have nearly the lasting effect they might otherwise. Where does the rest of their revenue come from? For big networks like CNN, a lot of it comes from “carriage fees” – the lucrative contracts the big news networks sign with cable providers like Comcast, Time Warner Cable and Charter Communications in return for allowing their channel to appear on the carriers’ channel line-ups. These deals – which can be contentious and result in channel blackouts with individual providers but usually, ultimately go the TV networks' way – are often negotiated in multi-year terms. Time Warner CFO Howard Averill said that next year, 2017, will deliver record profits for CNN, beating 2016 despite this year’s election boost. Previously negotiated carriage fee increases guarantee that result, even if the channel sees a steep ratings decline. And that’s just one place where the connection between audience size and revenue is deteriorating. In fact, while 2016 may top the revenue charts, the three big cable news networks have actually been on the rebound since 2013, with all three increasing ad revenue every year since then. These good signs are generally taken with a grain of salt behind the closed doors of the TV businesses’ executive suites. The chief worries: Television audiences are aging out of the TV news ecosystem, and not being replaced by younger viewers coveted by advertisers. Over time, this will also depress audience numbers, as those aging viewers are replaced by fewer young viewers growing into engagement with TV news. And indeed, not everyone has shared in the big bounty of 2016. Local ad revenue, which relies heavily on political spending, has not been as strong as anticipated. SNL Kagan downgraded their projected income of $3.3 billion for local television down to $3.1 billion partly as a result of Trump not spending as much on advertising. Sinclair Broadcasting, the country’s largest owner of TV stations, warned investors last week that 2016 political ad spending was falling short of expectations. Ironically, the presence of Donald Trump in the 2016 campaign, often discussed as if it were the reason this election is such a television draw, is a factor in that slump. “While we previously anticipated a decline in presidential ad spending in the third quarter based on the late fund-raising by the Trump campaign, we have yet to see significant spending, even at the levels we initially anticipated,” Sinclair CFO Chris Ripley said at a conference hosted by Goldman Sachs. CBS CEO Les Moonves told attendees at the same conference that his local station revenue was on track, but much of that was coming in from local and statewide races and issue campaigns. As far as the presidential campaign, there was one big reason Moonves pointed to to describe the unexpected slump: “To generalize, [there is not as much spending from] the top of the tickets, because Mr. Trump does not appear to be spending as much as people thought.” — Additional reporting by Kelsey Sutton
Donald Trump leads Hillary Clinton by 1 point among Florida’s likely voters, a new Suffolk University poll released Thursday shows, placing the candidates in a statistical dead heat. On the Sunshine State’s crowded presidential ballot, the Republican nominee leads the former secretary of state by a narrow 45 percent to 44 percent margin. Of the four other candidates named on the ballot, only Libertarian Gary Johnson and Green Party candidate Jill Stein registered any support, with 3 percent and less than 1 percent, respectively. Because the poll’s margin of error is plus-or-minus 4.4 percentage points, Trump’s 1 point lead puts him in a statistical tie with Clinton in Florida. Still, it is more good news for the Manhattan billionaire who has also polled ahead in recent days in the key swing states of Nevada, Ohio and North Carolina. President Barack Obama won those three states as well as Florida in his 2008 presidential bid and lost only North Carolina from that group in 2012. In the Florida senate race, incumbent GOP Sen. Marco Rubio leads Democratic Rep. Patrick Murphy by 9 points, 43 percent to 34 percent. Rubio, a former Republican presidential candidate, had initially said he would not run for reelection to the Senate if he failed to earn the nomination but wound up entering and winning Florida’s GOP Senate primary. Murphy defeated firebrand liberal Rep. Alan Grayson in the Democratic primary to earn his spot on the general election ballot. The Suffolk University poll was conducted from Sept. 19-21 among 500 likely Florida voters. The poll’s margin of error was plus-or-minus 4.4 points.
Alicia Machado, the former Miss Universe who vaulted into the political spotlight Monday night as the latest example of Donald Trump’s derogatory remarks about women, said the GOP nominee’s wife, Melania, is “a decoration” with limited English-speaking skills. In an interview with Cosmopolitan magazine published Tuesday, Machado drew a clear line between her own immigration story and that of Melania Trump. Both women are former models, but Machado attacked Melania Trump for failing to do more to help those around her as the wife of a prominent political figure. Story Continued Below “I think I speak more English than her,” Machado said. “I don’t see anything about this girl. She’s a doll. She’s a decoration. That is how I see her.” Donald Trump was harshly critical of Machado during her tenure as Miss Universe, calling her Miss Piggy and Miss Housekeeping, the latter a reference to her Hispanic heritage. Machado told Cosmopolitan that those remarks triggered a relapse of her bulimia that took several years to escape. Machado, who was also crowned Miss Venezuela, became an American citizen in August, something she told Cosmopolitan she did specifically to vote against Trump. Tuesday morning, Trump admitted that Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton had gotten under his skin a little bit by bringing up Machado at the debate. He said the pageant winner “gained a massive amount of weight, and it was a real problem.” “That person was a Miss Universe person, and she was the worst we ever had. The worst, the absolute worst. She was impossible, and she was a Miss Universe contestant and ultimately a winner who they had a tremendously difficult time with as Miss Universe,” Trump said on Fox News’ “Fox & Friends.” “She was the winner, and, you know, she gained a massive amount of weight, and it was a real problem. We had a real problem. Not only that, her attitude, and we had a real problem with her, so Hillary went back into the years and she found this girl. This was many years ago, and found the girl and talked about her like she was Mother Teresa, and it wasn’t quite that way, but that’s OK. Hillary has to do what she has to do.”
The White House would prefer to avoid a government shutdown, but “it’s not at all clear” that President Barack Obama would sign the continuing resolution put forward Thursday by Republicans to fund the government through Dec. 9, an administration spokesman cautioned Friday. White House press secretary Josh Earnest on Friday raised the possibility of Obama vetoing the legislation Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.) proposed Thursday, warning Republicans that the measure's lack of money for addressing Flint, Michigan’s lead crisis — and its failure to include a change to campaign finance disclosure law that Democrats want — raises serious concerns for the president. Story Continued Below “You know, one of the reasons I was a little late in joining you all today is I had an opportunity to talk with the president in the Oval Office about this proposal, and after that conversation it’s not at all clear to me that he is prepared to sign this bill because he believes that Congress has got some work to do,” Earnest told reporters Friday at the daily press briefing. “And hopefully they’ll get to work on that and get it done without putting the American people and the American economy through another cliffhanger related to a government shutdown.” Speaking from the Senate floor Thursday, McConnell praised what he called a “clean continuing resolution” as “many, many hours of bipartisan work across the aisle.” Congress has until next Friday to pass legislation to head off a government shutdown. “It’s a fair proposal that funds all current government operations through Dec. 9, while also providing funding for the new legislation we’ve just passed overwhelmingly and that the president has signed — that’s legislation to address the heroin and prescription opioid epidemic and the TSCA bill.,” McConnell said. According to the White House, though, it falls short of expectations. Earnest said McConnell’s proposal does include “some attractive elements,” such as the fact that it would keep the government funded for a few additional weeks and help fund a response to the Zika crisis. “We were, however, disappointed that for — that Congress has not made a commitment to addressing the situation in Flint,” Earnest said, adding that while many Democrats are advocating for such, not enough Republicans are following suit. “And the president is concerned that that situation has not been addressed in the context of these ongoing negotiations. So he’s concerned about that.” “The president’s also concerned about the fact that the proposal includes a rider that would essentially protect the ability of special interests to funnel money into political campaigns without having to disclose it,” Earnest continued. “That’s — first of all, I don’t really know what a proposal like that’s doing in a budget bill, setting aside the fact that transparency in government and transparency in politics is something that is worthy of bipartisan support.”
Donald Trump on Thursday offered some advice to Lester Holt, who will moderate Monday’s presidential debate between Trump and Hillary Clinton: Don’t be Candy Crowley. The Republican presidential nominee suggested that the “NBC Nightly News” anchor be a moderator, not a fact-checker, a recommendation that comes after NBC’s Matt Lauer faced intense criticism earlier this month after allowing Trump’s assertion that he didn’t support the Iraq War go unchecked. Story Continued Below “Well, I think he has to be a moderator,” Trump told “Fox and Friends” of Holt during a phone interview Thursday morning. “I mean, you’re debating somebody and if she makes a mistake or I make a mistake, I’ll, you know, we’ll take each other on. But I certainly don’t think you want Candy Crowley again.” Crowley, who moderated a 2012 debate at Hofstra University, where Trump and Clinton will square off Monday, attempted to fact check then-GOP presidential nominee Mitt Romney, who said it took President Barack Obama 14 days to call the attack in Benghazi, Libya, an “act of terror.” “And she turned out to be wrong. I really don’t think you want that,” Trump said. “That was a very pivotal moment in that debate. And it really threw the debate off and it was unfair. So I don’t think you want that. No, I think you have to have somebody that’s just — let them argue it out.” PolitiFact later rated Romney’s criticism “half true,” noting that Obama did say “act of terror” right after the attacks but that the administration did not speak “consistently in the days that followed."
Bill Clinton on Tuesday defended his own economic legacy and accused Donald Trump of being woefully ignorant when it comes to trade deals and keeping jobs in the United States. At an event in Ohio, the former president conceded that not all trade deals have worked. But he went after Trump in a wonkish and detailed manner, especially when it came to one of the examples the Republican nominee singled out during the primetime debate Monday night. Story Continued Below “They were talking about that closing in Indiana, that Carrier air conditioning plant, you remember that last night,” Clinton asked the audience. “They don’t make air conditioners there, they make furnaces. But it is a Carrier company.” During the debate, Trump called the North American Free Trade Agreement the “single worst trade agreement ever approve in the country.” The treaty was first negotiated by President George H.W Bush, but Clinton was in the White House when the deal was finally signed. Trump singled out the example of Carrier closing the Indiana plant and shipping jobs to Mexico as one of the reasons the U.S. has been ripped off by the pact. Not so, said Bill Clinton. “Her opponent blamed NAFTA, but that’s not really what happened. You want to know what happened? It’s really important you understand this, because any president who wants to trade with other countries has got to take this into account.” Clinton said Carrier wanted to break the union in a rush toward profits and in turn blew off an offer from employees to try to save the Midwestern plant from going to Mexico. “They wanted to break the union, make the money in a hurry and give it to their activist shareholders, we used to call them raiders, and give it to their CEO. So an American president, until we go back to being a stakeholder country, where corporations take account not just their most active shareholders, but their workers, their communities and their customers and their future, we have to be a lot more careful," Clinton said. "And that is something we have all learned."
President Barack Obama used a pseudonym in email communications with Hillary Clinton and others, according to FBI records made public Friday. The disclosure came as the FBI released its second batch of documents from its investigation into Clinton’s private email server during her tenure as secretary of state. Story Continued Below The 189 pages the bureau released includes interviews with some of Clinton’s closest aides, such as Huma Abedin and Cheryl Mills; senior State Department officials; and even Marcel Lazar, better known as the Romanian hacker “Guccifer.” In an April 5, 2016 interview with the FBI, Abedin was shown an email exchange between Clinton and Obama, but the longtime Clinton aide did not recognize the name of the sender. "Once informed that the sender's name is believed to be a pseudonym used by the president, Abedin exclaimed: 'How is this not classified?'" the report says. "Abedin then expressed her amazement at the president's use of a pseudonym and asked if she could have a copy of the email." The State Department has refused to make public that and other emails Clinton exchanged with Obama. Lawyers have cited the "presidential communications privilege," a variation of executive privilege, in order to withhold the messages under the Freedom of Information Act. The report doesn't provide more details on the contents of that particular email exchange, but says it took place on June 28, 2012, and had the subject line: "Re: Congratulations." It may refer to the Supreme Court's ruling that day upholding a key portion of the Obamacare law. It's been known since last year that Obama and Clinton corresponded occasionally via her private account, but the White House has insisted Obama did not know she relied on it routinely and exclusively for official business. A report on the FBI's June 7, 2016 interview with "Guccifer" confirms FBI Director James Comey's claim that Lazar falsely asserted that he'd surreptitiously accessed Clinton's server. "Lazar began by stating that he had never claimed to hack the Clinton server. [An FBI agent] then advised that Fox News had recently published an article which reported that Lazar had claimed to hack the Clinton server. Lazar then stated that he recalled the interview with Fox News, and that he had lied to them about hacking the Clinton server." Additional FBI interviewees whose reports were made public Friday included Jake Sullivan, Clinton's policy planning director; Bryan Pagliano, a former Clinton technology aide; Monica Hanley, a veteran Clinton aide who worked for her in the Senate and at State; and Sidney Blumenthal, Clinton’s longtime confidant. Hanley revealed in her FBI interview that she had no idea where a thumb drive she used to store an archive of Clinton's emails had gone. Hanley searched for the thumb drive, which the FBI described as "something she happened to have laying around the house," several times but was unable to find it. The interviews provide more insight into Clinton's lack of technical acumen. According to the FBI's Abedin writeup, she "could not use a computer"; Hanley said Clinton had no idea what her own email password was, and had to rely on aides. The so-called "302" reports also detail FBI interviews with former Secretary of State Colin Powell, former CIA acting director Mike Morell, State Department official Pat Kennedy, State Department Inspector General Steve Linick, Bill Clinton aide Justin Cooper, former diplomatic security chief Eric Boswell and longtime diplomat Lewis Lukens. Some of the interview reports had the subject's name removed on privacy grounds before the records were released. Many of those people seem to be computer technicians or lower-level State Department officials. The FBI published 58 pages of documents earlier this month that revealed Clinton had relied on others’ judgment to not send her classified material during email correspondences. “Clinton did not recall receiving any emails she thought should not be on an unclassified system,” the FBI said in its Sept. 2 report. “She relied on State officials to use their judgment when emailing her and could not recall anyone raising concerns with her regarding the sensitivity of the information she received at her email address.”
Donald Trump’s campaign on Monday hit back at the White House’s characterization that the U.S. is in a “narrative fight” with the Islamic State, insisting “we should all be very concerned” by the Obama administration’s assessment. “For the U.S. troops in Iraq and Syria who are on the front lines against ISIS, it’s a real fight where we’ve lost real lives,” Trump senior communications adviser Jason Miller said in a statement. “Diminishing the threat the Obama Administration has allowed to materialize on its watch puts us all at risk and is another reminder that we need new leadership in the fight against radical Islamic terrorism. Hillary Clinton has backed President Obama’s failed ISIS strategy to the hilt, and voters should know whether she too shares the White House’s troubling assessment of the situation.” Story Continued Below In an interview with CNN’s Chris Cuomo on Monday, White House press secretary Josh Earnest pointed to the ongoing battle against the Islamic State as a “narrative fight.” “When it comes to ISIL, we are in a fight, a narrative fight, with them. A narrative battle,” Earnest said. “And what ISIL wants to do is they want to project that they are an organization that is representing Islam in a fight and a war against the West, and a war against the United States. That is a bankrupt false narrative. It’s a mythology, and we have made progress in debunking that mythology.” During his phone interview with Fox News on Monday, Trump seemingly suggested that law enforcement officials should profile Muslims to stop terrorist attacks, a remark that came in response to the bombing in New York on Saturday that injured 29 people, and again hammered President Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton for refusing to call out “radical Islamic terrorism.” “Here’s another element of this fight,” Earnest added. “We can’t play into this narrative that somehow the United States or the West is against — is fighting against the Muslim religion.”
The Senate will vote on Wednesday to override President Barack Obama’s veto of legislation that would allow the families of the victims of the Sept. 11, 2001 attacks to sue the government of Saudi Arabia, Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.) said Monday. The House is likely to vote on the override Thursday or Friday, a Republican leadership aide said. Story Continued Below Congress is expected to easily clinch the two-thirds support needed to override Obama’s veto, which would be the first veto override of his presidency. The legislation, known formally as the Justice Against Sponsors of Terrorism Act, sailed through Congress with no recorded objections earlier this year. But with a veto override apparently imminent, some lawmakers, particularly ones who specialize in national security policy, have become increasingly vocal about their concerns with the bill. Both the chairman and the top Democrat on the House Armed Services Committee — Republican Mac Thornberry of Texas and Democrat Adam Smith of Washington — are circulating letters urging lawmakers to oppose JASTA. They warn that the legislation could open up U.S. officials abroad to retaliation.
Gov. Chris Christie has the third-worst approval ratings of any governor in the country, according to a poll released Tuesday. According to Morning Consult, New Jersey voters give Christie a 29 percent approval rating and 68 percent disapproval rating. That's down from a 36 percent approval rating in the spring, and not far behind the two worst ranked governors. Story Continued Below Republican Sam Brownback of Kansas fares the worst, with a 23 percent approval rating and 71 percent disapproval rating. Democrat Dan Malloy of Connecticut has a 26 percent approval rating and a 70 percent disapproval rating. The numbers in the Morning Consult poll are actually slightly better for Christie than a Rutgers-Eagleton poll released Monday, which showed 26 percent of voters approving of his job performance and 69 percent disapproving, while just 23 percent said they had a favorable opinion of the governor. Both surveys were conducted before the Bridgegate trial got underway on Monday — a spectacle that has already proven embarrassing for Christie amid the prosecution's claims that he knew of the George Washington Bridge access lane closings as they happened. There is a potential consolation for Christie in the Morning Consult poll. Two Republicans he helped elect in blue states against long odds as chairman of the Republican Governors Association are among the most popular in the country. Massachusetts Gov. Charlie Baker and Maryland Gov. Larry Hogan both have 70 percent approval ratings and disapproval ratings of 18 percent and 17 percent, respectively. Only Republican South Dakota Gov. Dennis Daugaard is more popular, with a 74 percent approval rating. The margin of error for the New Jersey poll results is plus or minus 2 percentage points.
Rose Pak, a brash and lively community activist who helped transform San Francisco's growing Asian American population into a politically powerful constituency during an era when few women carried such clout, has died. She was 68. Pak died of natural causes in her home Sunday morning. Friends and family said she seemed healthy after spending several months in China after a kidney transplant, The San Francisco Chronicle reported Monday (http://bit.ly/2d22ERE). Pak never held elective office, but as the longtime consultant to the Chinese Chamber of Commerce, she helped raise money for preferred politicians and backed projects that benefited Chinatown's residents. She hated being called a power broker. "If I was white, they'd call me a civic leader." In 2011, Pak started a campaign that led to Ed Lee becoming the city's first Chinese American mayor. She would later call him an enormous disappointment. "She was strong and fearless," Lee told The Chronicle. "Whether she was right or wrong, she grounded herself in representing the community. She really wanted to make sure Chinatown as a whole was respected." Pak was born in Hunan, China, and fled to Hong Kong with her family as a child. She arrived in San Francisco in 1967, became a reporter for The Chronicle and covered the community she would later champion. She was such an aggressive reporter that a lawyer ended up in court on battery charges after throwing a punch at Park during an interview. The lawyer called her "an enormously pushy person." Pak countered that she "was trained to be persistent." Pak became an advocate as she became immersed in issues concerning the neighborhood. In the 1970s, she helped save Chinatown's Chinese Hospital, an underfunded medical center for Cantonese-speaking poor. A few years ago, she took over efforts to raise more than $100 million to rebuild the facility. "I don't know if I'm the best person, but someone had to do it," she said, according to the newspaper. Pak was such an institution that 300 people, including Lt. Gov. and former San Francisco Mayor Gavin Newsom, were on hand in May at San Francisco's airport to greet her when she returned from China. She told the crowd that her doctor said she could live another 40 years. Pak said she only needed 15, including 10 to rebuild a housing complex in Chinatown and five "to get even with the people who wished me dead."
Sen. Elizabeth Warren told Wells Fargo Chairman and CEO John Stumpf at a public hearing Tuesday he should resign in the wake of an unauthorized customer-account scandal, return the money he made while the activity went on, and face a Justice Department investigation for possible criminality. "It's gutless leadership," Warren said of Stumpf's response to revelations that the bank opened as many as 2 million accounts without customers' permission. Story Continued Below The Massachusetts Democrat used the closely watched Senate Banking Committee hearing to make her case that the United States needs "tough new laws" to hold corporate executives personally accountable. Stumpf left senators dissatisfied with comments that he would have no responsibility in clawing back top officials' pay. He deferred to the rest of the bank's board when it came to questions about decisions involving compensation for executives. "That's unfortunate," said Sen. Sherrod Brown (D-Ohio), the panel's top-ranking Democrat. Senators have urged Stumpf to revoke money from retiring consumer banking head Carrie Tolstedt, who is reportedly leaving the company with $125 million in stocks and options. Stumpf said he was not involved with compensation discussions at the board level. Though he is the board chairman, he does not sit on the Human Resources Committee responsible for overseeing executive pay. "To not invoke some degree of clawback for yourself and others involved would be committing malpractice from the standpoint of just public relations," Sen. Bob Corker (R-Tenn.) said. Senators from both parties suggested that Wells Fargo might have violated SEC rules. Warren said the agency should also investigate Stumpf. Sen. Pat Toomey, a Republican running for reelection in Pennsylvania, told Stumpf that he had been unable to find Wells Fargo disclosing potential material risks to investors related to the scandal. Sen. Jeff Merkley (D-Ore.) said the SEC should investigate whether Wells Fargo violated internal control provisions in the 2002 Sarbanes-Oxley Act by not recognizing and stopping widespread fraud. In an attempt to illustrate what she said was Stumpf's personal gain from the unauthorized account openings, Warren said Wells Fargo shares held by Stumpf during the period of the scam grew in value by more than $200 million. "If one of your tellers took a handful of $20 bills out of the cash drawer they’d probably be looking at criminal charges for theft," she said. "They could end up in prison. But you squeezed your employees to the breaking point so they would cheat customers and you could drive up the value of your stock and put hundreds of millions of dollars in your own pocket." Stumpf, responding to criticism from Chairman Richard Shelby (R-Ala.), said,"If I could turn the clock back, and I’ve thought about this a thousand times, of course we all wish we would have done something more earlier. We didn’t get on this fast enough."
Today marks the one-week mark ahead of the first of the three presidential debates during the 2016 campaign and the candidates are gearing up. The Commission on Presidential Debates announced today the broad topics that are slated to be covered during the first debate: America's Direction, Achieving Prosperity and Securing America. The topics were selected by the moderator, Lester Holt of "NBC Nightly News," but are "subject to possible changes because of news developments." The commission also made its final decision on Friday that there would only be two candidates taking the debate stage on Monday, Sept. 26. It ruled that neither Libertarian Party nominee Gary Johnson nor Green Party nominee Jill Stein had met the 15 percent mark in a combination of polls, which had previously been set as the bar for participation qualification.       Before Republican nominee Donald Trump and Democratic nominee Clinton head to Hofstra University, the site of the first debate, the candidates and their campaign aides have started teasing their debate prep strategies. Trump started his debate prep in late August, and at the time, sources told ABC News that he hadn't participated in mock debates, which is one of the more typical prep strategies for presidential candidates. As for Trump's personal debate strategy, he hasn't talked about the specifics of his game plan, focusing more on how he will deal with facing one opponent head on. "I will treat her with great respect unless she treats me in a certain manner, in which case that will be the end of that," Trump said about Clinton last week during an appearance on Sean Hannity's Fox News show. "But I'm certainly starting off with the feeling that I'm going to treat her with great respect. I hope we can talk about policy and certain things. I am not looking to go in and treat her with disrespect." Clinton's press secretary Brian Fallon told MSNBC last Thursday that she won't "go in there seeking to provoke Donald Trump." "She's going to do what she always does which shows she got the grasp of the issue and the command and poise of being commandeering chief. That contrast there will speak for itself," Fallon said.
Washington (CNN)Rep. John Lewis, a pioneer in the civil rights movement, wants the Obama administration to appoint observers for the November election in certain states. "We should ask for federal protection," the Georgia Democrat said Wednesday, warning "the election can be stolen on election day at polling places." Lewis, who was badly injured in 1965 while marching in Selma, Alabama for voting rights for African-Americans, said several states including Georgia, Florida, Ohio and North Carolina should be monitored, and potentially all of the states that belonged to the confederacy. Lewis made his comments at a roundtable on voting rights with other Democrats and advocacy groups held in the room in the Capitol named after President Lyndon Baines Johnson, who signed the landmark voting right law. In August, the Supreme Court denied a request from North Carolina to allow provisions of its controversial voting rights law to go back into effect. The Supreme Court order meant provisions of the law -- concerning a tightening in voter ID requirements, cutbacks on early voting and the preregistration of 16-year-olds -- will remain off the books for November's election. The court's order was a major victory for challengers to the law, including civil rights groups and the Department of Justice, which argued that it had a disparate impact on minority voters. Lewis said the 2016 presidential election is the first since 1965 that voters don't have the full protections of the Voting Rights Act due to a Supreme Court ruling three years ago. The lawmaker said it was a "shame and a disgrace" that Congress hasn't acted on the issue. In 2013, the Supreme Court decided in a 5-4 decision that key parts of the Voting Rights Act of 1965 are no longer valid. The opinion left it to Congress to revise the law, so that it's constitutional in the minds of a majority of justices. Chief Justice John Roberts explained the ruling saying "our country has changed" for the better. And that the conditions that moved Congress five decades ago to require certain parts of the United States to "preclear" changes to voting laws "no longer characterize voting in the covered jurisdictions." 
PHILADELPHIA—Juliette Comfer, a pink-haired freshman at Temple University, was wild for Bernie Sanders. Now she’s mild for Hillary Clinton. “I don’t love her, but our views are aligned,” she said before Clinton made a pitch for millennial votes at her school on Monday. Orion Tucker, a junior with a nose ring and a hipster goatee, also felt the Bern in the Democratic primary, but he’s also backing Clinton over Donald Trump: “The more Donald runs off his mouth, the clearer the choice gets.” Philip Mattes, a freshman with a scruffy orange beard, is another Bernie Bro who’s transferred to the Clinton train. “If you care about health care, student debt, all the progressive issues, you’ve got to be with her,” he said. Polls suggest that most millennials prefer Clinton to Trump, but especially among college-aged voters who tend to lean left, her margin isn’t nearly as wide as President Obama’s over Mitt Romney. And you could sense why at her speech on Monday. The carefully curated crowd was clearly on her side—there were only about 200 attendees, many of them members of Democratic campus groups who got tickets from her campaign—but the enthusiasm was not exactly overwhelming Story Continued Below In interviews at the event, many of her millennial supporters, especially the former Sanders revolutionaries, talked about her in the could-be-worse tone they might use to describe a boring but socially appropriate romantic partner. They used words like “capable,” “well-informed,” “responsible,” and “qualified.” They dutifully praised her positions on issues like abortion, student debt, mass incarceration, and climate change, while emphasizing the importance of stopping Trump and his inflammatory rhetoric. But most of them did not sound particularly inspired. “Bernie was a genuine grass-roots kind of guy, and he really spoke to the younger generation,” said Nicole Brigstock, a freshman at the University of Pennsylvania who wore a “NO WAR” pin next to her “Ready for Hillary” pin. “He truly cared about progressive issues. I guess I’d like to believe that she does as well.” Clinton’s campaign staff acknowledges that after losing millennials to Sanders by blowout margins in the Democratic primary, she’s still underperforming in that age group in the general. They described the Temple speech as an effort to earn the votes of young people who might not know where she stands on issues like equal pay for women, gay rights, the minimum wage, and college affordability. She also appealed to their sense of tolerance and multiculturalism, attacking Trump as a racist, sexist, and generally divisive figure, repeatedly pushing her campaign themes of Stronger Together and Love Trumps Hate. The conventional wisdom on millennials is that they’re swayed more by passion and emotion than substance—that in politics as well as smartphones, they’re always looking for the shiny new thing. But coming of age with the first black president, very few of them expressed excitement about the prospect of the first woman president. On the other hand, her young supporters here almost all name-checked her more traditional liberal views, in contrast to Trump’s calls to build a wall and undo most of Obama’s work, as well as her knowledge of policy, in even sharper contrast to Trump. In her speech, Clinton admitted she’s not much of an entertainer, but touted her commitment to the “slow, hard business of governing,” pointing out that she knows the interest rate on student loans down to the decimal point. “She’s showing that she’s experienced, she’s reality-based, she cares about policies we care about,” said junior Mike McDermott, a former Sanders supporter who’s on the executive board of the Temple Democrats. “Young people want to see that kind of positive message. It’s not sexy, but it’s about getting the job done.” Margaret Strolle, a graduate student in history at Villanova, said Clinton gets a bad rap from starry-eyed Sanders types who think politics is about waving magic wands and making everything better. She said Clinton is a realist, and like Alexander Hamilton in the Broadway musical, has been in the room where it happens. “People deride her for being part of the system but I like her experience,” Strolle said. “She’s not making big promises about how she’s going to change everything, but she’s committed to getting things done, even if it’s incremental.” Trump is wildly unpopular with millennials, so the real danger for Clinton is that they could vote for third-party candidates or stay home, and she warned Monday that Trump could win if the youth turnout is stagnant. Judging from the students at her event, that might be her strongest millennial message. Tom Quinn, a nursing student and a registered independent who had considered voting for Libertarian Gary Johnson, says he’s now convinced that only two candidates have a path to victory, and that Trump is unacceptable. “We can’t have a racist president,” he said. Bernie Mann, a diehard Sanders supporter—she noted they even share a name—said she’s realized she can vote for his platform by voting for Clinton: “It felt a lot more real from Bernie, but she’s way, way, way better than Trump.” Vicki Gouvalis, a moderate Republican and voted for John Kasich in the primary, said she was undecided before Clinton spoke, then told me after the event she will vote for Clinton. “I was shocked by how much I agreed with her,” Gouvalis said. The good news for Clinton is she has room to grow with undecided millennials who loathe Trump and share many of her views. The bad news is that many of them are undecided because they don’t like her or trust her. Several Clinton supporters who showed up Monday said they’re still concerned about her emails, her support for the Iraq war, and her ties to Wall Street. They said most of their Bernie-or-Bust friends are coming around as the election nears, but not all of them. “Everyone keeps saying she’s a liar, and I’m like, what politician isn’t?” said Jeffrey Fuentes, a junior whose parents are Salvadoran immigrants. “I think people will come around, but they’re not amped up like they were for Bernie.” At Temple, Clinton tried to reach out to reluctant millennials, telling unusually personal stories about her mother and other women who influenced her, urging them to resist the notion that politics is all corrupt and no one ever changes. And there was one group of millennials at the event whose enthusiasm seemed to defy all the punditry: young black voters, who never felt the Bern in the first place. James Walton, a 30-year-old buyer for a Philadelphia manufacturing company, said African-Americans appreciate Clinton’s attention to the minimum wage, police brutality, and gun control; he’s lost three friends to gun violence. “We’re millennials, too,” he said. “And she’s speaking to our demographic.” Jeanmarie Elican, a senior at the University of Pennsylvania, said that as a black woman, she appreciates Clinton’s concern about discrimination against minorities, immigrants and gays. But like so many of her fellow Clinton supporters, she said she’s most energized about stopping Trump, a candidate who has dismissed Black Lives Matter, retweeted white supremacists, and argued that blacks should vote for him because their lives are so abysmal they have nothing to lose. “I have plenty to lose,” Elican said. “Donald Trump doesn’t see black people as people. If that’s not a reason to vote, I don’t know what is.”
To fact check or not — that was the debate before the debate, one that pitted Hillary Clinton’s backers against Donald Trump supporters and even engaged some top journalists. But as the hour of the debate drew closer, only the comparatively small Bloomberg TV network publicly said it would be doing any sort of on-screen fact checks during the debate, running them periodically as part of their headline scroll. Story Continued Below Despite the demands from the Clinton campaign for more media fact checks in the wake of Matt Lauer’s failure to correct Trump’s assertions at NBC’s commander-in-chief forum, none of the major networks has publicly committed to doing concurrent on-screen fact-checking during the debate, when the audience is highest. That would leave the moderator, NBC News anchor Lester Holt, on his own in deciding whether to weigh in on the candidates’ claims — as both sides tried to publicly pressure him in the hours leading up to the debate. Democrats including vice presidential nominee Tim Kaine called fact-checking crucial to the debate, while Republicans echoed Trump’s demand that Holt refrain from intervening the way that Candy Crowley did in the second 2012 debate between President Barack Obama and Mitt Romney, when she sought to correct Romney on his claim that Obama hadn’t characterized the Benghazi attacks as terrorism. While on-screen fact-checking could help expose inaccurate or misleading assertions without interrupting the flow of the debate, nearly all of the major cable or broadcast networks, including Univision and Telemundo, said that they would not use any sort on screen fact check or graphics. Of the networks POLITICO surveyed, only Bloomberg TV confirmed that it will be doing on-screen fact checking during the debate. Network spokespeople said the on-screen fact checks would need to be nearly instantaneous to correlate with the answer the candidate is giving, leading to some high editorial and technical hurdles. Only NBC, Holt’s home network, did not respond to multiple requests for comment. Thus, the burden of keeping the candidates honest will likely come down to Holt, the only other person on the stage. Debate moderators and questioners have been more frequent targets than usual during this election cycle, with the Republican National Committee even going so far as to pull planned debates with NBC-related networks because it didn’t like how CNBC handled an early primary-election debate. The journalists moderating the debates and providing questions have been singled out by critics in both parties for offenses ranging from asking too many “gotcha” questions to tossing too many softballs. Some moderators were criticized for losing control of the debates, while others were knocked for being too controlling themselves. Lauer, who sat in silence while Trump insisted he never supported the Iraq war – despite well-known footage of him saying the opposite – was only the most recent big-name anchor to emerge from a highly touted campaign forum with his reputation challenged. And both the Trump and Clinton camps have made it clear that they’ll be scrutinizing Holt very closely. "These are two of the most difficult people in American politics to interview for very different reasons,” said veteran CBS News anchor and debate moderator Bob Schieffer. "So I think a moderators [of the three scheduled debates] are going to have their hands full. But I think all of them are veteran journalists and they will have done their homework by the time they get to the debate and they’ll do fine." For 90 minutes, with no break, Holt will lob questions of his own choosing at the candidates, guiding how and when they will respond. Schieffer, who said he has not given advice to Holt but has to some of the other moderators, said the hardest part for a moderator is not the vaunted “fact checking” that Lauer was so criticized for not enacting, but rather keeping track of the time and making sure the candidates get to the point. “[Moderators] are always part of the story,” Schieffer said. "When there’s someone to blame for something, people first turn to the press. That seems to be our role traditionally, that it’s our fault. You can’t help but become part of the story. You need to remember that going in. This scrutiny now is so intense, if you hadn’t been through it before you better get used to it now.” Despite the evident pressure, handling the first debate will be a huge opportunity for Holt, who took over “Nightly News” from Brian Williams under less than ideal circumstances. Instead of a grandly orchestrated rollout, Holt took over the anchor desk with little fanfare, as all of the drama focused on Williams’ fabrications and ultimate suspension. (Williams is now back on air, anchoring for MSNBC.) Holt has stayed away from doing any publicity ahead of the debates and stopped anchoring “Nightly News” last Tuesday to prepare for Monday night’s faceoff. Schieffer said moderators do best when they deliver short and simple questions that force the candidates to explain themselves. "A key question for both these candidates is 'how are you going to do that?’ ” Schieffer said. “… How are you going to get the money to do it and how are you going to put together the coalition you would need if it’s a law to get something like that passed?" The Clinton campaign hasn’t been directly in touch with Holt about its expectations for his handling of fact-checking duties on Trump – whom Clinton allies say routinely sprinkles his interviews and debate performances with assertions that journalists know aren’t true but are reluctant to challenge. But the campaign has made little secret of its insistence that Holt hold Trump accountable. "For the moderator to let lies like that that come out of his mouth at this debate to go unchallenged would give Donald Trump an unfair advantage,” Clinton Communications Director Jennifer Palmieri said during a conference call with reporters on Friday. "We do believe it is the role of the moderator . . . to call out those lies and to do that in real time." But the two former presidential debate moderators, Scheiffer and Lehrer, said that’s not necessarily how they would do it. Becoming the fact checker risks putting oneself in the position of Crowley, whom many Republicans believe damaged Romney’s performance unfairly. "My thought is yes the moderators have to fact-check, but the first fact-check opporutnity should go to the candidate themselves,” Scheiffer said. “If candidate A said something and is blatantly wrong you want to give candidate B the first opportunity to fact check that." If the second candidate doesn’t step in, Scheiffer said, the moderator has “the responsibility” to “state for the record what the facts are.” Jim Lehrer, the former PBS Newshour anchor who has moderated 12 presidential debates, said he also would strongly prefer to have the candidates fact-check each other than to step in himself. "Usually the way you do that with simply the candidate there, you say 'would you agree with that, is that how you see it?’ ” Lehrer said. “In debates I tried to not do that [fact check] because I didn’t want to get in the way." Both Schieffer and Lehrer said it’s almost guaranteed that Holt will be criticized by one side or the other, if not both. When Lehrer stayed mostly out of Obama and Romney’s way during the first presidential debate in 2012, he was criticized for not taking enough control. That same year, Schieffer was criticized for allowing the final debate to stray from foreign policy, the chosen topic for that debate. “This will be the ultimate ‘Rashomon’ test,” Lehrer said, referring to the famous movie in which an event is viewed differently by each character. “They always are, this one will just be a little more extreme." Darren Samuelsohn contributed to this report.
Donald Trump has praised the policing tactic known as “stop and frisk” on the campaign trail, but the controversial technique has a questionable history in New York City. The stop-question-and-frisk program entails NYPD officers’ randomly stopping people on the street, on the theory that such searches help law enforcement identify people with illegal handguns and deter crime. Supporters credit the program with helping to push down homicides and other major crimes in New York City to historic lows, but opponents have another description: racial profiling. A federal judge in New York ruled in 2013 that the program was unconstitutional and violated the rights of minorities because they were being disproportionally targeted by the practice. Between 2003 and 2015, for instance, more than half of those who were subjected to searches were black and about 30 percent of the other searches were of Latinos, according to an analysis of New York Police Department records by the New York Civil Liberties Union. The NYPD stopped the most New Yorkers in 2011 -- 685,724 – before the number dropped to 532,911 in 2012 and 191,558 in 2013, the year when the federal ruling was handed down.       The number of reported stops then dropped dramatically to 45,787 in 2014 and 22,939 last year, according to the figures analyzed by the NYCLU. "Tactics like stop and frisk or tactics that utilize race-based profiles are ineffective because they don’t differentiate between those in the community who may be involved in criminal activity and those who are simply residents in the community,” professor John Cohen of the Rutgers University School of Criminal Justice said. "So what tends to happen is you tend to have a greater number of confrontational police interactions with members of the community who are not involved in any type of illegal activity. That not only is ineffective operationally but it also tends to cause tension between those members of the community who are the people you want to have good relationships with,” Cohen, an ABC News consultant, former police officer and former acting Homeland Security undersecretary, added. The NYPD records analyzed by the NYCLU note that the number of people who were completely innocent account for 80 to 90 percent of the searches. "It’s not helping you in the short run because your officers are spending time with people who aren’t involved in criminal activity,” Cohen said. Trump, who has calls himself the “law and order candidate,” has lauded the NYPD “stop and frisk” program on the campaign trail, saying in Ohio Wednesday the program “was incredible, the way that worked.” When asked by an African-American audience member at the Fox News town hall event about how he would stop violence in the black community, Trump said, "I would do stop and frisk. I think you have to. We did it in New York. It worked incredibly well and you have to be proactive and, you know, you really help people sort of change their mind automatically.” But his praise may not sit well with many African-American voters, whom Trump has been actively courting in recent weeks. Cohen said, "The reason why African-Americans and other minority members will react negatively to his comments on stop and frisk is because many African-Americans and Latinos equate stop and frisk with racial profiling and, from a law enforcement perspective, racial profiling is operationally ineffective and unconstitutional.” Rep. Hakeem Jeffries, D-NY, took issue with Trump's suggestion today when asked about it during a news conference for the Congressional Black Caucus. "For years 'stop, question and frisk' was implemented in New York and it had nothing to do with the decline in crime," Jeffries said. "The notion that stop and frisk had anything to do with the improving public safety numbers in New York is ludicrous and Donald trump needs to check his facts," he said.
(CNN)Sen. Mark Kirk's campaign falsely asserted on its website that the Illinois Republican was a veteran of the Iraq war, a misstatement that comes six years after exaggerations over his military record nearly cost him his state's Senate seat. The Republican, now battling for a second term in a tight race in Illinois, stayed in the United States during the Iraq War when he served in the Navy Reserves. But on a public webpage on his official campaign website touting his record on veterans' issues, Kirk was listed as a "veteran of the Iraq war." While Kirk campaign officials said it was a staff error, the issue resembles the controversy that nearly caused his 2010 Senate campaign to implode. Moreover, Kirk is now running for reelection against Democratic Rep. Tammy Duckworth, a military veteran who lost both of her legs during combat in Iraq. Kirk campaign officials said the webpage was not meant to be made public, saying that it was supposed to be a private site while edits were being made to the page. Campaign officials said a third-party vendor had drafted the language that they said had not been vetted or reviewed by the senator's staff. The language, they acknowledged, was inaccurate, saying it would be changed when the campaign began a more direct push to court military veterans. After CNN inquired about the statement, the campaign moved the webpage behind a password-protected firewall. It had been accessible publicly and through Google searches about Kirk's work on veterans issues prior to that. Kirk campaign manager Kevin Artl downplayed the error -- and instead attacked Duckworth over her tenure leading the Illinois Department of Veterans Affairs. "Rather than focus on draft web copy that has yet to go through an approval process, we would welcome the media's attention on the six military veterans who died waiting for care during Tammy Duckworth's time at the Illinois Department of Veterans Affairs," Artl said. Duckworth campaign officials declined to comment. In 2010, Kirk came under heavy criticism for making a number of inaccurate comments about his military record, including falsely asserting he was the lone member of Congress to serve in Iraq and had been named the Navy's intelligence officer of the year. He later backtracked, including by saying he served "during" the Iraq war -- not "in" the war. He also later acknowledged that a different award was given by the Navy, and it was awarded to his entire unit. Kirk apologized for his misstatements, including one saying he had been fired on in 2000 while flying reconnaissance missions over Iraq and another saying he was a veteran of Operation Desert Storm in the early 1990s. During the Iraq war invasion of 2003, Kirk was a congressman representing a district encompassing suburbs north of Chicago. He served in the Naval Reserves at that time but was working stateside, even joking to a reporter in 2003 that he wouldn't see combat unless the Iraqi army came to Washington. After a 23-year career in the Navy Reserves where he served as an intelligence officer, Kirk retired from the service in 2013 -- a year after he suffered a major stroke that still affects his mobility and speech today. 
Washington (CNN)Rep. John Lewis, a pioneer in the civil rights movement, wants the Obama administration to appoint observers for the November election in certain states. "We should ask for federal protection," the Georgia Democrat said Wednesday, warning "the election can be stolen on election day at polling places." Lewis, who was badly injured in 1965 while marching in Selma, Alabama for voting rights for African-Americans, said several states including Georgia, Florida, Ohio and North Carolina should be monitored, and potentially all of the states that belonged to the confederacy. Lewis made his comments at a roundtable on voting rights with other Democrats and advocacy groups held in the room in the Capitol named after President Lyndon Baines Johnson, who signed the landmark voting right law. In August, the Supreme Court denied a request from North Carolina to allow provisions of its controversial voting rights law to go back into effect. The Supreme Court order meant provisions of the law -- concerning a tightening in voter ID requirements, cutbacks on early voting and the preregistration of 16-year-olds -- will remain off the books for November's election. The court's order was a major victory for challengers to the law, including civil rights groups and the Department of Justice, which argued that it had a disparate impact on minority voters. Lewis said the 2016 presidential election is the first since 1965 that voters don't have the full protections of the Voting Rights Act due to a Supreme Court ruling three years ago. The lawmaker said it was a "shame and a disgrace" that Congress hasn't acted on the issue. In 2013, the Supreme Court decided in a 5-4 decision that key parts of the Voting Rights Act of 1965 are no longer valid. The opinion left it to Congress to revise the law, so that it's constitutional in the minds of a majority of justices. Chief Justice John Roberts explained the ruling saying "our country has changed" for the better. And that the conditions that moved Congress five decades ago to require certain parts of the United States to "preclear" changes to voting laws "no longer characterize voting in the covered jurisdictions." 
A billionaire who built up a corporate empire from his father’s inheritance now is running his first major political campaign with a promise to shake up the establishment and restore prosperity after a long period of stagnation. But in this case it’s not Donald Trump. It’s Jim Justice, the Democratic candidate for governor in West Virginia and a coal baron to boot. Like Trump, Justice has been accused of not paying his bills and being out mainly for himself. And like Trump, Justice is running a nontraditional campaign that exists well outside the partisan pattern, eschewing Hillary Clinton and Barack Obama in favor of a cult of personality based around his exploits in business. As West Virginia’s only billionaire, he can self-fund, pumping $2.2 million into his campaign through mid-June. Justice faces stiff crosswinds, however, running as a down-ballot Democrat in one of Trump’s strongest states. Story Continued Below West Virginia polling is scarce and often inaccurate, but a MetroNews West Virginia poll released earlier this month showed Trump with a 49–31 advantage over Hillary Clinton, who won only 36 percent to Bernie Sanders’ 51 percent in the state’s May 10 primary. In an era of declining split-ticket voting, Justice must outperform Clinton by double digits to win. That’s led to a dynamic in which West Virginia’s GOP candidate for governor, state Senate President Bill Cole, is embracing Trump while Justice is distancing himself from Clinton. It’s very nearly the opposite of what’s happening in other states with close races. “Across the nation, Democrats are trying to nationalize their races because they think they can use Trump as a weapon. In this race, it’s pretty clear Democrats are trying to localize, because Trump is not a drag but an asset for Cole,” says Kyle Kondik, managing editor of Larry Sabato’s Crystal Ball at the University of Virginia’s Center for Politics. “This is one of the few places in the country where Republicans are more concerned with nationalizing a race than Democrats are.” In this race, Trump isn’t a drag on Republicans; he’s an asset. The reason is simple: coal. Republicans have dominated Appalachia the past three cycles by bludgeoning Democrats with “war on coal” rhetoric blaming Obama for the industry's decline. It’s hard to make that charge stick against a coal baron. And Justice definitely qualifies: He inherited an array of coal interests from his father, then enlarged them to become one of the biggest private coal mine owners in the East. That growth included the 2009 sale of his Bluestone Coal Corp. to Russia’s OAO Mechel for $568 million. Then the coal slump hit, and last year Justice bought Bluestone back for $5 million, less than 1 percent of his selling price. Cole, the Republican candidate, has more elective experience than Justice, but he’s no establishment insider. Owner of Bill Cole Automall and other businesses, Cole is finishing only his first term in the West Virginia Senate, having previously served a few months in the House of Delegates when he was appointed to fill a vacant seat. However, Cole spent much of 2016 wrapped up in a state budget crisis and has focused his general election campaign on tried-and-true conservative policy proposals such as cutting spending and taxes, banning late-term abortions and opening charter schools. In a year in which voters largely have embraced personality over policy, that may not be enough, even in a Republican-tilting state with a wildly popular candidate at the top of the ticket. “If you think about the primary races here, we saw a giant Trump win and a giant Sanders win,” says Scott Crichlow, associate professor of political science at West Virginia University. “If you look at Trump, look at Sanders, look at Justice, they certainly have policies that are known—the wall, universal health care, the coal industry—but so much of what’s driving the appeal for them is personality and image, not just a list of policy prescriptions.” Justice is running as a conservative Democrat, not unlike former governor and current U.S. Sen. Joe Manchin, with whom he shares a number of campaign staff. He’s flip-flopped between the two major parties, giving money to both and changing his registration, most recently in February 2015, when he became a Democrat. However, he says he won’t vote for Clinton and dismissed Cole’s claim that he supports Obama as “complete dog snot.” And while Justice spokesman Grant Herring says his candidate “isn’t focused on the national political circus,” the language he uses to describe his appeal sounds awfully familiar. “Jim is no politician,” says Herring. “He is the outsider in this race who has the skills and experience to transform the state.” At the moment, it looks like that approach is working: A MetroNews West Virginia poll released September 3 showed Justice running away with the race at 46 percent, Cole with 32 percent, Mountain Party candidate Charlotte Pritt with 8 percent, and Libertarian David Moran with 5 percent. Many doubt the veracity of the MetroNews poll, which has varied wildly when measured against election results in recent years, but most, including Cole spokesman Kent Gates, agree that Justice is winning. “Do I think Justice has a lead? Yes,” says Gates. “Do I think it’s double digits? No.” Some of that is because Justice’s industry ties largely make him resistant to the GOP’s otherwise effective “war on coal” messaging, which has proven to be Democrat kryptonite around Appalachia, even in districts beyond the coalfields. “If you’re going to win in West Virginia, you better be running against Hillary Clinton,” says Dave “Mudcat” Saunders, a western Virginia political consultant known for his so-called Bubba Strategy, designed to help Democrats appeal to white working-class voters. Saunders, who has said he’s voting for Trump, says voters don’t trust Clinton or care about her support for funding going to help coalfield economies transition to something else. “She said she’s going to put coal out of business. West Virginia coal miners don’t want a handout. They want their dignity. They want their jobs.” If you’re going to win in West Virginia, you better be running against Hillary Clinton,” says one Democratic strategist. But Saunders doesn’t have kind words for Justice either: “He’s screwed every coal operator in West Virginia at one time or another.” Cole sees that reputation as his big opening. His spokesman, Gates, says the Republican campaign will open up attacks on Justice’s business record over the next several weeks. “Jim Justice is a coal operator, but he’s not a coal operator acting in the best interest of West Virginia,” Gates says. “His legacy of unpaid bills is documented across the land.” That record extends from unpaid federal fines to unpaid vendors to unpaid state and local taxes in multiple states. In a 2014 series on delinquent mines, NPR reported that Justice “stands out” among mining operators, owing nearly $2 million in unpaid fines at the time. That same year, a federal agency issued 39 cessation orders against three Justice companies for reclamation violations at Tennessee mines, including hiring a contractor who planted trees upside down. The problems have persisted. This year in Kentucky, Justice’s mines missed reclamation deadlines and owed nearly $2 million in delinquent property taxes. That’s an improvement from last year, when he owed $3.5 million in unpaid Kentucky taxes. In southwest Virginia, Tazewell County officials seized machinery, tools and other equipment from a Justice-owned mine this spring to make up for $850,000 in unpaid property taxes. When 2015 West Virginia property taxes became delinquent in April, Justice owed more than $3.9 million. The pattern apparently extends to Justice’s other businesses, as well: Two companies sued the Greenbrier for unpaid work on its golf courses for the PGA tournament, eventually settling out of court. Justice’s mining record, which includes extensive use of mountaintop removal mining, as well as his issues with mine reclamation, has made him the target of many an Appalachian environmental activist. The Cole campaign going negative on Justice might not push those green voters to vote Republican, but it might tip them toward Pritt, who is running for governor as the candidate of the Mountain Party, the West Virginia affiliate of the Green Party. Pritt served eight years in the state Legislature and is making her third run for governor. The last time she ran, in 1996, she defeated Manchin in a primary on the way to a loss in the general election. Both Cole and Justice have promised to bring back coal jobs, but whoever wins in November faces the monumental task of a state economy that’s suffered mightily with the collapse of the coal industry. According to the U.S. Census, West Virginia’s 2014 median household income was $41,576, compared with $53,657 nationally. Its poverty rate was 18.3 percent, versus 14.8 nationally. Mining jobs have plummeted, falling 19 percent in the past calendar year, 26 percent from a decade ago, and 39 percent from 2011, when the market for metallurgical, or steel-making, coal spiked on the strength of a then-strong Asian economy. Mines sit idle as a string of industry giants— Alpha Natural Resources, Arch Coal, Patriot Coal, Peabody Energy and Walter Energy—filed for bankruptcy due to a convergence of factors including a slumping Asian economy, competition from cheap natural gas, and federal clean-air regulations that resulted in a wave of older power plants closing or converting to natural gas. While the market for metallurgical, or steel-making coal may eventually return, it’s unlikely the same will be true for steam, or power-producing, coal. The coal industry’s struggles haven’t just hurt West Virginia’s employment rate, but also its state budget. The reduction in coal and natural gas severance tax collection contributed to its budget crisis, along with an economy that generally has failed to transition from its fossil fuel roots. In this gubernatorial campaign, neither candidate seems eager to push that process forward. Justice, however, has experience operating in economic sectors such as farming and tourism that may be part of the recipe for recovery. He previously owned Wintergreen Resort in Virginia before selling it last year, and in 2009 he bought the famed Greenbrier Resort out of bankruptcy. Since then, he’s brought an annual PGA tournament and the New Orleans Saints’ training camp to the Greenbrier. In late June, a month and a half after Justice won the Democratic nomination and two weeks before the Greenbrier Classic PGA tournament was scheduled to start, tragedy inadvertently threw a spotlight on the Greenbrier and the communities around it when West Virginia was slammed by historic rains and flooding that qualified as a 1,000-year event in parts of the state. Twenty-three people were killed, including 15 in Greenbrier County, and hundreds of homes were destroyed. Justice canceled the PGA event and closed the Greenbrier Resort, though it opened its doors, free of charge, to house about 200 people who had been displaced from their homes. He shut down his campaign for roughly 10 days following the flooding, appearing only at a brief press conference to announce the Greenbrier’s reopening date. Should he win in November, however, his response to the flooding and actions at the Greenbrier will be remembered as a defining moment. Whether Justice will win, however, remains an open question, double-digit poll lead notwithstanding. Sabato’s Crystal Ball recently moved the West Virginia governor’s race from “Leans Republican” to “Toss-up.” “We’re being cautious because of the fact that Justice will need to run so far ahead of Clinton,” Kondik says. Trump will easily win West Virginia, but the winner of the governor’s race will be determined by how willing voters are to split their tickets, and whether Democrats remain loyal to their party or break for Pritt. That’s why Cole’s campaign is attacking Justice on his record as a coal businessman, even as they decry the federal “war on coal.” Whether those voters go to Cole or to Pritt ultimately doesn’t matter, so long as they’re not voting for Justice. In his attacks on Justice, Cole spokesman Gates repeated one line a couple of times: “At the end of the day, Jim Justice is going to do what’s best for Jim Justice.” That line has been used about Donald Trump, too. The question for West Virginia voters on Election Day will be whether what’s in Justice and Trump’s best interests is in theirs, too.
(CNN)Hillary Clinton continues to lead in New Hampshire, according to the latest survey from Monmouth University released Wednesday. The poll showed 47% of likely voters in the state backing Clinton, compared with 38% who support Donald Trump. Libertarian Party nominee Gary Johnson has 10% support, according to Monmouth. Clinton has led Trump in almost every poll out of New Hampshire, and a Republican has not carried the state since George W. Bush won there in 2000. But Monmouth's findings pointed to a much wider lead for the former secretary of state than a NBC News/Wall Street Journal/Marist poll conducted there earlier this month, which showed Clinton and Trump virtually deadlocked in the Granite State. The Monmouth poll was conducted September 17-20 using phone interviews with 400 likely New Hampshire voters. It has a margin of error of 4.9 percentage points. 
Officially speaking, Monday night's debate was separated into three sections—achieving prosperity, America's direction, and securing America—but it didn't take long to explode into a range of issues from police-community relations to NATO to Donald Trump's business practices and Hillary Clinton's stamina. How to make sense of it all? Seriously, what just happened? We dialed in the experts on topics from criminal justice to international affairs to history, who detected some big moments that might have gotten drowned out in all the noise, from both candidates’ missed opportunities on foreign policy to an unprecedented invocation of direct racism on the presidential debate stage. And ... wasn't this thing supposed to have a Republican, too? Clinton showed she’s as un-serious on foreign policy as Trump Danielle Pletka is senior vice president for foreign and defense policy studies at the American Enterprise Institute. Story Continued Below Most of the debate between Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump had passed before we got to national security. By that time, Trump had drifted—nay, sprinted—away from his strong opener to the rambling, bombastic incoherence that characterized his performance from about minute 20 until the end. And as when the blazing dumpster fire draws our attention away from the rodent-ridden alley, all eyes were drawn to the New York businessman, wondering what the hell he was going to say next. That’s a shame, because it was Hillary Clinton who articulated not a single fresh idea, not a single pivot away from the disastrous Obama years, not a single vision. Her foreign policy might well be summarized as “I’m not crazy Trump.” And that’s far from enough. Consider the substance (and here I set aside the series of catcalls that pass for Trump foreign policy): On cyber-security, an issue about which Clinton has already displayed some confusion, she stated that “we are not going to sit idly by and permit state actors to go after our information.” What does that mean? Given the cyberattacks we’ve witnessed, didn’t she sit idly by as secretary of state? "Not sitting" is not foreign policy. Apparently Clinton has “a plan to defeat ISIS.” What is it? Literally, she led with “going after them online.” She threw in liberal hawk buzzword “intensify” about air strikes as if that represents a strategy. And she added that she would like to “take out their leadership.” Take that Al Qaeda and ISIS! How do we protect the homeland? “An intelligence surge.” Cooperating with Muslim nations. That’s it, really. Oh, and Clinton loves the Iran deal. And NATO. The former secretary of state closed her national security argument claiming, “Donald never tells you what he would do.” That’s spot on. The problem is, while Clinton is more polite, more temperate and well … more normal, in her own way she’s as unserious about national security as The Donald. The performer wilted; the bureaucrat stepped up Virginia Heffernan is author of Magic and Loss: The Internet as Art. On the debate stage Monday night, Hillary Clinton notably called her opponent “Donald,” a transparent move to gain the whip hand. Donald Trump called Clinton “secretary,” but only after elaborately asking her permission, the way someone asks a vegan if she eats even bread, implying, “You’re so finicky, who knows what will bother you?” Even formal terms of address between politicians would be played for schoolyard advantage, it seemed. Until Trump—the consummate bully, the master entertainer—wavered. Soon enough, he lapsed into “Hillary.” His initial “secretary” ploy, which at first seemed moderately promising—and might have teed up a sneering riff on political correctness later—lost his attention. He couldn’t commit to the bit, or any bit. The same was true all night. Yes, Trump, who never hit a false note as the capricious tyrant on The Apprentice, somehow kept straying from the role he had played so many times on the debate stage during the primaries: performer. “Message” has sometimes seemed protean with Trump, but his persona has always been brightly limned, his modest vocabulary serving as trusty scaffolding for a self as solid and simple as a cartoon. Tonight, however, that Trump-brand Trump slipped and slid, perhaps left wobbly without the crutch of a friendly crowd. Rather than talk about the magnitude of his primary victory or the one he hopes for this fall, Trump openly envisioned losing—twice. “If I don’t get to Pennsylvania Avenue one way, I’m going to get there another,” he said, referring to his company’s new hotel in Washington, D.C., just down the street from the White House. When asked if he would abide by the outcome of the vote in November—Trump has suggested he fears voter fraud—he dodged the question, rambled a bit, then, when pressed again, closed out the night with these final non-rousing words: “If she wins, I will absolutely support her.” The strongman didn’t look so strong. As the debate came to a close, Trump himself confessed that he had fallen short of his usual routine: “I was going to say something extremely rough to Hillary, to her family. And I said to myself, I can’t do it. I just can’t do it. It’s inappropriate, it’s not nice.” I can’t do it. He was talking like a loser. Debate previews had suggested that Clinton’s prep team was worried about her detail-packed disquisitions coming across as overly focus-grouped. They needn’t have. Trump, who was expected to speak simple and with feeling, conjured internecine battles involving consultants and media people that must have been moving and powerful to exactly … no one. Sidney Blumenthal, Patti Solis Doyle, Wolf Blitzer, Sean Hannity, Debbie Wasserman Schultz: Trump sounded positively wonky, like any old Beltway cable pundit. As for Clinton, she has a less clearly etched stage persona than Trump, and seemed to come in committed to a predictably studied style. But, especially early in the debate, she deployed an imperious way of looking soap-operatically classy and above-it-all, with a supercilious smile and complicated headwork. It’s possible she was aiming for the Texan Woman Exception, identified by the linguist Deborah Tannen (and cited recently in the Atlantic), which states that of all women, only Texans can pull off tough and brassy without being called shrill. Clinton did not seem Texan. She seemed smug, long-suffering. When Trump interrupted her, she did a pursed-lip “I’ll just wait” move that some substitute teachers employ. It didn’t serve her. But because Trump didn’t appear very threatening, she seemed to decide she didn’t need armor. She dropped the fake Ann Richards act after about 20 minutes. The surprise was that Clinton did have something to fall back on. Not the fake Arkansas accent of her early years in public service, not the you-go-girl pantsuits thing from 2008, not a “love and kindness” Age of Aquarius jam. Standing at a podium, in command of the facts, Clinton fell back on herself—a clear-eyed strategist, with unlovely Midwestern vowels and a map of geopolitics in her mind at all times. She seemed happy to be there. Trump missed a historical opportunity on tax cuts Josh Zeitz has taught American history and politics at Cambridge University and Princeton University and is the author of Lincoln’s Boys: John Hay, John Nicolay, and the War for Lincoln's Image. Watching Monday night’s debate in the moment, it was easy to see each candidate as the embodiment of our current political polarization. Democrats, we all know, are reflexive tax-and-spenders. Republicans are tax-cutting fanatics with a mystical faith in the power of supply-side economics. Slipping into those traditional partisan roles, Clinton mocked “Trumped-Up, Trickle Down economics,” and Trump claimed that Clinton would tax America back to the Stone Ages (or at least the Carter administration). But if those notes felt off in this strange policy year, where Trump has dispensed with nearly all the GOP's economic norms, they were even futher off if you consider the history they might have invoked. Were Trump a student of history, he might have pointed out that while Democrats frequently point to Reaganomics as an invidious form of class warfare, some of the largest and most productive tax cuts in modern American history were the work of two Democratic presidents: John F. Kennedy and Lyndon Johnson. The story goes something like this: In 1962, presidential aide Walter Heller convinced John Kennedy, and later LBJ, that the economy was underperforming by $30 billion. A tax cut–even one that increased the deficit temporarily–would stimulate growth, close the gap between economic potential and performance, and achieve full employment. Ironically, though the measure was born in a Democratic White House, some of its sharpest critics were liberal economists. Leon Keyserling, who served as chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers under Harry Truman, agreed that the tax cut would stimulate the economy but calculated that the wealthiest 12 percent of Americans would reap almost half of its savings, an outcome that struck them as both unjust and unlikely to help the economy much. The liberal economist John Kenneth Galbraith argued for stimulus spending instead. Michael Harrington, whose work on the hidden scourge of poverty had done so much to inspire the liberal imagination, scored the tax cut as “reactionary Keynesianism.” Yet the tax cut appeared to accomplish what its framers intended. In late February 1964, LBJ signed into law the Revenue Act of 1964, which sharply reduced individual income tax rates. The results were almost instantaneous. In 1965 GNP exceeded even the CEA’s optimistic forecast by a whopping $9 billion. “Tax relief, in massive doses, appears to have achieved something like magic,” marveled U.S. News and World Report. There are meaningful differences between the Kennedy/Johnson and Reagan tax cuts. But Trump missed an opportunity to claim a bipartisan mantle. And perhaps Clinton, too, missed an opportunity to remind Americans that Democrats have in past decades reduced the tax burden on the middle class. At the debate, who did the better job of sounding like someone else? Julie Sedivy has taught linguistics and psychology at Brown University and the University of Calgary, and is the co-author of Sold on Language: How Advertisers Talk to You and What This Says About You. In Monday night’s presidential debate, Donald Trump was challenged about his claim that Hillary Clinton lacked “a presidential look.” In truth, this was a test of whether the candidates sounded presidential, a chance for voters to assess two candidates whose communication styles have left lingering reservations. Clinton’s cool and technical language has reinforced perceptions that she is disconnected from many Americans, whereas Trump’s visceral style has left doubts about whether he can temper his passions when context demands it. To move voters, both Trump and Clinton were under pressure to stretch beyond their usual communicative range. For Clinton, this pressure is complex. Research shows that women who speak with emotional intensity are seen as less competent than men who do the same. Achieving that “presidential look” means she has to be masculine enough, but not emasculating or heartless. She has struggled with this over the years; in a study of 567 interviews and debates, researcher Jennifer Jones concluded that Clinton’s speaking style became more masculine with her growing political involvement and power, but that she struggled to find her rhetorical footing during the 2008 campaign, swinging between more masculine and feminine styles. On Monday, both candidates responded with noticeable shifts in language. Trump still leaned heavily on emotional trigger words (companies are “stealing our jobs”) and stacking adverbs and adjectives (“It’s bad, bad experience”; “We are in a big, fat, ugly bubble.”) But Debate Trump was far more restrained than Rally Trump, to the point of uttering acquiescent sentences such as, “As far as child care is concerned and so many other things, I think Hillary and I agree on that. We probably disagree a little bit as to numbers and amounts.” Clinton’s language was more forceful and direct than usual. Though she opened the debate with reference to her granddaughter’s birthday, she kept her sentences fairly short and simple. She talked about planning to “take out ISIS,” about coming back from the “abyss” of the recession, about how it's important to “grip this and deal with it” and about Trump “stiffing” his employees. The strain of speaking in a different voice showed more on Trump than Clinton. He sniffed and fidgeted and sipped his water; she locked her gaze at the camera and showed no evidence of having bodily needs. His responses became increasingly disorganized and irrelevant; hers, though obviously rehearsed, maintained a tight structure, circling back to the moderator’s question even after launching an attack on Trump, and articulating connections between principles and specifics. His sentences were often syntactically defective; hers displayed a neat rhetorical rhythm (“Unfortunately, race still determines too much, often determines where people live, determines what kind of education in their public schools they can get, and yes, it determines how they’re treated in the criminal justice system.”) Perhaps most striking was the fact that Trump, self-described voice of those left behind, appeared to forget entirely about the voters who were watching him outside the debate hall. At his rallies, he stirs up the crowd by addressing them directly and, as many of them have said, speaking the things they can’t say aloud. On Monday, almost every instance of the pronoun “you” was directed at Clinton in one of his private skirmishes with her—about his support for the Iraq War, about not paying his taxes, about not paying his workers, and what he has said about women. Clinton, on the other hand, did not appear to forget for one moment that she was on a national stage. She addressed the audience directly at the beginning and end of the debate. And she even seemed to speak for the country toward the end when she declared: “I want to reassure our allies in Japan and South Korea and elsewhere that we have mutual defense treaties and we will honor them.” The party that wasn't there Matt Latimer is a former speechwriter for President George W. Bush. He is currently a co-partner in Javelin, a literary agency and communications firm based in Alexandria, and contributing editor at Politico Magazine. Perhaps the most striking feature about last night’s debate was the absence of the Republican Party, at least as we have come to know it. Even the party’s once revered first family, including the GOP’s last two-term president, was a no-show, either in person or in spirit. Oddly, if anyone had a favorable thing to say about the Bush family, it would have been Hillary Clinton, who on Monday touted the endorsements of former Bush officials. Before the debate began, by contrast, Trump was reaching out to supporters of socialist Bernie Sanders. To be sure, there was one familiar exchange over Ronald Reagan’s tax cuts, and Hillary Clinton’s vague (and rather groan-worthy) attack on “trickle down” economics. But the brief contretemps seemed perfunctory and dated, with all the modern day relevance of the Garfield era. Throughout his unorthodox campaign, and quite remarkably, Donald Trump has completely jettisoned what only a year ago was Republican orthodoxy on trade, on entitlement reform, on infrastructure, on the war in Iraq. Last nigth the severing was complete. To wit, the Republican nominee began the debate aggressively lamenting the “rip off” of NAFTA, one of the trade deals about which Republicans used to regularly brag. He sharply attacked the Trans-Pacific Partnership, another deal that Republicans made with the Obama administration. He talked about wasting money on the Iraq war – the signature issue of the Bush era, to which many Republicans in that very audience had once pledged unrelenting fealty – while our roads, airports, and bridges were crumbling (the usual talking points of Washington Democrats). Mrs. Clinton, by contrast, hardly bothered with her usual attacks on the Republican Party, since many of the party’s elites are gingerly backing her. For Republicans who spent many years advocating policies now abandoned with, well, abandon, it was hard to know what to think about a worldview being remade before their very eyes, and a debate without anyone to represent them. Indeed, the only traditional Republican on that stage Monday night was Lester Holt. A candidate dropped the R-bomb Nicole Hemmer is assistant professor at the University of Virginia's Miller Center, co-host of the Past Present podcast and author of Messengers of the Right: Conservative Media and the Transformation of American Politics. It was a first for a modern presidential debate. When Hillary Clinton described Donald Trump’s actions as “racist,” she used a word that has never been used in a televised debate—and likely has never been used in any presidential debate. The charge came during a surprisingly frank discussion of racism from Clinton. In past presidential debates, discussion of race in the United States has often been discussed in the distancing language of “race relations” or “racial problems.” In the past two election cycles, with the first black nominee, then the first black president on the stage, race wasn’t mentioned a single time over the course of six debates. (The closest they came was in 2008, when John McCain expressed his frustration with the suggestion that he was racist.) With discussions of race absent in the last two debate cycles, the depth and nuance Clinton brought to the issue was striking. When asked how she would heal the racial divide in America, Clinton spoke in terms of individual hearts and minds, which she then connected to the larger issue of systemic racism. Clinton is not the first to discuss racism in personal terms. In a 1992 debate, Bill Clinton discussed his personal experience growing up in the segregated south. Hillary Clinton, however, did not just draw from personal experience, she connected the issue of personal prejudice— “implicit bias,” as she put it—to its effect on the pressing issue of discrimination and policing. But where Clinton got revolutionary was in talking about the personal racism of her opponent. It came after the moderator, Lester Holt, asked Trump about his role in perpetuating the birtherism lie. Trump tried once again to pin birtherism on Clinton’s 2008 campaign, and then crowed (falsely) about his role in ending the birther lie. That’s when Clinton went in for the kill. She slammed Trump for his role in perpetuating the “racist birther lie,” then broadened her attacked by pointing to Trump’s own history with discrimination. Noting that in the 1970s he faced two lawsuits from the Justice Department for racial discrimination, Clinton said, “So he has a long record of engaging in racist behavior.” Note that this is different from calling Trump a racist directly. She instead used the label to qualify his words and actions. But the use of the charge in a televised presidential debate is unprecedented, underscoring just how unusual the 2016 race is. Maybe the closest we’ve gotten to a similar divide between the candidates on racial issues was in the debate between Ronald Reagan and Jimmy Carter in 1980. While Carter didn’t claim his opponent was racist, he similarly drew on Reagan’s past: “I noticed that Governor Reagan said that when he was a younger man that there was no knowledge of a racial problem in this country,” Carter said. “Those who suffered from discrimination because of race or sex certainly knew we had a racial problem.” Reagan, much like Trump’s comment on Monday that black and Hispanic people were “living in hell,” pointed to the failures of government spending for young unemployed black people, ending with a specific case: “With regard to the great progress that has been made with this government spending, the rate of black unemployment in Detroit, Michigan, is 56 percent.” Reagan’s Detroit could just as easily be Trump’s Chicago. This is the key difference: Carter hammered Reagan on his failure to agree with policies like unemployment and minimum wage increases; he called his opponent insensitive to these people’s struggles. He did not call him racist. And the uniqueness of the racist charge on stage is due to the uniqueness of this election. Given the Trump campaign’s associations with white supremacist groups and the alt-right, and given Trump’s personal history with discrimination, racism has been front and center in this election. From his slowness to disavow David Duke to the frequency with which his son (and surrogate) retweets racist memes, Trump has created a campaign that provides a safe haven for racists. Critics have long pointed to journalists and politicians’ preference for euphemisms like “racially tinged” or “racially charged” or “insensitive” when the word “racist” could have worked. In this debate, there was no such tip-toeing. Trump sounded like he was talking to black voters. He wasn't. Issac J. Bailey is a columnist at the Sun News in Myrtle Beach, South Carolina. He’s the author of Proud. Black. Southern. (But I Still Don’t Eat Watermelon in front of White People). “African Americans and Hispanics are living in hell,” Trump said Monday night of Democrats’ neglect of the lives of people of color. “You walk down the street and you get shot.” Trump’s point, that the Democratic Party for decades has taken the black vote for granted, rings true in the minds of many black voters. It’s part of the reason I’ve voted for a variety of Republicans myself. “Trump just spoke the gospel about the Democratic Party,” commentator and professor Marc Lamont Hill, an African American activist who has been making the same point for years, tweeted during that exchange. There are Republicans who could have credibly made that point. Rand Paul, who has spoken eloquently about the need for criminal justice reform and racial disparities for years, is one of them. Or just about any of the other 16 GOP presidential candidate. But the Republicans had someone else on stage, someone touting the racial-profiling program known as stop-and-frisk; telling black people they live in Hell; and bragging about the dog whistle that is “law and order.” He rose to national political prominence on the bigotry of birtherism, and took a victory lap on the issue Monday night. Clinton, meanwhile, hit most of the right points, talking about implicit bias and the beauty and power of the African-American church and the need to hold police officers accountable while increasing the level of trust between cops and communities. She has come on strong about gun control policies that are toxic in the Republican Party but are seen as vital among activists who are trying to prevent violence in some of our nation’s largest cities. Her policy points were clear: No more mandatory minimums, no more private prisons and a presidential budget that will include money to help better train cops on implicit bias and how to better handle the mentally ill. Young millennials of color probably didn’t get fired up about her responses and likely wanted more, but the contrast with what Trump is offering was too stark to miss. Trump, it was clear, was still just using people of color as political props while promising to make their lives worse with race-based and criminal justice policies that have already destroyed or harmed millions of black families. He still wasn’t talking to us, or even about us, only a distorted version of who bigots believe we are. When asked about what he could do to bring a racial healing to the country, Trump answered: “I say nothing.” That was his most honest moment of the night. On Hillary's foreign policy vulnerability, Trump whiffed Aaron David Miller is vice president for new initiatives and a distinguished scholar at the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars. Paradoxically, nowhere were the potential risks greater for Hillary Clinton than in the segment relating to national security and foreign policy. This, after all, was her sweet spot: As a former secretary of State, senator and first lady, she knew had both practical experience and a substantive grasp of the issues. All candidate Donald Trump needed to do tonight was appear somewhat knowledgeable, keep his calm, and act presidential and poised as a potential Commander in Chief. And despite the low bar, Mr. Trump failed to clear it. Having worked for Republicans and Democrats (and voted for both, too) I say this not as partisan or cheerleader; but as an objective and common sense read on the evening. Indeed, the last 30 minutes of the debate—the “Securing America” section—was Mr. Trump’s weakest and seemed to validate his detractors’ criticism that he’s uniquely and stunningly unprepared, ill-suited temperamentally, and not ready for the prime time of the presidency. On Iraq, Mr. Trump fell back repeatedly on the factually inaccurate notion that he had never supported the Iraq war. He doubled down and angrily asserted a revisionist version of his stance, referencing conversations with Fox News hosts that backed up his own position. In response, both Lester Holt and Mrs. Clinton called him out—leaving him flatfooted and without a compelling comeback. On ISIS, Mr. Trump fell back again on a policy response that was vacuous and incoherent. Mrs. Clinton’s policy approach was not her best moment either. But Mr. Trump again raised the fantastical notion that if only the U.S. would have taken Iraq’s oil, ISIS could have been defeated. Along with the extraordinary assertion earlier in the hour when he accused Mrs. Clinton of ineffectively fighting ISIS all of her adult life—a remarkable howler—Mr. Trump turned in one of his most rambling performances on an issue of great concern, particularly to his own constituency. On NATO and U.S. allies, Mr. Trump tripped up on a point that has resonated effectively for him—that NATO allies aren’t paying their fare share for their defense—by insisting that NATO allies weren’t involved in counter-terrorism efforts alongside the U.S. Mrs. Clinton countered that the only time NATO’s Article 5—the agreement that an attack on one NATO member is an attack on all of them—has been invoked was when U.S. allies committed to join the U.S. military efforts in response to 9/11. On Cyber, Mr. Trump failed to address what moderator Lester Holt described as a central challenge to U.S. security. Indeed, his initial response to the question — that 200 admirals and generals and ICE had endorsed him—was off-message and particularly ineffective. His defense of Russia against Mrs. Clinton’s accusation that Moscow may have been responsible for much of the hacking was particularly self-serving, as was the implication that Russia did the country a favor by exposing the DNC’s bias against Bernie Sanders. For Mr. Trump’s detractors (and a good many undecided voters, I suspect), the last 30 minutes of the debate confirmed an image of an off-balance, rambling, flustered and frustrated candidate hoping somehow that the debate would end. Instead of conveying the image of a strong leader remaining calm under pressure, what we saw was a volatile combustible candidate trumpeting his winning temperament. That this quasi-meltdown came during a discussion of national security policy where Americans expect a calm-but-tough and self-confident president created even more of a deficit for a candidate who simply wasn’t ready for primetime. Trump dug in on “Stop-and-Frisk” while also dodging Richard Primus is the Theodore J. St. Antoine Collegiate Professor at the University of Michigan Law School. Follow him on Twitter at @Richard_Primus. Donald Trump returned to one of his campaign talking points tonight, praising the stop-and-frisk policing policy that New York City implemented under Mayors Rudolph Giuliani and Michael Bloomberg. When moderator Lester Holt intervened on a point of fact—something he restrained himself from doing for much of the debate—and pointed out to Trump that “stop-and-frisk” had been held unconstitutional, Trump doubled down. Stop-and-frisk had not been held unconstitutional, Trump claimed: the case had been assigned to a judge who was biased against the police, and the ruling wasn’t upheld on appeal, because New York City Mayor Bill DeBlasio decided to discontinue stop-and-frisk rather than continuing the litigation. As a matter of debating tactics, this was a skillful parry by Trump. It’s true that an appellate panel criticized the judge who handled the stop-and-frisk case—Judge Shira Scheindlin—for compromising her appearance of impartiality in the case, largely through comments she made to the media. (It later cleared her of any misconduct.) And it is also true that no appellate court ever upheld the ruling, because New York City declined to appeal. Trump, as he often does, succeeded in putting just enough fog around the issue to make it seem uncertain. And as a matter of politics, it’s clear why Trump would dig in. Stop-and-frisk resonates powerfully with voters who want to hear a get-tough, law-and-order candidate. But Trump’s move was also something of a dodge. It didn’t acknowledge the reality that the court whose ruling is still the last legal judgment on the matter did hold stop-and-frisk unconstitutional. Nor did it grapple with the problem of racial discrimination that lay at the heart of the constitutional challenge to the stop-and-frisk policy. The case, formally called Floyd v. City of New York, was built on mammoth piles of statistical analysis showing that New York City police systematically stopped and frisked nonwhite people at rates far higher than they stopped and frisked white people, and the differences couldn’t be explained away by other factors. The case also featured testimony from police sources directly confirming that New York City police were often instructed to treat nonwhite people as suspicious in circumstances where white people doing the same things would not have been regarded as suspicious. In other words, Floyd rested on a thorough and detailed record showing racial profiling by the police. Public safety improved in New York City dramatically during recent decades, and the city’s police officers and public-safety policymakers deserve an important share of the credit—though it’s hard to say how much stop-and-frisk contributed to the improvement. After all, stop-and-frisk was instituted after crime in New York had already fallen substantially, and crime continued to go down after the policy was terminated. And given the factual record, it is hard to see how one can endorse New York’s stop-and-frisk policy without endorsing racial discrimination in policing. Which might, for a certain constituency, be exactly the point.
I was a Democrat all my life. I came to Washington to serve President John Kennedy and Attorney General Robert Kennedy. When the president was murdered and his brother struck off on his own, I joined his Senate campaign and staff as his legislative assistant and speechwriter, until his presidential campaign ended with his own assassination. I ran on a (losing) Democratic ticket in the New York state elections of 1970. When I was working to enact my own program of police reform in the 1980s and 1990s, then-Governor Bill Clinton was chairman of my National Committee for the Police Corps. This year, I will vote to elect Donald Trump as president of the United States. Story Continued Below So profound a change, and a decent respect for old friendships, requires me to deliver a public accounting for this decision. Here it is. John and Robert Kennedy devoted their greatest commitments and energies to the prevention of war and the preservation of peace. To them that was not an abstract formula but the necessary foundation of human life. But today’s Democrats have become the Party of War: a home for arms merchants, mercenaries, academic war planners, lobbyists for every foreign intervention, promoters of color revolutions, failed generals, exploiters of the natural resources of corrupt governments. We have American military bases in 80 countries, and there are now American military personnel on the ground in about 130 countries, a remarkable achievement since there are only 192 recognized countries. Generals and admirals announce our national policies. Theater commanders are our principal ambassadors. Our first answer to trouble or opposition of any kind seems always to be a military movement or action. Nor has the Democratic Party candidate for president this year, Hillary Clinton, sought peace. Instead she has pushed America into successive invasions, successive efforts at “regime change.” She has sought to prevent Americans from seeking friendship or cooperation with President Vladimir Putin of Russia by characterizing him as “another Hitler.” She proclaims herself ready to invade Syria immediately after taking the oath of office. Her shadow War Cabinet brims with the architects of war and disaster for the past decades, the neocons who led us to our present pass, in Iraq, in Afghanistan, Syria, Libya, Yemen, in Ukraine, unrepentant of all past errors, ready to resume it all with fresh trillions and fresh blood. And the Democrats she leads seem intent on worsening relations with Russia, for example by sending American warships into the Black Sea, or by introducing nuclear weapons ever closer to Russia itself. In fact, in all the years of the so-called War on Terror, only one potential American president has had the intelligence, the vision, the sheer sanity to see that America cannot fight the entire world at once; who sees that America’s natural and necessary allies in this fight must include the advanced and civilized nations that are most exposed and experienced in their own terror wars, and have the requisite military power and willingness to use it. Only one American candidate has pointed out how senseless it is to seek confrontation with Russia and China, at the same time that we are trying to suppress the very jihadist movements that they also are attacking. That candidate is Donald Trump. Throughout this campaign, he has said that as president, he would quickly sit down with President Putin and seek relaxation of tensions between our nations, and possible collaboration in the fight against terrorists. On this ground alone, he marks himself as greatly superior to all his competitors, earlier in the primaries and now in the general election. It must also be said: Mr. Trump is an imperfect candidate, and he would surely be an imperfect president. He is crude, often vulgar. He has areas of great ignorance. He insults people and inflicts unnecessary harm. He would be twice the candidate he is if he used half the words. He is often intemperate; though it is not Trump but his opponent who is so intemperate as to compare Putin’s moves in Ukraine to what Hitler did—an insult that throughout all the Cold War and to this day, no American president has ever offered to any Soviet or Russian leader, not even the enormous butcher Josef Stalin, with whom in fact we joined to win the Second World War. And it is not Mr. Trump but Michael Morell, a former CIA director now high in the councils of the Democratic candidate, who has publicly suggested, without rebuke from anyone, that we should begin “killing Russians,” a doubly illegal act of war. Moreover Trump marks himself as a man of singular political courage, willing to defy the hysteria of the Washington war hawks, the establishment and the mainstream media who daily describe him as virtually anti-American for daring to voice ideas and opinions at variance with their one-note devotion to war. *** John Kennedy admired political courage. He began his first campaign for Congress at the height of the Cold War by saying, “Above all, day and night, with every ounce of ingenuity and industry we possess, we must work for peace. We must not have another war.” Years later, in the Cuban Missile Crisis of 1962, he and his brother had to overcome great opposition from their own military commanders, government officials and other public leaders, to prevent a war with the Soviet Union: there were 13 men in the ExComm room, and Robert Kennedy said that had any 1 of 8 of them been president, the crisis would have exploded in nuclear war. But within a year thereafter, deeply affected by the barely-averted catastrophe, President Kennedy had forged a close working relationship with Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev, spoke all over the country to promote peace policies, and delivered his historic American University speech of 1963. Our “strategy of peace,” he said, was “not a Pax Americana enforced on the world by American weapons of war.” Rather it must be founded on negotiation, cooperation in areas of mutual interest, and recognition that “our most basic common link is that we all inhabit this small planet. We all breathe the same air. We all cherish our children’s future. And we are all mortal.” As to our great adversary the Soviet Union, he said, “we must reexamine our own attitude—as individuals and as a nation—for our attitude is as essential as theirs.” Six months later he was dead; and it was Robert Kennedy who must resume the effort. Robert Kennedy made ratification of the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty the early centerpiece of his Senate career. But as President Lyndon Johnson escalated the war in Vietnam, it was that war which forced Robert Kennedy to make his doomed race for the presidency. Wherever he campaigned in 1968, to virtually every audience, he spoke of the loss, the horror, the infinite tragedy of that war, in words that could be and must be repeated today, after 15 consecutive years of wars all over the world. “Our brave young men,” he said, “are dying in the swamps of Southeast Asia. Which of them might have written a poem? Which of them might have cured cancer? Which of them might have played in a World Series or given us the gift of laughter from the stage or helped build a bridge or a university? Which of them would have taught a child to read? It is our responsibility to let these men live ... It is indecent if they die because of the empty vanity of their country.” He also urged that we consider the Vietnamese mother, desperately trying to shield her baby from the fire from the sky, sent by machines from a country she could barely understand. He demanded of his colleagues, on the Senate floor, to answer what gave us the right to destroy remote villages on the other side of the world, to arrogate to ourselves the power of God, the rule of life and death over others. “All this is our responsibility,” he said, “not just a nation’s responsibility but yours and mine.” John and Robert Kennedy were no pacifists, nor ignorant of the realities of power. But they required that great power be used with great precision and restraint, and with humility. Both knew that their own lives were hostage to the possibility of assassination, yet they kept trying to guide us toward peace up to the moments of their death. The legacy of JFK & RFK is “being abandoned by today’s Democratic Party.” Theirs is the legacy that is being abandoned by today’s Democratic Party. We have broken one Middle Eastern nation after another. Hundreds of cities and villages lie in ruins, hundreds of thousands are dead, millions are refugees; and, for all the press and political thundering against the menace of ISIS, Al Qaeda, or Islamic terrorism generally, our military leaders offer no prospects of victory. They cannot tell us what victory would require or mean; though they are quick to assure us, as in Libya today, that this conflict will go on indefinitely. They cannot even explain how some of our current allies (example Turkey) are bombing and shelling others of our purported allies (example the Kurds). So a Democratic administration, carrying on the work of the Bush presidency, without thought and without question, year after year, has kept sending more young men and women into the grinder. Scores of Democratic elected officials once spoke and worked tirelessly to end our disastrous war in Vietnam. Today there is only the voice of the marvelous Democratic member of Congress Tulsi Gabbard, a reservist who has twice deployed to Iraq and knows of what she speaks. And it is a Democratic president who sends an endless parade of drones to nations all over the world, flaunting for all to see America’s unique military technology, coupled with our seeming complete carelessness in how that technological prowess destroys people and nations. Most amazing of all, however, is that as we proclaim that the terrorists threaten Europe, threaten the United States, threaten Western civilization itself—as we face all this, we do not concentrate our military might against this unique threat. Where are we sending our warriors, our ships, our planes? Why to Russia, which the U.S. general who commands NATO has announced is the prime “existential” threat to America. As you read this, ground, air and naval forces of NATO, led and largely paid for by the United States, have been moving about the Western borders of Russia, carrying out the largest military maneuvers since World War II. At the same time, our most powerful carriers and naval air forces have been steaming about the South China Sea, there perhaps to find encounters of unknowable potential with the rising forces of China, our second said to be “existential” enemy. There are no Russian terrorists ravaging France or Italy or America. ISIS is not to be found on Russian soil. The only Russian terrorists who have attacked the West are the Islamists whom President Putin first asked us to join in the fight against in 1999. The only Chinese terrorists are Uighurs who are attacking not us but China itself. It would seem elementary common sense that America would have long since sought, not to fight with Russia and China, but to cooperate with both to suppress the terrorists and the terrorism that have plagued us for over a generation, including the ISIS that is terrorizing Europe today. Former Defense Secretary William Perry, a Democrat, warns that we are now, today, “on the threshold of a new Cold War. ... a new nuclear arms race. ... the likelihood of a nuclear catastrophe is actually greater than it was during the Cold War.” Surely the wars and threats of war already on our horizon would be more than enough for any empire; and our empire, as every thoughtful person knows, is already staggering under the immeasurable loads of debt piled up by America, by our governments, our corporations, our households, our students, and our promises of unlimited benefits in the future. The years of constant combat have exhausted our military. False hopes and vain promises of victory have burnt up the caches of idealism and patriotic commitment with which we began the wars a generation ago. Our forces are worn out, especially the elite warrior units that have been constantly deployed for more than a decade. But, ominously, there is more to come, more that already stares us in the face. The dire events of this summer have shown us the true danger that lurks here at home. This is not a danger imported from Syria or Iraq or Russia. Our greatest menace is the danger of our own history, our inheritance to the latest day. For the fact is that while we chased a chimera of peace and justice in lands far from our own, imposing ourselves and our concepts on strangers who rejected our teachings, we were neglecting our own country and our own people, our own neighbors, our own children and our own friends. And now we can see the result. The violence we took to other countries bounces back to our own. The money we squandered on bombs in Iraq was not available for our own schools. The brilliant young men and women, who gave up their bodies and their lives on distant battlefields, were not here to teach and mentor and guide the young people of the ghetto. They were not here to police the mean streets, to suppress and eliminate the crime that is the greatest cause of poverty. They were not here to bring the protection and the blessings of the American Constitution to the least among us. They were not here to protect American cities and enrich American lives. And they were not here to keep Americans and American children from murdering American police officers. This is our true present danger. *** So my hope for America is this. First, we must begin immediately to end our involvement in endless, unnecessary and therefore murderous wars. We need our best young people to help us here at home. We need to stop the reckless military spending on more destructive armaments. We need to breathe free again. We must and will defend civilized order against its deadly enemies. ISIS and its brethren must be eliminated: no quarter, no hesitation. But we will need to engage all civilized peoples in our mutual defense. We must abandon foolish skirmishes and petty jealousies. We must end our reflexive efforts to dominate other developed nations, especially Russia and China. President Kennedy told us over and over that our own peace and security, in this dangerous world, would depend upon peaceful and cooperative relations with Russia and the Russian people; indeed, at the end of his presidency, Ronald Reagan said the same. Fools in Washington, intent on world domination, would have us ignore that wisdom now. But it is the wisdom that we need to preserve the world and our children’s future. Second, we must at the same time begin to recover our domestic peace. There are many ills to be cured, many shortcomings to be righted. But nothing can be accomplished in the midst of a war against police, an insurrection against the Constitution itself. Our clear priority is reinforcement of our police and police departments. We need many more and better police. We need them to be better trained, not as warriors but as shepherds, as leaders and teachers of the young, as peacemakers in communities that have not known real peace for many years. We need our very best young people, not getting their legs blown off by IEDs in Afghanistan, but saving all of our lives in St. Louis and Chicago and Detroit and Baton Rouge and all the other wasted places in our own land. Donald Trump has been mocked mercilessly for saying, “America first.” But to demand that all the actions of government, at home or abroad, be first directed at the interests and well-being of our own country is not old-fashioned or outmoded. Rather it represents the deepest wisdom and tradition of American statesmen from the founders on. Only with a clear vision of what is truly in the interests of our nation and our fellow citizens, and a full commitment to those interests, can we act wisely at home and in the world beyond. Finally, our president has told us we must lower our voices. Of course we do not hope for domestic discord. But the people of the United States have perhaps stood silent for too long. The elites of opinion and government have not hesitated to offer us instruction, from the heights of their power and eminence. These are the people who have led us into useless foreign war and limitless domestic disaster. This president tells us that we must now spend another trillion dollars on new nuclear weapons systems, and when we ask who will be the target for these world-destroying weapons, says only, “There can be no business as usual with Russia.” Surely he must have misspoken, for anyone can see we are on a course of madness. We simply cannot fight the entire world, Russia and China and all the nations of the Mideast, and fight a war at home all at the same time. And therefore we citizens must not be silent, we must speak as with one great overwhelming voice, a voice as powerful as Washington, as Jefferson, as Lincoln, as Martin Luther King: Return to the wisdom of the founders, who fought necessary wars to defend the Union, but sought no foreign conquests. Do not step over the threshold of a new Cold War, a new nuclear arms race with Russia and China, but seek to enlist them in common ventures to resist the forces of terror and chaos that threaten all civilization. Commit to our own domestic peace and security, rather than persist in a vain effort to control the lives and affairs of 200 foreign nations. This, as I understand it, is the platform of Donald Trump. It was not the Republican Party platform, and he had to overcome much opposition within his party to gain the nomination. But it is his platform. It is the platform he has restated again and again, with determination, and with the courage and persistence to outlast his critics. It is a platform that, even in these troubled days, could fulfill the hopes of the greatest Americans of all parties. Well may we seek reassurance whether Mr. Trump has the kind of cool judgment and self-possession that the presidency requires; the judgment that comes to the fore in crisis, that saves a nation or perhaps a world. No one can ever truly know how a future president will react to such enormous pressures. But Trump has given some evidence. He set himself a unique course toward the office, disdaining conventional wisdom, speaking more truth about politics and about America than any conventional consultant or adviser thought prudent or wise. And yet it is his independence, his willingness to name facts however unpleasant, together with his great political courage, that can give us hope and even some confidence that he may be up to the job. Perhaps most important, he has proven that he is not intimidated by the generals and admirals who have up to this day had their unimpeded way with our wars and our budgets, to the immense loss of both. Flawed as he may be, Trump is telling more of the truth than politicians of our day. Most important, he offers a path away from constant war, a path of businesslike accommodation with all reasonable people and nations, concentrating our forces and efforts against the true enemies of civilization. Thus, to dwell on his faults and errors is to evade the great questions of war and peace, life and death for our people and our country. You and I will have to compensate for his deficits of civility, in return for peace, we may hope as Lincoln hoped, among ourselves and with all nations. Truly, America first, last and always; for ourselves and for our posterity. These are the reasons why I will vote for Donald Trump for president.
President Barack Obama hasn't changed his assessment of Donald Trump after Monday night's debate: The GOP nominee, he said on Tuesday, lacks the preparation and temperament for the presidency and can't be trusted to address serious threats like nuclear weapons and climate change. The president unloaded on Trump during an interview with Ryan Seacrest in the wake of Trump's showdown with Hillary Clinton, which he watched from the Treaty Room of the White House. Story Continued Below Obama touted Clinton’s performance and her qualifications for the presidency, saying “she’s serious and does her homework.” And he blasted Trump for not having the “preparations and the temperament or the core values of inclusion and making everybody, you know, have opportunities that would take our country forward.” The president said his two biggest concerns for his daughters’ generation are the spread of nuclear weapons and the onset of climate change — adding that Trump falls short on both. "I get worried when I hear somebody like Donald Trump start saying, 'Well, I don't necessarily know whether Japan or Korea should be protected by us. Maybe they should get their own nuclear weapons.' That shows somebody who doesn't pay attention to these issues, and you don't necessarily want close to the nuclear button,” Obama said. (Trump objected to a similar characterization of his views on East Asia during Monday's debate, saying it was "wrong.") Obama also took a shot at Trump for suggesting, in a November 2012 tweet, that climate change is a hoax created by China. The concept of global warming was created by and for the Chinese in order to make U.S. manufacturing non-competitive. — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) November 6, 2012 "When you hear somebody like Trump say he thinks this is a plot by the Chinese, that this is a fraud and a hoax, when 99 percent of scientists are saying you've got to do something about it," Obama said, "that worries me." Kellyanne Conway, Trump's campaign manager, said in a TV interview on Tuesday that he believes climate change is "naturally occurring."
Donald Trump on Tuesday evening declared that the nation's African-American communities "are absolutely in the worst shape that they’ve ever been in before, ever, ever, ever." As he has done regularly of late, Trump attacked the Democratic politicians who overwhelmingly control America’s urban centers as having failed the African-American populations who live there. Before a mostly-white audience at a rally in rural North Carolina, Trump rhetorically asked black voters, “what do you have to lose?” Story Continued Below "We’re going to make our country wealthy again. We’re going to make our country safe again. We’re going to rebuild our inner cities because our African-American communities are absolutely in the worst shape that they’ve ever been in before, ever, ever, ever,” Trump said. “You take a look at the inner cities, you get no education, you get no jobs, you get shot walking down the street. They’re worse, I mean honestly, places like Afghanistan are safer than some of our inner cities.” While Trump told the crowd that his message has been resonating with African-American voters, his poll numbers suggest otherwise. The Manhattan billionaire has struggled mightily with minority voters throughout his White House bid, polling often in the single digits among black voters and in some cases registering zero percent support.
As he made clear once again in Monday night’s debate, Donald Trump sees the world in zero-sum terms—when one person or one country wins, another always loses. Asked by NBC’s Lester Holt how to help American workers, Trump responded in his usual way, saying America was getting beaten by everyone else around the world, and the NAFTA free-trade deal was “one of the worst things that ever happened to the manufacturing industry. ... We have to stop these countries from stealing our companies and our jobs.” Hillary Clinton, by contrast, sees the world as a place where all boats can rise at once—as she also made plain Monday by harking back to Bill Clinton’s pro-globalization presidency, which included NAFTA. ‘I think my husband did a pretty good job in the 1990s. I think a lot about what worked and how we can make it work again,” she said. “Incomes went up for everybody.” Story Continued Below That is the election of 2016 distilled down to its essence. “My whole life is about winning. … I always win,” Trump says in explaining why he’s running. The economic plan on his website begins with the rubric “Winning the Global Competition.” You don’t get more zero-sum than that. Despite the view of most economists that the economy overall is not a zero-sum game—but rather a complex mechanism that, if run right, can raise everyone’s welfare at once–Trump’s message has resonated in an era when it’s become common to speak of winners and losers in the global economy. The zero-sum message fits neatly with the widespread reality that many millions have been severely harmed by the transitions in our economy over the past decades. As Danny Vinik recently noted in Politico, the gap between those who are thriving in the new economies of today and those who are not continues to grow. The recent Census Report that showed a 5.2 percent increase in real median income between 2014 and 2015 was taken by many as proof that the narrative of an America in decline and losing is fundamentally flawed. Statistically, if the United States is one unit, that is true. But 320 million people have a huge variety of experiences ill-suited to one size fit all numbers, and while the averages and medians may go up or down, that says nothing about the lived experience of tens of millions who diverge from that one number. And the experience of a goodly portion of what was the industrial heartland and what was the epicenter of the mid-2000s housing bubble is unequivocally negative, insecure and economically grim. Hence, you have the sense that those who perceive themselves as winners in the global economy are trending towards the Democrats, while those who think they’ve lost are going toward Trump. There is some truth there, but that isn’t a sufficient explanation for why, for instance, massive percentages of African-Americans and Latinos, who have certainly struggled economically and socially, support Clinton. No, what is most striking about this election is the degree to which the electorate is polarized not between winners and losers per se but between those who view the world in such zero-sum terms, like Trump, and those who sense that it is possible to multiply the numbers of “winners” without creating a commensurate number of losers. That has been the mantra of Clinton and her predecessors in the Democratic Party, and it was also the foundation of Ronald Reagan’s appeal. The belief that the economic pie can expand year after year and embrace ever more people has also backed up by a generation of economists who argue that open trade and globalization makes the whole world wealthier. Hillary Clinton has continued to deliver that message. At the Democratic Convention in July she spoke of an America thriving with economic opportunity, with millions working hard and succeeding. President Obama has also been at pains to highlight the innovations of Silicon Valley, the revival of many cities in the past decade, and the substantial gains on the other side of 2008-2009 financial crisis. Judging from polls and surveys, those who fit that description – clustered and concentrated in large metro areas, and on the coasts especially – support Clinton and the Democrats by wide margins. *** Is either side right? Most economists see the liberal internationalist order backed by the law establishing the rules of engagement in free markets as a key element to the emergence of a several billion-strong global middle class. In general, that view is correct. But it still tends to gloss over just how wrenching it is to be among the tens of millions in the United States caught in the vortex of rapid change. It does these global laggards no good to say that they have bigger homes and longer lives and more possessions than their grandparents. They legitimately fear that they will lose those homes, be unable to afford healthcare, that they will see their communities crumble and their children’s hopes extinguished. And they see a world of others who appear to be doing better, who seem to be winning, and a political establishment that has promised everything and delivered what feels like nothing. The voice of the so-called losers in this global competition is as loud, politically speaking, as it’s been in a long time. Hence Trump (not to mention Bernie Sanders’ powerful insurgency in the Democratic primaries). The last time so many in the United States were so sour about the inequities between those winning (the few) and those losing was at the dawn of the Progressive Movement in the 1890s. Many early Progressives rebelled against an elite vision of Social Darwinism then prevalent which said that the strong and the best thrive while the rest manage to eke out what they can. In 1896, the scion of that view was William Jennings Bryan, who painted a picture of the United States every bit as bleak and dark as Trump with his thundering about elites on the coasts crucifying hard worker labor and farmers on a “cross of gold.” Bryan lost two elections, and his zero-sum view never came to dominate American politics. Much of his message about inequality and the need to reform the system, however, was taken up by Theodore Roosevelt and generations of both Republicans and Democrats. Some of it harsh and redistributive, focused on trust busting and exerting American influence and prestige abroad, and much of it was about expanding opportunities for all. Trump also enjoys a good deal of sub-rosa support among business leaders and Wall Street, who certainly haven’t lack for economic benefits in today’s world. They aren’t supporting him with their money, but many of them detest Clinton and see Trump as expressing their world view. For Wall Street, that makes some sense, in that in the wake of the financial crisis, key aspects of finance are becoming less popular and less profitable. In that sense, finance, which was the winning sector of the economy from the mid-1980s through the mid-2000s, has been losing ground. The idea of gain and loss, and that every trade represents a winner and a loser, is deeply embedded in aspects of Wall Street. We have, of course, no idea which candidate and which worldview will prevail in six weeks. But if Trump wins, he should remember: it is impossible to find any society and any point in American history where a zero-sum formula has led to increased affluence for the many and increased security. Zero-sum most often begets zero-sum, whether in the form of trade wars or actual wars. By contrast, the profound strength of the United States has been a vision of an open economy that thrives on education and innovation and an open world where the strength invariably overcomes the zero-sum countries and alliances that pepper the planet and always have. A vision of winners and losers invariably begets more winners and losers, and little else.
Toledo, Ohio (CNN)Donald Trump wants to take the controversial policy of stop-and-frisk to Chicago. Trump touted the much-maligned program during a Fox News town hall that was pre-taped for Wednesday night but didn't air, responding to a question about how he would stem "violence in the black community." He clarified on "Fox and Friends" Thursday morning that he was specifically proposing expanding the program only to Chicago, highlighting the city's gun violence epidemic and comparing the situation to New York in the 1990s. "(Former NYPD Commissioner) Ray Kelly did a great job and New York was not in a Chicago situation, but it was really in trouble. It was in bad shape, crime wise, with all the shootings and everything," he said. "And it really -- Rudy Giuliani did a great job as mayor, and they really straightened things out with stop-and-frisk and it was used further by the next mayor, Bloomberg, and now they just recently -- not so recently, but fairly recently -- they stopped it." Under stop and frisk, police stop people on the street who they deem suspicious and think may be involved in criminal activity and search them on the spot for guns and illegal drugs, among other things. Trump said the program worked and that it could impact gun violence in Chicago. "Now Chicago is out of control. I was really referring to Chicago stop and frisk. They asked me about Chicago. And I was talking about stop and frisk for Chicago," he said. Trump had praised the practice -- which a federal judge ruled in New York in 2013 was unconstitutional, and unlawfully targeted blacks and Latinos, although it was not banned outright -- in similar terms at the town hall Wednesday night. "One of the things I'd do ... is I would do stop-and-frisk. I think you have to. We did it in New York, it worked incredibly well and you have to be proactive and, you know, you really help people sort of change their mind automatically," Trump said in response to an audience member's question. Trump has previously touted stop-and-frisk policies, but his full-throated endorsement of it Wednesday -- in which he called for its widespread implementation -- came as Trump pressed forward with his pitch to African-American voters, appearing at a predominantly black church alongside several of his prominent black surrogates. New York mayor: Donald Trump wrong about 'stop-and-frisk' That pitch to African-Americans hasn't come without a series of slip-ups, the latest of which came as Trump invited the prominent boxing promoter Don King, who is black, to introduce him at the church event -- only to have the celebrity use the N-word at the podium. And on Tuesday, Trump described the state of African-American communities as being in "absolutely the worst shape that they've ever been in before. Ever. Ever. Ever." and comparing the US's inner cities to Afghanistan. While Trump has pledged to bring jobs and safety to the inner cities, he has offered few specifics as to how he would address those issues. But Trump has called for beefing up the number of police officers in inner cities and argued that police officers need more latitude to do their jobs and backing from political figures -- a push not necessarily consistent with African-Americans' frustrations over the spate of police shootings against unarmed black men, which have rocked the country. "You have to have, in my opinion -- I see what's going on here, I see what's going on in Chicago -- I think stop-and-frisk. In New York City it was so incredible, the way it worked. Now, we had a very good mayor, but New York City was incredible, the way that worked, so I think that could be one step you could do," Trump said Wednesday. The real estate mogul's call for introducing stop-and-frisk as a prescription for reducing "black-on-black crime" -- as the questioner put it in the town hall -- is also likely to face a stiff rebuke from minority leaders. Many have opposed the practice during its use by New York City police as minorities were disproportionally targeted. In August 2013 a federal judge ruled that the NYPD's stop-and-frisk policy violated the constitutional rights of minorities in New York. She didn't order an outright ban, but called for reform of the policy and outside oversight. The city under Mayor Michael Bloomberg appealed that ruling, but those efforts were dropped under de Blasio's administration, and the city is participating in an ongoing reform and oversight process, which is supervised by a federal monitor. "The United States Constitution guarantees the rights of all Americans, and the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York already ruled in 2013 that stop-and-frisk, as previously practiced in New York, was unconstitutional," said Rep. Elijah Cummings, D-Maryland. "These policies erode trust between law enforcement officers and the communities they serve. Plus, they have proven to be ineffective." A November 2013 report from the New York attorney general revealed just 3% of stop-and-frisk stops led to convictions between 2009 and 2012. And in more than 5 million stops between 2002 and 2013, police recovered guns less than 0.02% of the time, according to police department data compiled by the New York Civil Liberties Union in a 2014 report. Stop-and-frisk was instituted by one of Trump's most prominent supporters and advisers, former New York City Mayor Rudy Giuliani. Giuliani has continued to defend the practice in recent years, rebutting the statistics showing little correlation between stop-and-frisk and a reduction in crime. Giuliani frequently joins Trump on the campaign trail -- where he is introduced as "America's mayor" -- and argues that Trump will bring the same tough-on-crime approach to the presidency. Trump recently praised the stop-and-frisk policy in an interview earlier this month in Philadelphia where he was asked about the African-American communities' concerns that stop-and-frisk amounts to racial profiling. "Well, I think you are going to have it. So many people are being killed in Philadelphia, that it's actually incredible when you look at the stats. I think you have to have it," he said in an interview with the local NBC station. Trump pressed forward with his pitch to African-American voters Wednesday afternoon during a rally in Toledo, Ohio -- where he again described black lives in the US in bleak terms. "To the African-American community, I say: vote for Donald J. Trump. I will fix it -- and I say, honestly, what do you have to lose? It's not gonna get any worse. It's terrible. The crime, the bad education, the no jobs. What do you have to lose? Believe me, I will fix it. I'm gonna fix it," Trump said. But New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio said Thursday that the belief that stop-and-frisk caused the city's crime rate to plummet is false. "I understand that people say that, (but) that's just not the history," he told CNN's Alisyn Camerota on "New Day." The mayor said it was former New York City Police Department Commissioner Bill Bratton promoting community policing in 1994 that led to the decrease of crime in the city. "That's what changed things in New York City," de Blasio said. "The bottom line is it (stop-and-frisk) created a huge line of division between police and communities." "We ended that unconstitutional use of stop-and-frisk, that overuse of stop-and-frisk," he added. De Blasio said that crime has actually decreased since the city all but ended stop-and-frisk three years ago. And that Trump's facts on policing are inaccurate and would reverse the progress that the city has made, the mayor said. "Donald Trump talks about stop-and-frisk like he knows the facts," he said. "He has had no experience with policing, no experience with public safety." "He should really be careful because if we reinstituted stop-and-frisk all over this country, you'd see a lot more tension between police and communities," de Blasio added. CORRECTION: An earlier version of this story misstated whether New York City is appealing the federal judge's 2013 ruling on stop-and-frisk. The city appealed the ruling at the time, but has since dropped that effort and is participating in an ongoing reform and oversight process. CNN's Eugene Scott contributed to this report.
When is the first general election presidential debate? The first general election presidential debate of 2016 will be held at Hofstra University in Hempstead, New York on Sept. 26. Story Continued Below What time is the debate and how long is it? The debate will start at 9:00 p.m. Eastern Time and run for 90 minutes without commercial breaks. How can I watch the debate? It will be broadcast on all of the major television networks, as well as the websites for major cable news channels and C-SPAN. Who will participate in the debate? Former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and celebrity real estate mogul Donald Trump. No other candidates qualified. Who will moderate the debate? Lester Holt, who anchors "NBC Nightly News," will be the moderator. It’s his second time serving in that role in the 2016 presidential cycle. Holt was also a moderator for the Democratic primary debate on January 17. On February 15, 2015 Holt became the substitute anchor of NBC Nightly News after Brian Williams was suspended. Four months later he became the permanent anchor. What is the format of the debate? The debate will be divided into six segments of 15 minutes each. Each segment will start with a question from Holt, after which each candidates will have two minutes for an initial response and then will be allowed to respond to each other. On Monday, the Commission on Presidential Debates announced the tentative topics for the debate: “America's direction,” “achieving prosperity,” and “securing America.” The topics are subject to change based on news developments, according to the commission. Why aren't Jill Stein or Gary Johnson participating in the debate? Libertarian Party presidential nominee Gary Johnson and Green Party presidential nominee Jill Stein were not invited by the presidential debate commission. The commission said it would only invite candidates that averaged 15 percent in five national polls it selected. Neither Johnson nor Stein made that threshold. What's at stake for Hillary Clinton? The debate is Clinton’s chance to turn the page on a few weeks during which Trump has eaten much of the polling lead she built following her convention. Clinton’s camp has also been counting on her policy knowledge and debate experience to help her expose Trump’s weaknesses, but the Democratic candidate also comes in facing higher expectations than Trump. What's at stake for Donald Trump? Trump has been accused lacking policy gravitas and self-restraint, and both of those perceived weaknesses could be exposed in a debate, where candidates will be grilled on their familiarity with issues foreign and domestic and be expected to keep composed under rhetorical assault from their opponents. Trump has the advantage, however, of low expectations: At several turns in the presidential campaign, even modest pivots away from his bombastic primary style were hailed as pivots to professionalism, and a similar self-restraint — provided he still hits the high notes his supporters are expected — could help him clear the low bar again. What is the most watched debate in presidential history? In 1980 the debate between President Jimmy Carter and Republican presidential nominee Ronald Reagan garnered a viewership of 80.6 million people, the largest television audience for a debate since Nielsen Ratings began collecting viewership data in 1976. In 2012, the first general election presidential debate between President Barack Obama and Republican presidential nominee Mitt Romney attracted about 70 million viewers. What's the most-watched television moment of all time? Super Bowl XLIX in 2015 on NBC is currently the most watched television program in U.S. history, attracting 114 million viewers, according to NBC News. The New England Patriots played against the Seattle Seahawks, winning the game 28-24. Still, that pales in comparison to the estimated 600 million people worldwide who watched Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin make the first moon landing on July 20, 1969, or the estimated 750 million people worldwide that watched Prince Charles of Wales marry Lady Diana Spencer on July 29, 1981.
When Donald Trump said he was hoping for a collapse in the housing market before the Great Recession, it was just smart business sense, he said in the first sharp exchange of the debate. “In fact, Donald was one of the people who rooted for the housing crisis,” Hillary Clinton said when discussing the recovery from the Great Recession. “He said back in 2006, ‘Gee, I hope it does collapse because then I can go in and buy some and make some money. Well it did collapse.” Story Continued Below “That’s called business, by the way,” Trump said, interrupting. But Clinton talked over him. “Nine million people lost their jobs, five million people lost their homes,” she said. Clinton appeared to be referencing when Trump, in 2006, said regarding a crash: “I sort of hope that happens because then people like me would go in and buy.”
WILLIAMSBURG, Va. — Mike Pence stood with no umbrella before about 650 die-hard supporters in an at times torrid rain Tuesday night, and delivered his stump speech over the chants of protesters less than 100 yards from the stage. It was a dramatic scene here in this colonial village/college town, as the skies opened up but did not deter Donald Trump’s running mate. Story Continued Below “You people are awesome,” Pence told the crowd as he took the stage while a steady rain poured down. He acknowledged it was a “moist evening.” When he prepared to leave the stage just over 20 minutes later to work the rope line, he conceded the night was “soggy.” “Tonight, we’re showing the media and showing the world this is a movement that’s going to elect Donald Trump as the next president of the United States,” Pence told the crowd. The outdoor rally meant vulnerability not only to the weather, but also to local permitting ordinances. A throng of about a dozen protesters with Clinton-Kaine signs stood just behind the press pen and sought repeatedly to disrupt the speech. “Pro women, pro choice!” the group chanted at one point. “Monica!” a man yelled at them. At another point the group shouted, “We are all immigrants!” “You’re all idiots!” a man nearby retorted. A chant of “You are racist!” morphed seamlessly into an “America’s already great!” chant. But whenever Pence, in a soaking wet suit, hit his applause lines, the crowd drowned out the protesters. Pence stuck to the message he has been hammering since the weekend, accusing Hillary Clinton and Barack Obama of a foreign policy that opened the doors for the kinds of terrorist attacks that hit New York, New Jersey and Minnesota on Saturday. “You know, theirs is narrative of denial,” Pence said of the administration and the Democrats. “Truth of the matter is we need a president who understands we are in a real fight against terrorists, against radical Islamic terrorism, against the ISIS caliphate. And when Donald Trump becomes president of the United States, we will take the fight to the enemy, we will destroy ISIS at its source and we will defeat radical Islamic terrorism wherever it emerges.” After the speech, Pence got a change of clothes and delivered towels to damp reporters on the back of his plane. He spoke with Trump by phone after the rally, he said. “Six hundred and fifty people standing in the pouring rain,” Pence said. “I told him, we’re going to win Virginia.”
Washington (CNN)Protesters angry over the police killings of unarmed black men won't prompt change through violence, President Barack Obama said during an interview Thursday. Speaking a day after riots erupted in Charlotte over the killing of Keith Lamont Scott, Obama said anger should instead be redirected toward pushing needed reforms. "The way we change the system requires us to be able to reach out and engage the broader American community. And that requires being peaceful," Obama said during an interview with ABC News. "The overwhelming majority of people who have been concerned about police community relations doing it the right way. Every once in awhile, you see folks doing it the wrong way." Obama -- who also offered debate advice to Democrat Hillary Clinton in the interview -- said the violence that has raged in cities such as Charlotte, Baltimore and Ferguson, Missouri, shouldn't distract Americans from real concerns about systemic biases within US law enforcement agencies. "I think it's important to separate out the pervasive sense of frustration among a lot of African-Americans about shootings of people and the sense that justice is not always always, you know, colorblind," he said. Obama has sought to encourage reforms in police departments by convening a policing commission and recommending a set of common practices. But the White House says specific reforms should be left to local forces who best understand their communities' needs. "It's the responsibility of local law enforcement leaders and local elected officials to determine how and whether to pursue the implementation of these best practices," Obama's spokesman Josh Earnest said Thursday. "It's not something that can be imposed by the federal government." Clinton spoke with Charlotte Mayor Jennifer Roberts and Democratic North Carolina Rep. Alma Adams, whose district includes Charlotte, about the shooting and protests today, a Clinton aide said. They discussed "steps we must take to ensure that everyone is respected by the law, and everyone has respect for the law," the aide added. Meanwhile, Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump is considering a trip to Charlotte next week after Monday's debate, two aides told CNN. Campaign officials are looking at the logistics involved in such a trip, which would also bring Trump to a critical battleground state. In his interview with ABC, Obama also offered debate advice for Clinton, his preferred successor. "Be yourself and explain what motivates you," he said. "I think there's a reason why we haven't had a woman president before, and so she's having to break down some barriers. There's a level of mistrust and a caricature of her that just doesn't jibe with who I know." CNN's Jim Acosta and Dan Merica contributed to this report.
Philadelphia (CNN)Hillary Clinton made a direct appeal Monday to a demographic group that continues to be deeply skeptical of the Democratic nominee: millennials. Addressing a largely younger crowd here at Temple University, Clinton argued that her Republican opponent, Donald Trump, does not share their values, and that in contrast, she has fought her entire life for children and young people and would be their biggest advocate in the White House. Clinton said that young people she has spoken with to over the course of this campaign have expressed concerns about divisiveness and discrimination. "Too many young black men and women made to feel like their lives are disposable; too many immigrants living in fear of deportation; too many young LGBT Americans, bullied; too many young women and men assaulted," Clinton said. Clinton emphasized efforts to promote affordable tuition and combat college debt. These topics were at the core of the presidential campaign of Bernie Sanders -- the raspy, populist Vermont senator who proved to be formidable challenger to Clinton as he overwhelmingly won the support of young people and liberals. "As you know better than most, tuition keeps going through the roof and debt keeps piling up," Clinton said. The crowd broke out into cheers as Clinton continued: "I worked with Bernie Sanders on a plan." In a speech that drew on her history as a young Democratic activist as well as personal anecdotes about her mother, Clinton openly acknowledged this obvious truth: that young people are disenchanted and disillusioned with the current political system. "I remember wrestling with the challenge when I was a student during the Vietnam War," Clinton said. "It can be tempting to think that no one will tell you the truth and nothing is ever going to change." Younger voters overwhelmingly backed President Barack Obama in 2012 -- giving him a 29 point lead over Republican nominee Mitt Romney, according to exit polls. In 2008, Obama easily outpolled Republican John McCain among -- 66% to 32%. But the enthusiasm that young voters -- including many first-time voters -- showered on Obama, however, has not transferred over to Clinton. One obstacle getting in Clinton's way: third party candidates. A recent New York Times/CBS News poll found that 36% of voters under 30 plan to support Libertarian candidate Gary Johnson or the Green Party's Jill Stein. With just 50 days left until Election Day, the Clinton campaign is relying heavily on popular, big-name Democratic surrogates to help court undecided and unenthusiastic voters. Last week, it dispatched Obama, first lady Michelle Obama, Sanders and Massachusetts Sen. Elizabeth Warren to battleground states. And Priorities USA, a super PAC backing Clinton, announced last week that they are launching a multimillion-dollar digital campaign to discuss "how a vote for a third-party candidate is a vote for Donald Trump." Priorities has conducted polling on voters backing Johnson and Stein -- research they will use to determine how those individuals can be persuaded to back Clinton, according to Priorities spokesman Justin Barasky. The lead that Clinton has enjoyed since the Democratic National Convention in July has largely evaporated, and she is now neck-and-neck with Trump in both national and swing state polls. "This is going to be close. We need everyone off the sidelines," Clinton said Monday. "Not voting is not an option. That just plays into Trump's hands." A vote against Trump, Clinton concluded, would show that world that "America is better than this. America is better than Donald Trump." 
Washington (CNN)The FBI has asked to examine the cell phones of a small number Democratic Party staffers as it investigates a possible hack, law enforcement and Democratic sources told CNN Tuesday. The development comes on the same day Homeland Security Secretary Jeh Johnson told lawmakers that 18 states have asked for help in warding off cyberattacks on their electronic voting systems. Law enforcement officials have reached out to the staffers individually about "imaging" their phones to search for evidence of hacking, such as malware. Investigators are still probing whether this attempted hack is part of the original breach of Democratic National Committee emails -- which is widely thought to be the work of the Russian government -- or a new hacking attempt. "Our struggle with the Russian hackers that we announced in June is ongoing -- as we knew it would be -- and we are choosing not to provide general updates unless personal data or other sensitive information has been accessed or stolen," interim DNC Chairwoman Donna Brazile told CNN. Meanwhile, Johnson outlined to the Senate Homeland Security Committee the concerns states had about defending their voting systems from hackers. "We are seeing a limited number of instances where there have been efforts through cyberintrusions to get into the online presence of various state election agencies," Johnson said. Law enforcement and election officials said in August that hackers had breached databases for election systems in Arizona and Illinois. "What we are seeing are efforts to get into voter registration rolls, the identity of registered voters," Johnson added. While Johnson would not say who was behind the latest hacks, their reveal comes less than a week after the top Democrats on Congress' intelligence committees blamed Russian intelligence agencies for a series of hacks designed to influence the US presidential election. California Sen. Dianne Feinstein and California Rep. Adam Schiff, the ranking members on the Senate and House Intelligence Committees, respectively, released a joint statement Thursday blaming Russian President Vladimir Putin and the Russian government for the cyberintrusions. "Based on briefings we have received, we have concluded that the Russian intelligence agencies are making a serious and concerted effort to influence the US election," they wrote. Russia's suspected role in efforts to hack systems relating to US elections was a major theme in Monday's debate between Republican nominee Donald Trump and his Democratic opponent, Hillary Clinton. Clinton also faulted the Russians for the election-related cyberintrusions while Trump said "it could be Russia, but it could also be China. It could also be lots of other people. It also could be somebody sitting on their bed that weighs 400 pounds." Asked about the latest hacking reports, Schiff told CNN's Wolf Blitzer on "The Situation Room" Tuesday that it was "very serious business," adding that, "Unfortunately, I think we are going to see more of it." Schiff called Trump's refusal to blame the Russians for the cyberintrusions "troubling," saying Trump "has essentially become an apologist for the Kremlin." "My guess, Wolf, is if this guy weighs 400 pounds, he is sitting somewhere in Russia right now," Schiff added. Asked in July whether Russia was trying to use cyberattacks to influence US elections, Director of National Intelligence James Clapper said Russia believes it is reacting to what it sees as US attempts to destabilize Russia. "Try to look at things from their vantage, I think. They are paranoid," he told an audience at the Aspen forum. "They believe that we are trying to influence political developments in Russia and trying to effect change and so their natural response is to retaliate and do unto us as they think we have done unto them," Clapper added. 
The Clinton campaign continues their strategy of attempting to use Donald Trump's words against him. Today, the campaign begins airing atelevision ad in seven battleground states and on cable. According to Hillary Clinton's team, the intention of the ad is to show the effect "Trump's hateful rhetoric towards women is having on our daughters." The ad cuts between images of young girls staring into the mirror overlapped with video of Trump's comments about women. "I'd look at her right in that fat ugly face of hers - she's a slob - she ate like a pig," said Trump during what appears to be an interview. That comment is followed by the Republican nominee, at a different time, saying "a person who is flat chested is very hard to be a 10." When the ad wraps, text appears on the screen reading "is this the kind of president we want for our daughters?" The video begins with an image of Hillary Clinton hugging a young girl she met in Keota, Iowa during the primary who told Clinton she was bullied because she has asthma. Hillary For America says this ad shows how Trump stands in contrast to Clinton's career "fighting for and uplifting women and girls," something they say she'll continue to do if elected president.
Donald Trump believes that "global warming is naturally occurring" and humans are not the cause, his campaign manager Kellyanne Conway said Tuesday morning on CNN — a stance that flies in the face of the vast majority of mainstream climate science. Conway was trying to walk back the Manhattan billionaire's previous dismissals of climate change as a "hoax" driven by China. But while her remarks Tuesday might seem less extreme on the surface, they still did nothing to assuage climate activists' fears that a President Trump would attempt to bring a wrecking ball to the Obama administration's efforts to head off the most catastrophic effects of global warming. Story Continued Below "He doesn't believe it's manmade," CNN anchor Alisyn Camerota said to Conway, referring to climate change. "Correct," Conway responded. Camerota suggested: "So he believes the idea that it's manmade is a hoax." "No, I didn't say that," Conway said. The Sierra Club tweeted afterward: "Trump's campaign manager confirmed this morning that he doesn't understand science." Hillary Clinton had drawn attention to Trump's beliefs on climate science during Monday night's presidential debate, saying, “Donald thinks that climate change is a hoax perpetrated by the Chinese.” Trump interrupted to reply that “I did not, I do not say that." But in fact, Trump has repeatedly made such remarks on Twitter, writing in 2012 that “the concept of global warming was created by and for the Chinese in order to make U.S. manufacturing non-competitive.” And in 2013, he posted that “Ice storm rolls from Texas to Tennessee — I'm in Los Angeles and it's freezing. Global warming is a total, and very expensive, hoax!” Presented with those posts Tuesday morning, Conway said Trump believes “that climate change is naturally occurring, that there are shifts naturally occurring,” but added that the GOP nominee does not believe that those shifts are manmade. The vast majority of scientists disagree, saying carbon emissions from power plants, automobiles, agriculture and other human activities are driving climate change, although natural factors have an effect as well. Conservatives often explain their opposition to cutting U.S. emissions by claiming nonetheless that global warming is an entirely natural phenomenon, even if they sometimes argue that warming has halted or is cyclical. Conway also dismissed the notion that it is possible to grasp Trump’s policy positions, be they on climate change or his stance on the U.S. invasion of Iraq, from the non-traditional media he wields so frequently. “I think that's based on a tweet,” Conway said when asked about Trump’s previous statements that climate change is a hoax. “I just love that, that this whole man, whether he's giving a, ‘Yeah, I guess so,’ answer to Howard Stern about invading Iraq as a private citizen on an entertainment radio show, or through a tweet, we're supposed to understand all of his policies.” However, Trump also described climate change as "a hoax" and "a money-making industry" at a December rally in South Carolina, during his run for president. Later, Conway suggested that it is Clinton, not Trump, who has been unclear on the issue of climate change. “We don't know what Hillary Clinton believes because nobody ever asks her,” Conway said, to which Camerota replied that the former secretary of state had addressed the issue quite clearly at Monday night’s debate. Clinton also has repeatedly promoted her climate change agenda on the campaign trail. “Oh, she gave us the canned, scripted responses, Alisyn, about ‘Somebody's going to be the clean energy super power,’” Conway said. “Look, I can't blame her. She obviously was overprepared and wanted to make sure we heard every single scripted moment, including the snarky ones that she had prepared to say.” GOP vice presidential candidate Indiana Gov. Mike Pence, in a separate CNN interview, tried to recast his running mate's hoax comments as aimed at the notion "that bureaucrats in Washington, D.C., can control the climate of the Earth," and he blasted the Obama administration's efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. And Pence also broke from both Trump's stance and the earlier comments from Conway in acknowledging that human activity was changing the climate. "Well, look, there's no question that the activities that take place in this country and in countries around the world have some impact on the environment and some impact on climate," he said. Tuesday's exchange on climate science occurred on the same morning that the centerpiece of President Barack Obama's climate agenda — regulations on power plants' greenhouse gas emissions — were facing crucial legal arguments in front of a federal appellate court in Washington, D.C.
(CNN)Michelle Obama on Tuesday joked about the plagiarism controversy that engulfed Melania Trump during the Republican National Convention, delivering a dry retort when "The Late Show" host Stephen Colbert asked the first lady if she was sympathetic to the plight of a fellow political spouse. "Melania Trump was criticized for using what turned out to be a portion of your speech -- but do you have any sympathy? Because there are people around her creating things, and you know, I have sympathy for her. Do you understand how that might be sympathetic, for what happened to her?" the CBS host asked. "Yeah, that was tough," Obama deadpanned, prompting laughs from the audience. Colbert also asked the first lady if she was sympathetic to political spouses who are required to stand behind partners whose political beliefs are antithetical to their own -- a premise Obama flatly rejected. "Do you have any sympathy for the people who have to go there and stand by the person running for president?" "No," Obama replied. "Because if -- you know, you have to be, you know, in it. If you're in it, and if you don't agree, you should have agreed before they ran. Bottom line is, if you didn't agree with what Barack was saying, I would not support his run. So I stand there proudly, and I hope they are, too, standing with their spouses proudly. So no, no sympathy." During her appearance on the show, Obama also joked around with Colbert, climbing into a blanket fort with the host (a recurring segment on the show) to discuss serious issues, like investment in education for young girls around the world, and less serious ones -- such as when a conversation about healthy eating turned into a joke about how eating too many carrots can turn someone orange. "And if you turn really orange, you have to start saying crazy things and run for president," Colbert cracked. 
Minorities in America’s inner cities “are living in hell,” Donald Trump said in response to a question about healing race relations. “We have a situation where we have our inner cities, African-Americans, Hispanics, are living in hell, because it's so dangerous,” Trump said. “You walk down the street, you get shot. In Chicago, they've had thousands of shootings, thousands, since January 1st. Thousands of shootings. And I say, where is this? Is this a war-torn country? What are we doing? And we have to stop the violence, we have to bring back law and order, in a place like Chicago, where thousands of people have been killed. Thousands, over the last number of years.” Story Continued Below It was a twist on what has become one of Trump’s signature lines in his pitch to the African American community: “What do you have to lose?” Trump often uses the line after listing what he says are the litany of problems in American cities, which he pins on Democratic politicians. Trump also hit Clinton for not saying “law and order” in response to the question. Clinton, for her part, said Trump misunderstood the state of America’s inner cities. “Well, I've heard Donald say this at his rallies, and it's really unfortunate that he paints such a dire negative picture of black communities in our country,” she said. “The vibrancy of the black church, the black businesses that employ so many people, the opportunities that so many families are working to provide for their kids. There's a lot that we should be proud of and we should be supporting and lifting up.” Trump has struggled badly amongst African-American voters, but has sought to close the gap in recent weeks with events in African-American churches.
Melbourne, Florida (CNN)Donald Trump argued Tuesday that the controversial stop-and-frisk policing tactic once employed in New York City is constitutional, adding that it would "overwhelmingly" save African-American and Hispanic lives. The practice, however, has been criticized as racial profiling that unfairly targeted those very minority groups. Trump quibbled with debate moderator Lester Holt on Monday night after Holt pointed out that the stop-and-frisk practice as implemented in New York City was ruled unconstitutional. "I explained last night that stop-and-frisk is constitutional," Trump said at a Florida rally, speaking of a back-and-forth he had with debate moderator Lester Holt of NBC News during Monday night's presidential debate. While stop-and-frisk policies are used in various US cities, the aggressive implementation of stop-and-frisk in New York was ruled unconstitutional by a federal judge in 2013, who said the policy violated the rights of minorities who were disproportionately targeted. "Stop, question and frisk" remains a policing practice in New York, but has been dramatically reined in. But Trump pressed the issue even as he continued to make entreaties to African-American voters. "A policy like stop-and-frisk could save thousands of lives in a city like Chicago, just like it saved thousands of lives in New York. Overwhelmingly, this will save African-American and Hispanic lives -- citizens who are entitled to the same protections as every American," Trump said. "I say this to African-American communities. What do you have to lose? Donald Trump is going to fix it. We'll fix it. We're going to make it safe," he added. Trump then ticked down a list of crime statistics, pointing in particular to the more than 3,000 shootings that have taken place in Chicago just this year. "I will never back down -- and that's true, Obama's hometown -- I will never back down from trying to save American lives," Trump said, pointing out that Chicago is the hometown of President Barack Obama. 
One of Donald Trump's sons compared the complexity of the Syrian refugee crisis to a bowl of Skittles on Monday evening. Donald Trump Jr. tweeted an image Monday, which had a Trump-Pence logo, that said: "If I had a bowl of skittles and I told you just three would kill you. Would you take a handful? That's our Syrian refugee problem." Story Continued Below "Let's end the politically correct agenda that doesn't put America first," Trump Jr. wrote in the tweet with the image. Trump Jr.'s tweet came after the hunt and eventual capture of bombing suspect Ahmad Khan Rahami, who was born in Afghanistan It is unclear whether he came to the U.S. as a refugee. Rahami was charged with five counts of attempted murder of a law enforcement officer after a shootout Monday with police in Linden, New Jersey. This image says it all. Let's end the politically correct agenda that doesn't put America first. #trump2016 pic.twitter.com/9fHwog7ssN — Donald Trump Jr. (@DonaldJTrumpJr) September 19, 2016 The tweet was met with backlash on Twitter. President Barack Obama's former chief speechwriter Jon Favreau shared the viral image of the young Syrian refugee boy who was covered in dirt after being saved from a building that was hit with a bomb. Hey @DonaldJTrumpJr, this is one of the millions of children you compared to a poisoned Skittle today: https://t.co/SDSGw0eUIP pic.twitter.com/HuhY9RGvWW — Jon Favreau (@jonfavs) September 20, 2016 Hillary Clinton's traveling press secretary Nick Merrill also responded to Trump Jr.'s tweet, calling it "disgusting." This is disgusting. https://t.co/Qygl03Cnc1 — Nick Merrill (@NickMerrill) September 20, 2016 Jason Sparks, a former Barack Obama staffer, tweeted photos of Syrian refugee children. He wrote: "These aren't Skittles, @DonaldTrumpJr." These aren't Skittles, @DonaldJTrumpJr. pic.twitter.com/h8DXvdFtVM — Jason Sparks (@sparksjls) September 20, 2016 A representative for Skittles said in a statement that the company doesn't believe the comparison is appropriate. "Skittles are candy. Refugees are people," the company stated. Donald Trump has repeatedly called for restrictions or bans on refugees from Syria and other parts of the Muslim world, urging "extreme vetting" to make sure no dangerous people enter the country.
If recent history is any guide for the first debate between Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton, the polls will become more volatile in the ensuing days, bouncing around more than during the more stable periods of the campaign. But then the race will return to its normal equilibrium, reflecting largely locked-in perceptions of the two candidates. That's no certainty, though. In a race as close as this one, a debate can alter the trajectory of a race — as in 1976, when Gerald Ford was surging in the polls in the fall but may have seen his momentum stunted by a poor performance in a foreign-policy debate with Jimmy Carter in which the Republican claimed there was “no Soviet domination” of Eastern Europe. Story Continued Below The more frequent outcome resembles what happened in 2012, when Mitt Romney saw his poll numbers swell after a strong performance in the first debate, but fade just as quickly. Same for the 2000 presidential nail-biter, when polls after the first debate showed a brief bump for George W. Bush before returning to an Al Gore lead before the second debate. And in 1984, Walter Mondale cut into Ronald Reagan’s lead after their first debate, but Reagan parried Mondale’s attacks in their second meeting and resumed on course for his landslide victory. The most interesting potential analog to this year's Hofstra University debate might be 1980. Carter and Reagan debated only once that year, with Reagan getting a slight bounce after their debate. But the most consequential part of that campaign might be the candidate who wasn’t on stage: John Anderson, the GOP congressman from Illinois who ran for president as an independent. Carter declined to debate Anderson, so the first-term incumbent skipped the first debate. Anderson had been polling at about 15 percent in mid-September, according to Gallup — but he received only about 7 percent of the vote on Election Day. Support for third-party candidates this year rivals Anderson’s backing: Libertarian Gary Johnson and Green Party nominee Jill Stein are combining for about 10 percent of the vote in likely-voter surveys. (Ross Perot in 1992 also had significant support, but he participated in debates with George H.W. Bush and Bill Clinton.) There are some parallels in the 2016 campaign — and reasons to believe the three debates, starting with Monday night's, could be decisive. 1. The race is closer than recent elections. The national polls out on Monday set the stakes: Clinton and Trump are even in a Bloomberg Politics survey, and Clinton leads by 1 point in a Quinnipiac University poll and 4 points in a Monmouth University poll. In the poll averages, Clinton leads Trump by a slim margin: 2.2 points in the RealClearPolitics average, as of Monday afternoon. That’s closer than most recent elections. On the eve of the first debate in 2012, President Barack Obama led Romney by 3.1 points in the RealClearPolitics average, and the Democrat had a 4.2-point lead over John McCain in 2008. George W. Bush led John Kerry by 6 points on the eve of their first debate in 2004. And it’s close in the battleground states, too. In POLITICO’s Battleground States polling average, Clinton has a lead of 5 points or greater in six states: Colorado, Michigan, New Hampshire, Pennsylvania, Virginia and Wisconsin. But the most recent polls in Colorado, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin show a much closer race. Trump, meanwhile, has pulled narrowly ahead in Iowa and Ohio. The two candidates are within a single point in three states: Florida, Nevada and North Carolina. 2. More voters are up for grabs this year. Neither Clinton nor Trump is popular: In both the Bloomberg and Monmouth polls, majorities of likely voters have negative impressions of each candidate. But between the candidates’ poor image ratings and the large segment of voters backing either Johnson or Stein, there’s more volatility in this race than other recent elections. As of Monday afternoon, the RealClearPolitics average showed Clinton at 46.2 percent and Trump at 44 percent in a two-way matchup. (In a four-way matchup, Clinton is at 42.9 percent and Trump at 41.2 percent.) That leaves more voters up for grabs than in recent elections. In 2012, Obama led Romney in the RealClearPolitics average, 49.1 percent to 46 percent, combining for more than 95 percent. In 2008, Obama’s lead over McCain stood at 47.9 percent to 43.7 percent, combining for nearly 92 percent. In 2004, Bush led Kerry, 49.5 percent to 43.5 percent, combining for 93 percent. (In 1980, a pre-debate Gallup poll showed Carter narrowly ahead of Reagan by 3 points, 45 percent to 42 percent, with Anderson at 9 percent.) Both candidates still face enormous headwinds in changing voters’ perceptions of them beginning on Monday night, but there are voters out there who haven’t yet committed to either candidate. 3. A massive audience is expected to watch. Television ratings for Monday night’s debate could challenge the all-time record: the nearly 81 million people who watched the Carter-Reagan debate in 1980, according to Nielsen. The debate is going up against “Monday Night Football” on ESPN — a matchup of two of the weaker teams in pro football: the Atlanta Falcons and New Orleans Saints. But the debate will be on all the broadcast networks and each of the cable-news outlets. (The game will air instead of the debate on the NBC affiliate in New Orleans.) Even ESPN thinks the game won’t be a significant drag on debate ratings, with an executive telling Sports Illustrated “it’s going to be a rough night” for football viewership. If the debate doesn’t outrate 1980, it should still draw more eyeballs than the first debates in more recent elections: The first debate in 2012 drew 67 million television viewers, compared to 52 million in 2008, 63 million in 2004 and 47 million in 2000. Usually, according to Nielsen data, the first debate in a given year outrates the subsequent debates — that’s been true in three of the past four elections. That makes Monday night the best chance for both Clinton and Trump to claim an advantage in a close race. “Maybe two-thirds of the people who vote in this election are going to watch the entire debate,” former Obama campaign manager David Plouffe said Monday morning on MSNBC. “This is an incredible moment for both candidates to speak directly” to voters.
HEMPSTEAD, N.Y. — A composed Hillary Clinton got under Donald Trump’s skin during their high-stakes showdown on Monday night, with the Republican nominee persistently interrupting Clinton as she needled him on his business record, the size of his fortune and his relationship with the truth. For 90 minutes at Hofstra University, Clinton and Trump clashed on style and specifics, disagreeing about foreign policy, economic plans and their readiness for the Oval Office. But for most of the evening, it was Clinton who was driving the agenda. She rattled off crisp prepared lines and repeatedly lured Trump into less politically favorable terrain, including a long discussion of why he was refusing to release his taxes. Story Continued Below “First, maybe he's not as rich as he says he is,” Clinton suggested. “Second, maybe he's not as charitable as he claims to be.” The much-hyped debate opened up with momentary niceties — Trump called her “Secretary Clinton, yes, is that okay?” — and a friendly handshake that briefly masked the tension of a knife’s edge contest that is well within the margin of error in the most crucial swing states. And in an unprecedented moment for presidential politics, the Democratic nominee midway through the debate accused the Republican nominee of racism. “He has a long record of engaging in racist behavior,” Clinton said, during an exchange on Trump’s years-long questioning of the American citizenship of President Barack Obama. Trump soon fired back with one of the evening’s most memorable lines. “When you try to act holier than thou it really doesn’t work.” The exchange was emblematic of a debate not deep on substantive policy differences but full of attacks, with both candidates landing blows that will resonate with their established bases of support. “I have a feeling that by the end of this evening I am going to be blamed for everything,” Clinton said with a smile. “Why not?” Trump retorted. “Just join the debate by saying more crazy things,” Clinton shot back. Clinton seemed to gain steam as the debate went on, hitting Trump in the closing minutes for his past attacks objectifying women’s appearances. The former secretary of state often appeared relaxed as Trump scowled and tried to jump in during her answers. Clinton had prepared for weeks for the face-off with Trump, complete with briefing books and mock debates. Trump has eschewed such traditional preparation and, while he landed some of the evening’s most memorable lines, his performance was far more uneven. In one of the debate’s tenser moments, Trump swiped at Clinton’s recent time off the campaign trail when she came down with pneumonia and holed up for debate preparation. “You decided to stay home and that's okay,” Trump said with more than a hint of sarcasm. “I think Donald just criticized me for preparing for this debate,” Clinton said. “And yes, I did. And you know what else I prepared for? I prepared to be president. And I think that's a good thing.” Under sustained attack, Trump did not have a meltdown, even as he misrepresented key elements on his record, including citing opposition to the war in Iraq despite the public record, and insisting that Clinton began raising questions of Obama’s citizenship. Asked about his judgement toward the end of the debate, Trump declared, “I think my strongest asset, maybe by far is my temperament. I have a winning temperament. I know how to win. She does not.” It was the evening’s most talked-about line both on Facebook and Twitter. Throughout, Trump stuck to knocking Clinton as a predictable, talking-point driven, lifelong politician. “Typical politician. All talk. No action. Sounds good. Doesn’t work. Never gonna happen,” Trump said in a staccato summation of his debate plan. In the closing minutes, Trump summarized his appeal again. “Hillary has experience,” Trump said. “But it’s bad experience.” The two candidates sniped about nearly everything from climate change to the economy to ISIS to trade to their records. One of the longest exchanges came not on tax policy — but Trump’s refusal to release his taxes, breaking decades of precedent for presidential candidates. Trump got a rise out of the audience – against the debate’s ground rules of silence from the crowd -- by pledging to release his tax returns if Clinton releases all of the emails her staff deleted from the private email server she used as secretary of state. “I will release my tax returns, against my lawyer's wishes, when she releases her 33,000 e-mails that have been deleted,” Trump declared. “So it's negotiable?” moderator Lester Holt asked, with Trump shooting back, “It's not negotiable, no.” Clinton tried to turn the attack on her private email use back on Trump, who had previously said he wouldn’t release his tax returns until a routine audit is completed. “I think you've just seen another example of bait and switch here. For 40 years, everyone running for president has released their tax returns,” Clinton said. Clinton tried to direct viewers to her website for real-time fact-checking of Trump. Trump directed viewers there, too, at one point. “She tells you how to fight ISIS on her website. I don't think General Douglas MaCarthur would like that too much,” Trump said of the 20thcentury general. “At least I have a plan to fight ISIS,” Clinton said. “No, you're telling the enemy everything you want to do. No wonder you've been fighting ISIS your entire adult life,” Trump said about a group that has only existed for a few years. Trump didn’t just tangle with Clinton — but with Holt. When Trump said, despite the public record, that he was opposed to the war in Iraq, Holt interjected “The record shows otherwise,” Holt said. “The record shows that I’m right,” Trump said. Back and forth, they went. When Clinton finally got her turn, she exclaimed, “Whew! Okay…” Clinton more than once made accusations that caused Trump to blurt out interruptions, referring to him only by his first name. “Donald was one of the people who rooted for the housing crisis,” she said. “That’s called business,” Trump jumped in. “Donald thinks that climate change is a hoax perpetrated by the Chinese. I think it's real,” she said at another point. “I did not say that,” Trump countered. “I did not say that.” And when she hit him for his rhetoric about failing black communities, he sighed audibly. More than anything, Clinton sought to make the evening a referendum on Trump’s truthfulness, even as polls show the public have many questions about her own trustworthiness. “Donald, I know you live in your own reality,” she said to Trump during an exchange about trade, “but that is not the facts.” They went back and forth several times, but Clinton ultimately got the last word.
Hillary Clinton is a copycat who’s probably sleeping because she needs to rest, Donald Trump suggested Tuesday. In a pair of tweets bookended by a post announcing “two big rallies” in North Carolina, Trump accused the Democratic presidential nominee of “copying my airplane” and continued his assault over her stamina, or alleged lack thereof. Story Continued Below “Do people notice Hillary is copying my airplane rallies — she puts the plane behind her like I have been doing from the beginning,” Trump mused in a tweet Tuesday morning. “Hillary Clinton is taking the day off again, she needs the rest,” he added minutes later. “Sleep well Hillary — see you at the debate!” Trump’s critical comments come shortly after Clinton warned voters during a radio interview with Steve Harvey, “The next 50 days will determine the next 50 years.” Clinton also previewed what she expects from Trump in Monday's presidential debate in New York, telling Harvey she will do her “very best to communicate as clearly and fearlessly as I can in the face of the insults and the attacks and the bullying and bigotry that we’ve seen coming from my opponent.” “You know, I can take it, Steve. I can take that kind of stuff,” she added. “I’ve been at this and, you know, I understand it’s a contact sport.” Trump also attacked Clinton earlier Tuesday, questioning her effectiveness against the Islamic State as head of the State Department. “Crooked Hillary has been fighting ISIS, or whatever she has been doing, for years,” he said. “Now she has new ideas. It is time for change.” Clinton has no public events planned for Tuesday and has opted to stay at home in Chappaqua, New York, as she prepares for the debate with Trump. She had a full campaign schedule on Monday — between holding a news conference in White Plains, New York, a campaign speech and a fundraiser in Philadelphia, and three meetings with foreign leaders in New York City. She is scheduled to return to Florida for a campaign rally and fundraiser on Wednesday. Gabriel Debenedetti contributed to this report.
(CNN)Drawing enormous support from the state's non-white voters, Hillary Clinton holds a 5-point edge over Donald Trump in Florida, according to a new poll from Monmouth University out Tuesday. The poll found Clinton leading Trump among likely voters in the crucial battleground, 46%-41%. Libertarian Party nominee Gary Johnson and Green Party nominee Jill Stein, both of whom will be on Florida's ballot, drew 6% and 1%, respectively. Monmouth's poll produced another unfavorable finding for Trump: 54% of Florida voters believe the GOP nominee's recent turnabout on President Barack Obama's origins was made for political reasons. Only 24% think Trump believes that Obama is a natural-born citizen. After years of promoting conspiracy theories regarding the first black President's birthplace, Trump changed course last week. He still has plenty of work to do on that front in Florida. According to the poll, Clinton leads Trump among Hispanic, black and Asian voters in the state, 69%-16%. Those three blocs comprise one-third of Florida's electorate. Clinton's 5-point advantage is wider than other recent polls out of the state, including a CNN/ORC survey released last week that found Trump up by 3, within the poll's 3.5 percentage point margin of error. But it's smaller than her lead in the previous Monmouth poll in Florida last month, which showed Clinton up by 9. That margin was also larger than other Florida polls conducted at the time. The latest Monmouth poll was conducted September 16-19 using phone interviews with 400 likely Florida voters. It has a margin of error of 4.9%. 
Maureen Dowd has covered Donald Trump for more than a decade as a columnist for The New York Times. She told ABC News that the Republican presidential nominee's “ego arithmetic hasn’t changed," meaning that "he would donate to candidates of both parties and basically it was like what would benefit his business.” According to Dowd, Trump's office at Trump Tower "is like an infinity mirror. He has pictures of himself just papering the whole office. And then his desk is all full of magazines where he is on the cover...the whole office is like this pure odyssey through his ego.” Speaking on ABC’s Powerhouse Politics Podcast, Dowd said she wondered why he would want to become a politician. “I asked him once, ‘Why are you running.’ It didn’t seem to me a wise decision to trade in a perfectly good reputation as this kind of fun huckster for a reputation as a scary Hitler. And I said, ‘Why couldn’t you run more like the person you were in New York all those years?'" she recalled. "He had a cartoonish reputation like a Batman character or villain but not hatred." Dowd, author of the new book, "The Year of Voting Dangerously, the Derangement of American Politics," said she was disappointed by Trump’s recent tweet calling her "wacky" and a "neurotic dope." "I felt like he hadn’t put much effort into giving me a good nickname. He calls all women reporters that he doesn’t like 'wacky and neurotic,'" she said. "I was hoping I would have something more distinctive like Pocahontas or Sleepy Eyes, which he uses for Chuck Todd. But I just got a generic one for women.” ABC News' Jon Karl and Rick Klein asked Dowd whether her sister, who had been a Trump supporter, would be voting for him. "I talked to Trump about this. He said, 'Is your sister still voting for me?' a couple months ago. And I said 'No' because you retweeted that unflattering picture of Heidi Cruz," Dowd said. "And he said it was not that unflattering. And I said, 'Yes it was. It was just a terrible thing to do. Why don’t you just apologize?' And there was this long silence. And then he goes ‘OK, I apologize.’ I got the first apology out of him!" This episode of ABC News' "Powerhouse Politics" podcast is available on iTunes, Stitcher, Google Play and TuneIn.
(CNN)The mayors of New York City, London and Paris released a joint op-ed Tuesday advocating for refugee resettlement and urging world leaders meeting at the UN this week to respond to a "watershed moment" with "relief and safe haven" for migrants Writing in The New York Times, New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio, London Mayor Sadiq Khan, and Paris Mayor Anne Hidalgo also cautioned against the spread of anti-immigrant rhetoric amid escalating tension and in the wake of bombings in New York and New Jersey over the weekend. "In the aftermath of an explosive device going off in the Chelsea neighborhood of New York last weekend, and other attacks in cities throughout the world, we recognize that the security of all our residents is paramount in large, open, democratic societies. But it is wrong to characterize immigrant and refugee communities as radical and dangerous; in our experience, militant violence is vanishingly rare," they wrote. RELATED: Trump son likens Syrian refugees to poisoned Skittles The mayors also released their op-ed to coincide with the meeting of the United Nations in New York this week, and directly called on those in attendance to provide "an effective response to a growing humanitarian crisis." "As the mayors of three great global cities -- New York, Paris, and London -- we urge the world leaders assembling at the United Nations to take decisive action to provide relief and safe haven to refugees fleeing conflict and migrants feeling economic hardship, and to support those who are already doing this work." They continued, "We know policies that embrace diversity and promote inclusion are successful. We call on world leaders to adopt a similar welcoming and collaborative spirit on behalf of the refugees all over the world during the summit meeting this week. Our cities stand united in the call for inclusivity. It is part of who we are as citizens of diverse and thriving cities." RELATED: Obama makes last pitch for diplomacy amid tumult at home and abroad 
One woman was killed and several children were injured after airstrikes pounded the city of Aleppo, according to residents and activists. On Sunday, warplanes targeted the besieged Syrian city for the first time since the cease-fire went into effect last week, according to the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights. The 52-year-old woman died after a wall fell on her after airstrikes on her house, according to Abu Rajab, a radiologist and managing director of the hospital where she was treated in Aleppo's al-Sakhur neighborhood. "She had a head injury and suffered suffocation," Abu Rajab, told ABC News. Four children were also treated at the hospital, he said. Among them was a 15-year-old girl who had pieces of shrapnel in her chest. "She was experiencing severe pain and is still under observation at the hospital," Abu Rajab said. Another child, a 3-year-old girl, was injured in the scalp and right hand. "We give children gifts to help them relax. I gave her a toy train so that she could play with it and forget her pain," Abu Rajab said, adding that the girl remains in the hospital. Two other children, a 3-year-old and a 2-year-old, were treated at the hospital and have been discharged, according to Abu Rajab. "They had lighter wounds and stayed for one day," he said. "They had dust in their lungs and we gave them oxygen." The U.S.-Russian-brokered cease-fire agreement was focused on reducing violence in the war-torn region and delivering humanitarian aid. The agreement had to be met before Russia and the U.S. would work together to fight militant groups ISIS and al-Nusra in Syria. So far no aid has entered eastern Aleppo, where up to 275,000 people live under siege, according to the United Nations. Two U.N. trucks carrying flour and food supplies that could feed around 185,000 people for one month are still parked by the Turkish border, ready to go. "I am pained and disappointed that a United Nations convoy has yet to cross into Syria from Turkey, and safely reach eastern Aleppo, where up to 275,000 people remain trapped without food, water, proper shelter or medical care," Stephen O’Brien, U.N.'s undersecretary-general for humanitarian affairs and emergency relief coordinator, said in a statement today. "All parties must facilitate regular and sustained access to families in all the besieged and hard-to-reach areas across the country, through both cross-line and cross-border routes. The people of Syria have suffered long enough. Millions of Syrian civilians continue to face horrific deprivation and violence, especially those trapped in besieged and hard-to-reach areas." Aid workers have not been able to reach eastern Aleppo since clashes between the Syrian government and armed rebel groups started on July 7. Around 13.5 million people in Syria are in need of humanitarian assistance, while 4.8 million have fled their country and 6.1 million are internally displaced, according to this month's figures from the U.N.'s Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
(CNN)The circus of politics can often be a distraction from actual policy -- and last night's debate proved no exception when it came to the subject of foreign affairs. The back and forth between Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump was perhaps more instructive in terms of what was not mentioned -- Syria's civil war, for instance -- than what was discussed. To be fair, the debate was not intended to focus on international issues, which were basically a footnote in the "securing America" segment. But amid the exchanges about ISIS, Iran, NATO and nuclear proliferation, there were some brief glimpses of what the world might look like under a President Trump or a President Clinton. QUIZ: Are you more like Clinton or Trump? Fighting ISIS For the most part, Trump focused on attacking Clinton's record -- "she's got experience, but it's bad experience" -- rather than on articulating his own foreign policy proposals. That was certainly true of the discussion on ISIS, which was mentioned 24 times during the foreign policy part of the debate. Clinton spoke of the need to "intensify our air strikes against ISIS," "support our Arab and Kurdish partners," and "take out their leadership" -- positions that don't differ much from President Barack Obama's current policies. MORE: CNN's Reality Check Team vets the claims Trump repeatedly slammed Clinton and Obama for contributing to the rise of the terror group by pulling out of Iraq, but he offered no details of his own "secret" plan "to knock the hell out of ISIS." When Clinton taunted him about not having a plan, he retorted: "You're telling the enemy everything you want to do ... No wonder you've been fighting ISIS your entire adult life." (Fact check: ISIS only came into being in 2006 after splintering from al Qaeda in Iraq. Clinton was born in 1947.) Iran's nuclear deal Similarly, on Iran, Trump repeatedly attacked Clinton for striking "one of the worst deals ever made by any country in history," arguing that Iran had been "about to fall" and was now poised to become a "major power." But he didn't offer many suggestions for how it should have been done differently, beyond suggesting that "they should have included the fact that they do something with respect to North Korea. And they should have done something with respect to Yemen and all these other places." MORE: 6 key takeaways from the first debate Support for NATO If the debate didn't offer much new insight into Trump's foreign policy plans, his comments about America's allies and NATO certainly did. "I want to help all of our allies, but we are losing billions and billions of dollars. We cannot be the policemen of the world. We cannot protect countries all over the world ... where they're not paying us what we need," Trump said. MORE: Trump, Clinton debate nukes, ISIS, hackers It was a moment that will have sent shudders down the spines of America's international allies -- an isolationist vision that has many global leaders wary about a President Trump. Already under Obama, there is a perception that the US has retreated from taking an international leadership role, particularly in the Middle East. Clinton sought to provide some reassurance that she would be different, saying: "we've got to work more closely with our allies". But it remains to be seen how she would take on some of the toughest foreign policy questions -- namely, the civil war in Syria -- in a way that would be meaningfully different or more impactful than her predecessor. Perhaps the next debate will offer some more clues. 
Saudi Arabia is mounting a last-ditch campaign to scuttle legislation allowing families of victims of the Sept. 11, 2001 attacks to sue the kingdom — and they're enlisting major American companies to make an economic case against the bill. General Electric, Dow Chemical, Boeing and Chevron are among the corporate titans that have weighed in against the Justice Against Sponsors of Terrorism Act, or JASTA, which passed both chambers unanimously and was vetoed on Friday, according to people familiar with the effort. The companies are acting quietly to avoid the perception of opposing victims of terrorism, but they're responding to Saudi arguments that their own corporate assets in the kingdom could be at risk if the law takes effect. Story Continued Below Meanwhile, Trent Lott, the former Senate majority leader who now co-leads Squire Patton Boggs' lobbying group, e-mailed Senate legislative directors on Monday warning that the bill could lead other countries to withdraw their assets from the United States and retaliate with laws allowing claims against American government actions. "Many foreign entities have long-standing, intimate relations with U.S. financial institutions that they would undoubtedly unwind, to the further detriment of the U.S. economy," reads one of the attachments, obtained by POLITICO. "American corporations with interests abroad may be at risk of retaliation, a possibility recently expressed by GE and Dow." Still, the Saudis and their agents face a significant uphill battle, with lawmakers loath to take a vote against victims of the 9/11 attacks right before an election. There was little public opposition to the bill as it made its way through the Capitol, and even now, efforts to tweak the bill haven't caught much traction. Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.) announced Monday that the Senate will vote Wednesday on a motion to override President Barack Obama's veto, and if override advocates are successful there, the House will take the same vote Thursday or Friday, a House Republican leadership aide said. But even if Obama receives the first veto override of his presidency, the story won't end there: the Saudis will seek a new bill to scale back the law in the lame-duck session or in the next session, after lawmakers are relieved from the heat of the campaign, people familiar with the plans said. "It's Washington at its finest," one of the people said. While the White House has emphasized national security to justify rejecting the bill, enlisting business interests could prove influential with lawmakers representing places where the companies have significant economic footprints. Companies could lose favored access to the Saudi market and see their own assets subject to seizure in lawsuits, just as Saudi holdings in the U.S. would be, people familiar with the situation said. "While I understand that the sponsors are well-intentioned, the bill potentially could have serious consequences for our country's critical relationships in the Middle East and with the rest of the world," GE CEO Jeffrey Immelt wrote in a Sept. 22 letter to McConnell obtained by POLITICO. "The bill is not balanced, sets a dangerous precedent, and has real potential to destabilize bilateral relationships and the global economy." In May GE committed to investing $3 billion in Saudi water, energy, aviation and digital projects, part of the country's push to diversify its economy from oil. One source familiar with Boeing's effort said the company wrote in the letter that the victims’ families deserve justice but argued that the economic consequences of the bill were important to consider. The letter warned of potential job losses, the source said. Dow Chemical is also lobbying against the bill, people familiar with the campaign said. Dow has several facilities in Saudi Arabia and Boeing this year sent its first 787 jet to Saudi Arabian Airlines. Chevron, which has an oil field and chemical plants in the kingdom, reported lobbying on the bill last quarter, disclosure show. Several financial firms are also monitoring the legislation but not taking a stand on it. The Saudis are now spending more than $250,000 a month fighting the bill, retaining powerhouses Brownstein Hyatt Farber Schreck, Glover Park Group, Sphere Consulting and Squire Patton Boggs. Besides working with companies invested in Saudi Arabia, the lobbyists are directly contacting lawmakers, placing opinion articles and seeking support from think tank scholars. GOP Sens. Lindsey Graham of South Carolina and Bob Corker of Tennessee are trying to hammer out a compromise that would soften the bill, bringing it in line with previously proposed versions rather than keeping the harsher language that just passed. A proposed amendment obtained by POLITICO — an effort that one person said was led primarily by Graham — suggests restoring an exemption for discretionary government actions, which the document says would prevent American interference in foreign countries' internal policies and vice versa. A Graham spokesman declined to comment on the language. Graham, who had voiced concerns about the legislation, said in an interview last week that discussions to address those issues were "not at the level I would appreciate." "We'll see," Graham said then. "Time will tell." GE declined to comment beyond Immelt's letter. Dow, Boeing, Chevron and the Saudi embassy didn't answer requests for comment. Jeremy Herb and Rachael Bade contributed to this report.
George Soros is pumping $500 million into migrant- and refugee-founded businesses and other initiatives, the billionaire investor announced Tuesday, noting that his hope is other investors will follow suit. “Our collective failure to develop and implement effective policies to handle the increased flow has contributed greatly to human misery and political instability—both in countries people are fleeing and in the countries that host them, willingly or not,” Soros wrote in a Wall Street Journal op-ed published online Tuesday. “Migrants are often forced into lives of idle despair, while host countries fail to reap the proven benefit that greater integration could bring.” Story Continued Below While acknowledging that governments should play a key role “by creating and sustaining adequate physical and social infrastructure,” Soros pointed to “power of the private sector” as a critical need, too. In response to the Obama administration’s recently announced call to action for U.S. companies to play a larger role in the refugee crisis, Soros wrote, “I have decided to earmark $500 million for investments that specifically address the needs of migrants, refugees and host communities.” “I will invest in startups, established companies, social-impact initiatives and businesses founded by migrants and refugees themselves,” he continued. “Although my main concern is to help migrants and refugees arriving in Europe, I will be looking for good investment ideas that will benefit migrants all over the world.” Soros said his nonprofit-owned investments will complement his foundation’s philanthropic contributions and cover various sectors, including emerging digital technology. It “seems especially promising as a way to provide solutions to the particular problems that dislocated people often face,” he said. “Advances in this sector can help people gain access more efficiently to government, legal, financial and health services. Private businesses are already investing billions of dollars to develop such services for non-migrant communities.” Investments, he added, “are intended to be successful—because I want to show how private capital can play a constructive role helping migrants.” Adding that he plans to work with organizations like the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the International Rescue Committee to create principles that will guide his investments, Soros said his goal “is to harness, for public good, the innovations that only the private sector can provide. I hope my commitment will inspire other investors to pursue the same mission.”
On Wednesday, the Senate is expected to override President Obama's veto, for the first time, on a bill that would allow the families of 9/11 victims to sue Saudi Arabia. So how exactly does a veto override work? The rules are described in Article 1, Section 7 of the Constitution. When the president rejects a bill, he is required to return it, along with his objections, to the chamber in which the bill originated. Then, the members of that chamber "shall enter the Objections at large on their Journal, and proceed to reconsider it." In other words, the president sends vetoed Senate bills back to the Senate to reconsider first and vetoed House bills back to the House to reconsider first. In this case, the Justice Against Sponsors of Terrorism Act, or JASTA, began in the Senate, so the Senate votes first. Both the House and the Senate require a two-thirds majority to successfully override a president's veto. Both chambers also require the "yeas and nays" to be counted. In the House, the members vote using the electronic voting system and in the Senate they take a roll call vote, in which each senator’s name is called by the clerk. Though the Senate received President Obama’s veto message on Friday, they’re not voting on it until Wednesday. This is common, according to the Congressional Research Service, because it gives senators time to work out the terms under which they will reconsider the vetoed bill, including the amount of debate time on the Senate floor. Then, when the vetoed bill comes up for a vote, the presiding officer of that chamber states, "Shall the bill pass, the objections of the President of the United States to the contrary notwithstanding?" While some Senate Democrats and Republicans have concerns that the JASTA bill would open the United States up to similar legal retaliation from other foreign nations and tarnish its relationship with Saudi Arabia, a key Middle East ally, the veto override is expected to easily garner the two-thirds votes needed to pass. Assuming it clears the Senate, the JASTA veto override will then head to the House, where the same voting process will ensue. If the veto override is successful in the House and the Senate, the bill will become law because two-thirds of both chambers have agreed to pass the bill despite the president's objection.
Washington (CNN)Michigan Democratic Rep. Sander Levin called on the IRS Wednesday to audit The Trump Foundation, following a report that the billionaire used charity money to pay off legal settlements. "It is important that charitable funds be used for charitable purposes, rather than promote the business ventures of those affiliated with the charity. I therefore request an immediate audit of the Donald J. Trump Foundation," Levin wrote in a letter to IRS Commissioner John Koskinen. The Washington Post reported earlier this week that Trump used $258,000 from his charity to pay off settlements in a pair of lawsuits. The Post reported that Trump used the charity to pay for a $100,000 settlement with the city of Palm Beach in 2007 and used another $158,000 from his charity to settle a lawsuit filed in 2011 about a hole-in-one claim at a charity golf tournament. The revelation immediately drew accusations from Democrats of Trump self-dealing. Messages left with the Trump campaign and the IRS were not immediately returned Wednesday. But New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie, a top Trump surrogate, warned Hillary Clinton's campaign Wednesday of using the allegations against the Trump Foundation for a political attack. "Be careful what door you open, Mrs. Clinton, because you're not going to want people to be talking about the Clinton Foundation and comparing it to anything that Donald Trump has done in his life, including giving away tens of millions of his own personal money," Christie, who is chairing Trump's transition efforts, told radio host Laura Ingraham. Koskinen was on Capitol Hill on Wednesday fielding a barrage of questions from House Republicans at a hearing before the Judiciary Committee. House conservatives are pushing articles of impeachment to get rid of the commissioner over his handling of allegations that agency members targeted tea party groups, but it's unlikely any vote will happen before the fall election. Trump, meanwhile, has broken with decades of modern presidential politics in refusing to release his personal tax returns, saying that he is being audited by the IRS. CNN's Deirdre Walsh contributed to this report.
The Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee now plans to spend at least $5 million in Indiana, a media-tracking source confirmed Tuesday, as Democrat Evan Bayh’s once-dominant lead over Republican Todd Young has narrowed rapidly in the race considered a key part of Democrats’ strategy to take the Senate majority. The Senate Democrats’ campaign arm initially planned to spend $2.5 million supporting Bayh in Indiana as part of their broader strategy to bolster spending in traditionally conservative-leaning states such as North Carolina. But the DSCC has since doubled their ad reservations in Indiana. Story Continued Below “We expanded the map this year into states like Indiana where we can pick up an open Republican-held seat and further put the GOP on defense as they struggle to keep their hold on their majority,” a Democratic official said. Meanwhile, Senate Majority PAC — the super PAC dedicated to electing Democrats to the Senate — is adding an additional $1 million to their initial spending, bring its total ad reservation to $1.7 million in Indiana, a spokesman said. Bayh, who announced in July that he would make a last-minute comeback bid, has led in the limited public polling so far. But Bayh began his run with internal polling that showed him leading Young by more than 20 points. The most recent poll in the race, conducted by WTHR/Howey Politics earlier this month, shows Bayh with a four-point lead over Young.
(CNN)Hillary Clinton forced Donald Trump onto defense over his temperament, refusal to release his taxes and his past comments about race and women during a fiery debut presidential debate Monday -- a potentially pivotal moment in a tight election campaign. Clinton, who has seen her dominance of the presidential race fade in the weeks since the Democratic convention, delivered a strong performance in which she demonstrated a command of policy and a sense of humor, smiling through some of Trump's strongest attacks. She delivered the best zinger of the night in response to criticism from Trump for staying off the campaign trail recently. "I think Donald just criticized me for preparing for this debate," she said. "And yes, I did. And you know what else I prepared for? I prepared to be President. And that is a good thing." Trump came out swinging at the beginning of the debate, and made some effective points on the economy and jobs -- some of the aspects of his outsider presidential campaign that have struck a chord with many Americans. But the debate highlighted Trump's tendency to make false claims as he made inaccurate statements on everything from laws regarding policing, his support for the Iraq War and his contention that Clinton was behind the so-called birther conspiracy. CNN's Reality Check Team vets the claims at the first debate Appearing in the "spin room" after the debate to talk to journalists, Trump said he was happy with his performance. "It went better than I ever thought," he told CNN's Dana Bash. A CNN/ORC poll of debate watchers released after the event found 62% felt Clinton won compared to 27% for Trump. The poll suggests the debate audience was a bit more Democratic than the public as a whole, about on par with the Democratic tilt in the audience that watched the first debate in 2008 between Obama and John McCain. One of the most powerful moments of the debate came when the conversation focused on the so-called birther debate following Trump's recent acknowledgment that President Barack Obama was born in the US -- a fact that has been evident for years. With Trump standing just a few feet from her, Clinton blasted him for perpetuating a "racist lie." "He has a long record of engaging in racist behavior," Clinton said as Trump shook his head. Trump hit back, noting Clinton's tough critiques of Obama during their bitter 2008 primary battle. 'Holier than thou' "You treated him with terrible disrespect and I watch the way you talk now about how lovely everything is ... it doesn't work that way," he said. "When you try to act holier than thou, it really doesn't work." As the debate ended, Clinton hammered Trump over his treatment of women. "This is a man who has called women pigs, slobs and dogs," Clinton said. She accused Trump of calling a Latina contestant in a beauty contest "Miss Piggy" and a housekeeper because of her ethnicity, seemingly throwing Trump off as he twice asked "Where did you find this?" Who is Alicia Machado? Former Miss Universe said Trump called her Miss Piggy Clinton repeatedly sought to correct Trump's statements -- going so far as referring viewers to fact checks on her website -- as she aimed to portray him as out of touch with the complexities of the American economy. "I know you live in your own reality," she told Trump. Clinton and Trump opened the debate on a positive note by shaking hands before stationing themselves behind their podiums at Hofstra University on New York's Long Island. Their spouses, former President Bill Clinton and Melania Trump, also greeted each other before taking their seats in the debate hall. From there, the drama quickly unfolded. An increasingly angry Trump slammed Clinton for putting her plans to fight ISIS on her website -- and thereby tipping off America's enemy. "Well, at least I have a plan to fight ISIS," Clinton responded, referring to his previous statements that he has a "secret" plan to destroy the terrorist group. Battling over taxes Clinton also hit Trump over his refusal to release his tax returns. "Why won't he release his tax returns?" Clinton asked. "Maybe he is not as rich as he says he is," she went on. "Maybe he is not as charitable as he claims to be," "Maybe he doesn't want the American people to know that he has paid nothing in federal taxes." Clinton pressed Trump on the issue, saying "There is something he is hiding." Trump replied that he would release his taxes when Clinton made public 33,000 emails that were deleted from her private email server. When Clinton said that Trump had paid no federal income tax in some years, Trump replied "That makes me smart." Clinton also set about Trump's business record, pointing out that he had called himself "The King of Debt" and accusing him of "stiffing" thousand of contractors who did work for his business. When the debate turned to racial issues and crime, Clinton said that it was important for police to work together with local communities to restore trust. Trump accused Clinton of refusing to say the phrase "law and order" and bemoaned the state of inner cities. He said that African-Americans and Hispanics were "living in hell." "You walk down the street, you get shot," Trump said. Clinton rebuked Trump for painting "such a dire picture" of black communities. Campaign at a critical point Trump and Clinton are facing off with the campaign at a critical point, as the race is a dead heat just 43 days before Election Day. A CNN/ORC poll released Monday found Trump edging Clinton 42% to 41% in the crucial battleground state of Colorado among likely voters in a four-way race. In Pennsylvania, another key state, the poll found Clinton in a virtual tie against Trump among likely voters at 45% to 44%. The former secretary of state is relying on both states to help pave her way to the 270 electoral votes needed to win the White House. Nationally, CNN's Poll of Polls finds Clinton and Trump neck-and-neck 44%-42%. Debate prep The rivals spent the day preparing for their big battle. Clinton participated in mock debates with her tart-tongued former aide Philippe Reines playing Trump. In one practice debate, Reines assumed the character of the unpredictable nominee by praising Clinton for her role as a pioneer for women, campaign sources said. Reines even wore the kind of signature red tie that Trump favors and adopted his characteristic hand gestures in a bid to fully prepare Clinton for her unpredictable foe. The Republican nominee has watched videos of Clinton, but his preparation has been less intense than his opponent's, in keeping with his more freewheeling style. He did not hold mock debates, for instance, with someone standing in for Clinton. CNN's Dana Bash, Dylan Byers and Sara Murray contributed to this report
(CNN)A group of 375 "concerned" scientists -- including famed physicist Stephen Hawking -- released an open letter Tuesday sharply criticizing Donald Trump, citing the threat of climate change and blasting his push for the US to leave the Paris Accord. "It is of great concern that the Republican nominee for President has advocated U.S. withdrawal from the Paris Accord. A 'Parexit' would send a clear signal to the rest of the world: 'The United States does not care about the global problems of human-caused climate change. You are on your own,'" the group wrote on the website responsiblescientists.org. The use of the term "Parexit" is a reference to a political withdrawal along the lines of the UK's vote to leave the European Union, commonly called the "Brexit." They continued, "The consequences of opting out of the global community would be severe and long-lasting -- for our planet's climate and for the international credibility of the United States." The letter is signed by a number of famous scientists, including Hawking and Nobel Prize-winning physicist Steven Chu, who served as Secretary of Energy under President Barack Obama. CNN reached out to the Trump campaign for a response to the letter, but did not immediately receive a response. The Paris Agreement was reached by 195 countries at the United Nations Climate Change Conference in Paris in 2015, aimed at coordinating global efforts to combat climate change. Obama was a main proponent of the agreement, and Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton supports its ongoing implementation. The group slammed politicians who deny the existence of man-made climate change. "During the presidential primary campaign, claims were made that the Earth is not warming, or that warming is due to purely natural causes outside human control. Such claims are inconsistent with reality," they wrote. Republican nominee Donald Trump opposes the agreement, and he has previously suggested that climate change is a hoax "created by and for the Chinese." He recently said in an interview that "I am not a great believer in man-made climate change." 
Donald Trump's presidential campaign website went down briefly approximately 30 minutes into the first presidential debate. It was back up shortly after 9:30 p.m. Story Continued Below The outage appeared to begin shortly after both Trump and his Democratic rival Hillary Clinton encouraged viewers to visit their website for details of their policies. The hacktivist group Anonymous tweeted a few minutes prior that it was "getting things set up" for the debate, but it was unclear exactly what the tweet was in reference to. Anonymous has taken down Trump's website before.
The two fatal police shootings that occurred in Tulsa and Charlotte recently have prompted a renewed focus on what police may be able to do to help prevent future such incidents. Both Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump have discussed their proposals for law enforcement on the campaign trail.    The Democratic nominee has laid out two specific steps for bring change within law enforecment. The first would be to call on law enforcement and communities to "develop national guidelines on the use of force by police officers," Clinton said in a speech about her plan on July 8, 2016, the day after five police officers were ambushed and killed during a peaceful Black Lives Matter protest in Dallas. The protest was held in the wake of fatal police shootings of Alton Sterling in Baton Rouge and Philando Castile in Minnesota. "We’ll make it clear for everyone to see when deadly force is warranted, and when it isn’t," Clinton said in her speech, which was before the general conference of the African Methodist Episcopal Church in Philadelphia. The second step would be to "acknowledge that implicit bias still exists across our society and even in the best police departments" and commit $1 billion to fund new training programs and support research, she said. "We do need police and criminal justice reforms, to save lives and make sure all Americans are treated equally in rights and dignity," Clinton said in the speech, her most extensive talk yet on the issue of policing. "We do need to support police departments and stand up for the men and women who put their lives on the line every day to protect us. We do need to reduce gun violence. We may disagree about how to go about these things, but surely we can all agree with those basic premises. Her plan specifically focuses on "reducing excessive violence, reforming our sentencing laws, supporting police departments that are doing things right, and making it harder for the wrong people to get their hands on guns," she said. Clinton had also previously spoken about the need to end racial profiling. In October, her team noted that she plans to support legislation banning racial profiling on federal, state and law enforcement levels. She co-sponsored similar acts while she was in the Senate.    The Republican nominee, unlike Clinton, has given no speeches that specifically focus on his plans regarding law enforcement tactics. Instead, the self-anointed "law-and-order candidate" has made passing remarks on several law enforcement topics at different times. He has said that police need "better training," as evidenced by certain shootings. "Even when they wear cameras police wear the cameras you need training. You have to have training. You have to have better training obviously than what they have," he said during an interview with the Impact Network in September. Most recently, Trump said controversial "stop-and-frisk" practices that were previously used in New York City would be a way to end violence in the black community. The morning after mentioning this during a town hall with voters in Cleveland on Sept. 21, Trump said he didn't mean stop-and-frisk should be implemented nationally, but only in Chicago because "Chicago is out of control." Trump has also mentioned that mosques should be under surveillance, though he has wavered on the topic. He has also suggested that old military gear should be handed over to police departments, but did not go into detail. In the wake of the bombings last weekend in New York City and New Jersey, Trump said police should be allowed to profile, though his son Donald Trump Jr. later took issue with it being called "racial profiling." "They see somebody that's suspicious, they will profile," the candidate said on Fox News on Monday. "Look what's going on: Do we really have a choice? We're trying to be so politically correct in our country, and this is only going to get worse." ABC News' Liz Kreutz, Josh Haskell, John Santucci and Candace Smith contributed to this report.
Washington (CNN)Rock star Bono said Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump has the potential to be "the worst idea that ever happened to America." "America is like the best idea the world ever came up with, but Donald Trump is potentially the worst idea that ever happened to America," he told CBS's Charlie Rose. "He could destroy it." "America is not just a country," Bono continued in the interview that aired Tuesday on "This Morning." "America is an idea and that idea is bound up in justice and equality for all." The philanthropist and activist, who was in New York for the meeting of the United National General Assembly, called Trump's rise to prominence within the GOP "really dangerous." "I think he's hijacked the party, and I think he's trying to hijack the idea of America and I think it's bigger than all of us. This is really dangerous," he said. However, Bono did validate the concerns of Trump supporters frustrated with the status quo of the two leading political parties. "I would not diminish Trump supporters or underestimate their angst because I feel that in a way they have correctly assessed that the center parties haven't yet become clear," he said. "Their angst is real and genuine." The Irish musician declined to tell Americans how to vote, but said whatever voters decide will have global implications. "There are very real problems facing not just America, facing Europe," he said. "I'm Irish. I don't have a vote, and I can't be telling people how to vote. And I don't want to, but I have a voice and I can say who sits in that office affects everyone in this world." 
Washington Post reporter David Fahrenthold has been doggedly reporting on Donald Trump's charitable record, tracking down everything from $10,000 paintings of Trump paid for by his non-profit foundation to his promised donations to veterans. And in the wake of statements from the Trump campaign personally attacking Fahrenthold, the Post is pushing back. "The Trump campaign's response to our reporting has been full of personal insults and devoid of any discussion of the facts," senior politics editor Steven Ginsberg said in a statement. "We have reached out to the campaign repeatedly, by phone, email and on social media, and they have yet to answer our questions. We welcome a response that addresses the legitimate questions raised about the Trump Foundation." The Trump campaign has not responded to Fahrenthold's detailed questions about Trump's donations, but issued a comment late Tuesday after an explosive new report by Fahrenthold showed that Trump used $258,000 from his charitable foundation to settle lawsuits that involved the billionaire’s for-profit businesses. In a statement on Tuesday evening, spokesman Jason Miller said the Post, a news organizations Trump had previously blacklisted, has "gotten their facts wrong." "It is the Clinton Foundation that is set up to make sure the Clinton's personally enrich themselves by selling access and trading political favors," Miller said. "The Trump Foundation has no paid board, no management fees, no rent or overhead, and no family members on its payroll. There was not, and could not be, any intent or motive for the Trump Foundation to make improper payments. All contributions are reported to the IRS, and all Foundation donations are publicly disclosed. Mr. Trump is generous both with his money and with his time. He has provided millions of dollars to fund his Foundation and a multitude of other charitable causes." The statement then went on to personally attack Fahrenthold, a theme echoed by campaign manager Kellyanne Conway who in an interview on CNN said Fahrenthold has an "obsession". "The Post’s reporting is peppered with inaccuracies and omissions from a biased reporter who is clearly intent on distracting attention away from the corrupt Clinton Foundation, a vehicle for the Clinton's to peddle influence at the expense of the American people. Mr. Trump personally and the Trump Foundation, however, are staying focused on their charitable giving to veterans, the police, children and other deserving recipients," Miller said. Fahrenthold, for his part, is still on the trail.
Washington (CNN)The Washington Monument will remain closed indefinitely, the National Park Service announced Monday, following ongoing elevator issues. "The scope of work to be accomplished while the monument is closed and the duration of the closure are still being determined; we expect to have an announcement with those additional details in the next couple of weeks," the National Park Service said in a statement. Repairs were expected to be over by mid-September. However, determining the reasons for the elevator issues has taken longer than expected, National Park Service spokesman Mike Litterst told CNN on Monday. "Basically, we've had to make the difficult decision to keep the monument closed until the modernization work on the elevator is completed," Litterst said, characterizing the move as a "long-term" closure. The monument was shut down in mid-August when a cable broke lose in the elevator that takes visitors on a 555-foot ride up the structure to take in sky-high views of the nation's capital. Litterst said that although National Park Service officials previously considered the theory that a 2011 earthquake could have contributed to the elevator problems, a third-party inspector didn't "see any evidence" that the earthquake is a factor. A block-by-block inspection of the monument began in August 2011, after the structure experienced ground motion from the 2011 earthquake that struck the neighboring state of Virginia. 
Democrats have some advice for Hillary Clinton at her first presidential debate: Let Trump be Trump. Donald Trump’s more tightly scripted campaign of late could backfire on him when he squares off against Clinton on Monday in Hempstead, New York, Democrats believe. He won’t be able to rely on the teleprompter he’s been using of late, they say, and Trump’s only recent extended interview with The Washington Post showed that, left to his own devices, he’s apt to stumble back into controversy on issues like Barack Obama’s birthplace. Story Continued Below “He’s going to say some cockamamie stuff,” said Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee Chairman Jon Tester (D-Mont.). “Give him the rope.” Indeed, the best strategy for Clinton, lawmakers advised, is to let Trump do most of the talking. “Inevitably, he’s going to say enough dumb things to dominate the headlines,” said Sen. Chris Murphy (D-Conn.). “He’s gonna make mistakes; the question is, how big are the mistakes? And I’m certain there are things she can do that would cause his mistakes to be bigger.” Clinton will have to parry when Trump comes directly at her, but a more restrained rope-a-dope strategy is preferable to an aggressive posture right out of the gate, Democratic senators said. Trump showed in the Republican debates that he’s best as a counter-puncher, leveling spontaneous one-liners at his attackers that left them reeling. In one debate alone, Trump dubbed Sen. Marco Rubio a “choke artist” and Sen. Ted Cruz a “basket case.” Rubio notoriously jumped in the sandbox but lacked Trump’s talent — if you want to call it that — for making his zingers stick. Those moments should be instructive to Clinton, Democrats say, and serve as a warning that she should not rush into a war of words with the pioneer of put-downs. “She has to be unafraid,” said Senate Minority Leader Harry Reid of Nevada. “He’s a bully; he can’t help himself. I don’t know how he’s going to use a teleprompter in a debate situation. And he can’t control himself. His attention span is nonexistent.” Yet implicit in Reid’s comments is what is expected of Trump by Democrats: very little. And low expectations could be damaging on a debate night that will set the tone for a six-week sprint toward Election Day. Though Trump has been less bombastic over the past month, he’s still making headlines on a daily basis, whether by suggesting that Clinton’s Secret Service detail be disarmed or taking credit for predicting recent terrorist attacks in New York. Given the freewheeling nature of presidential debates, Democrats hope voters will see the vintage Trump that’s been partly concealed in recent weeks. “Expectations have been exceptionally low for Trump. I think that’s why in large part he has gotten away with it,” said Sen. Bill Nelson (D-Fla.). “If 150 million people are suddenly glued to their TV sets … they are going to be expecting to see the conduct of who they would want in a future president.” “He’ll do it himself,” said Sen. Claire McCaskill (D-Mo.). “There’s never been a time where he’s talked for longer than 30 seconds where he’s managed to say anything. He just says nothing. He’ll say the same empty phrases over and over again, and I think it will become obvious after an hour and a half.” The debate performances of Clinton and Trump are the subject of much chatter among Democrats on Capitol Hill, who have watched the race tighten after a summer surge by Clinton. When Clinton last visited with Senate Democrats in July, she remarked to the room that she has gotten more advice on debates than any other topic. “Everybody in the room laughed, because most of us had given her advice on what to do,” recounted Senate Minority Whip Dick Durbin (D-Ill.). There’s no constituency that will benefit more from a strong Clinton performance than Democrats desperately trying to take back the Senate this fall. They probably need a healthy Clinton victory to flip a minimum of four seats needed to recapture the chamber. And Clinton needs a strong debate performance to reassert the clear upper hand in the race. “Of course it’s important; she’s the head of the ticket. The better she does, [the better] we do,” Reid said. “She’s been a successful debater in the race we had with Obama. And she’s been good in the primaries with [Sen. Bernie Sanders] screaming and yelling at her all the time.” Democrats are counting on Clinton to not just wait for Trump to stumble; she also has to make an affirmative case to undecided voters, they say. That means contrasting her detailed plans for health care, the minimum wage and immigration with Trump’s more broad-brush stands on many issues. “I don’t think that the question is about attacking Trump at this point. It’s about pointing out her vision for the country,” said Sen. Jeanne Shaheen (D-N.H.). “People vote not only on who they oppose, but they want to vote for something.” Trump bragged on Fox News this week that he has the “strongest” temperament. But Democrats are betting the 90-minute showdown will reveal the opposite. “It’s important for people to see this side of him that is very much unpresidential and out of control,” said Sen. Martin Heinrich (D-N.M.). “It’s temperament, as much as anything. People want to trust that their president … is in control.”
“The kind of plan that Donald has put forth would be trickle-down economics all over again” and “it would be the most extreme version, the biggest tax cuts for the top percent of people in this country.” —Hillary Clinton She is correct that the wealthy would be the biggest winners under Donald Trump’s tax-reform plan. The top one percent of earners would see their after-tax incomes climb as much as 19.9 percent, according to an analysis by the conservative-leaning Tax Foundation. Those in the middle quintile of incomes would see, at most, a 9 percent increase, the group said.
Washington (CNN)Donald Trump's supporters on Capitol Hill said Thursday they know the stakes are high for Monday night's debate and could set the tone for the sprint to Election Day. "Donald Trump knows, the team knows that Monday night is going to be not necessarily make or break, but the momentum coming out of Monday night could be critical on both sides and Donald Trump knows that," said Rep. Chris Collins, a New York Republican, as he walked out of what could be the final meeting of Trump's congressional supporters. "He's likely to bring up some Clinton issues. I think we're going to see some give and take there," Collins said. "We all know Mr. Trump is a little quicker on his feet than Mrs. Clinton." The group met for close to an hour at the Republican National Committee headquarters and discussed the Trump campaign's plan for battleground states as well, but the debate prep stood out in the meeting led by top Trump advisers. Collins, the first congressman to endorse Trump and an early leader of efforts to rally highly reluctant House Republicans to Trump's side, said that he will be flying to New York Monday to help the Trump campaign after the debate against Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton in the media spin room. "Donald Trump knows that Monday night is absolutely critical," he said. "And I think with that in the back of his mind, I'm confident we'll see presidential Trump Monday night." Clinton supporters offer advice ahead of first debate Shortly after Collins talked Thursday, the Trump campaign sent out a debate prep survey to supporters, asking them what issues he should focus, whether he should attack Clinton's policies or defend his own and more. "Do you think Trump should refer to Hillary as 'Crooked Hillary' on stage?" Trump asked, in question #4 of the 30-question survey. Questions about Trump's use of charitable donations to pay off personal legal debts have hounded him this week, but Collins dismissed them and tried to put the focus back on the Clinton Foundation, which has been a source of consternation across the aisle. "I'm sure there will be these kinds of volleys, we'll hear more about, but the fact of the matter is Trump's Foundation made donations to not-for-profit, 501(c)3s -- that's what foundations do. And I think the more important question, or issue is there's no Trump family members being paid by the foundation," Collins said. "It's not a patronage pit like the Clinton Foundation is." How to watch the first presidential debate Collins said Trump's Hill supporters also got an update on the battleground plans, with just six weeks left in the race, and said they are confident Trump has multiple paths to the 270 electoral votes needed to win. "There are six different ways for him to get to 269, he's right now leading in Iowa, Nevada and New Hampshire, that takes him to 269, he might win one in Maine, there's 270, he might lose one in Nebraska, he's back to 269," he said. Collins cited other states in play -- Colorado, Michigan, Wisconsin, Pennsylvania, Virginia -- that could tip the balance to Trump. The focus now, he said, has turned from rallying conservatives to winning over independent and undecided voters. "It's all about the undecideds, they don't like Hillary Clinton, they don't like her with her character flaws, they haven't warmed up to President Trump and that's where the debate is going to be so critical Monday night for President Trump to address the nation for all those people who want no part of Hillary Clinton." 
(CNN)Name-calling has been the norm this political season, but it's unclear what salutations Hillary Clinton and Donald will use when they meet face-to-face Monday night. Past debates have usually featured a degree of formality and respect above harsh campaign trail rhetoric. Will that hold in 2016? There's at least some reason to think GOP nominee Trump and Democratic rival Clinton will tone it down Monday, based on some of the nicer ways they've addressed each other. Clinton, Trump poised for historic debate battle Yes, Clinton frequently uses Trump's last name derisively, as "Trump." But she's just as likely to refer to him to "Donald Trump" and sometimes even "Mr. Trump." He's famously tagged former Secretary of State Clinton "crooked Hillary." But he also regularly refers to her "Hillary," "Hillary Clinton" and from to time "Secretary Clinton." Will one or both reference a past role of their opponent? Say a back-handed compliment from Clinton about a "reality TV star"? Or will they exude a degree of familiarity by using first names only, with "Hillary" or "Donald"? How to address debate opponents has been a stumbling block before for national candidates. In 2008 Sarah Palin, the GOP vice presidential nominee, referred to her Democratic rival, then-Sen. Joe Biden of Delaware, as "Senator O'Biden." Though she had begun the debate asking if she could refer to him as "Joe." Her mistake about his last name proved a fleeting issue. 5 things to watch at Monday night's Clinton-Trump debate With the power to set a tone, distract from message and help create a memorable sound bite, there could be a lot in a name come Monday evening. Watch the video above for a sampling of how 2016 candidates have referred to their opponents over the past year. 
Donald Trump finally acknowledged President Barack Obama’s American birthplace last week, but one of his supporters, controversial Arizona Sheriff Joe Arpaio, sees a silver lining for the "birther" movement: Trump didn't take a position on whether Obama’s birth certificate was forged. “If he says the president was born here, maybe he has information I don’t have,” Arpaio told POLITICO of the GOP nominee's statement. “He didn’t say the document was legitimate. He didn’t go that route.” Story Continued Below Of Trump’s statement on Obama’s birthplace, Arpaio added: “It didn’t bother me.” Arpaio, a prominent Trump supporter known for his hard-line views on immigration, opened an investigation into the legitimacy of Obama’s birth certificate in August 2011, several months after the White House published it online, further demonstrating that he was, in fact, born in Hawaii. Trump rose to political prominence in part through insinuating, falsely, that Obama was not born in the United States — a claim the president’s supporters have long decried as racist. He backed down from it under pressure last week, in a short statement at an otherwise drawn-out press conference at his new luxury hotel in Washington. Trump also attempted to blame his opponent, Hillary Clinton, for starting the rumor, another claim independent fact checkers have debunked. But while Trump has sought to sidestep the birther issue, Arpaio has refused to back down from his own claim that Obama’s birth certificate was forged. On Tuesday in Phoenix, Arpaio addressed the conservative group that requested he investigate the document, saying that “we are looking at a forged document. Period.” On Wednesday, Arpaio told POLITICO the investigation into the document is ongoing. He declined to detail what evidence that effort has turned up, but he claimed that his office has found nothing “to say it’s a legitimate document.” Arpaio also tried to separate himself from the birther movement, arguing that his investigation is focused on the document itself, rather than the president’s birthplace, and denied that his skepticism is motivated by racism. Still, he would not say that he believes Obama was born in the U.S. “I have no idea now where he was born,” Arpaio said. “You hear a lot of stories.” He and Trump did not discuss the birth certificate issue before the nominee held the press conference last week, Arpaio said. “I didn’t know he was going to say it,” he said.
Washington (CNN)A federal judge on Friday ordered the State Department to release some, but not all, of the emails recovered from Hillary Clinton's private server by the FBI ahead of the presidential election in November. DC District Court Judge James Boasberg said the department must process 1,050 pages of emails between now and November 4, releasing any non-exempt documents aside from those that are determined to be duplicates of those already released. It is unclear exactly how many pages the State Department will have to release as part of that order, but it is expected to be significantly fewer than 1,000 pages. That's because a "substantial number" of the recovered documents are duplicates or near-duplicates, a Justice Department attorney representing the State Department said in court. The State Department has appraised approximately 15,000 documents recovered by the FBI, believed to have been sent by or to former Secretary Clinton while she was in office. Of those, over 9,400 have been deemed personal and therefore not subject to release, the attorney said, while approximately 5,600 are believed to be work-related. Production will begin October 7, with subsequent releases October 21 and November 4 -- four days before the election. The State Department will then process 500 pages of the remaining documents per month until all have been released. The order by Judge Boasberg comes as part of a Freedom of Information Act lawsuit brought by the conservative legal watchdog group Judicial Watch. An attorney for Judicial Watch pressed the judge to order the release of all the relevant records prior to the election. Saying he was sympathetic to the efforts of the State Department's heavily-taxed FOIA division, Boasberg offered his 1,500-page order. "I think it's important the public have as much clarity as possible," Boasberg said, but later quipped, "sometimes I wonder if there's anything other that FOIA processing going on at State." The Judicial Watch case is one over over two dozen FOIA lawsuits related to Clinton's emails. In a statement to CNN, State Department Spokesman John Kirby reiterated the State Department's commitment to release the official emails, and said, "All releasable records and portions of these records will be posted on State's FOIA website." 
Politico POLITICO's must-read briefing on what's driving the day in Washington Good morning from Hempstead, New York. The general consensus is this: Donald Trump didn’t throw up on his shoes. But Hillary Clinton had the far better night in their first 90-minute (it actually lasted 95 minutes) matchup here at Hofstra University on Long Island. Clinton mostly kept her cool -- as did Trump for the first portion of the evening. Trump ended up citing Sid Blumenthal, Rosie O’Donnell and referring viewers to Sean Hannity to vouch for his opposition to the Iraq War. The pre-debate buzz among reporters here was that Trump left himself the option to come to the spin room, but would only show up if he needed to change the narrative. He came to the spin room, and then spoke to Hannity live from the press filing center. Maggie Haberman (@maggieNYT) pointed out that “she can’t remember last time, if ever, a general election candidate went to the spin room.” Not a good sign for Trump. LAST NIGHT Hillary Clinton ended the debate by saying, “And one of the worst things he said was about a woman in a beauty contest. He loves beauty contests, supporting them and hanging around them. And he called this woman Ms. Piggy. Then he called her Ms. Housekeeping, because she was Latina. Donald, she has a name...Her name is Alicia Machado and she has become a U.S. citizen, and you can bet she's going to vote this November." Story Continued Below THIS MORNING Donald Trump went on “Fox and Friends” and said Machado was “the worst” contestant they had and chided her for gaining weight. “She was impossible...She was the winner and you know she gained a massive amount of weight and it was a real problem...This was many years ago, and [Clinton] found the girl and talked about her like she was Mother Teresa and it wasn’t quite that way, but that’s okay. Hillary has to do what she has to do.” Video clip http://bit.ly/2cA06xi (h/t Alex Burns) **SUBSCRIBE to Playbook: http://politi.co/1M75UbX --WHAT’S NEXT: The next presidential debate -- in St. Louis on Oct. 9 -- gives Trump an opportunity to bounce back. Remember: Mitt Romney trounced Barack Obama in the first debate. But the second event, which will be held at Wash. U., is a town hall, which brings its own challenges for both candidates. Clinton mostly skated on some of Trump’s signature attacks: Benghazi, her private email server, the FBI investigation, immigration and the Clinton Foundation. Trump is certain to hammer away on those issues in the coming weeks, and try to inject them into the conversation in Missouri. The vice presidential debate is in Farmville, Virginia, on Oct. 4 -- one week from today. WHAT TO WATCH FOR: How the down-ballot candidates react. Top Republican operatives running Senate and House races say they weren’t thrilled, but they don’t know that Trump’s bad night moves the needle. The early take is that Trump was stable for the first 30 minutes, which gives Republicans hope that any negative impact will be limited. 42 DAYS until Election Day. The government shuts down Friday. THE NARRATIVE -- “Clinton set the trap and Trump walked in: The Democrat dominated the debate. Will it matter?” by Eli Stokols: “‘Donald was very fortunate in his life, and that’s all to his benefit,’ Clinton started. ‘He started his business with $14 million, borrowed from his father, and he really believes that the more you help wealthy people, the better off we'll be and that everything will work out from there.’ Trump quickly dismissed Clinton’s characterization, saying he received ‘a very small loan’ that he turned into a company valued, he claimed, in the billions. ‘I say that only because that’s the kind of thinking that our country needs.’ In the moment, he seemed calm—but from that point forward he was anything but. ‘She mind-screwed him from the beginning by mentioning the loan from his father,’ said Rob Stutzman, a GOP operative in California. ‘That was brilliant psychological warfare on her part. He slowly unwound from there, culminating in borderline incoherency over the final 30 minutes.’” http://politi.co/2cynqH0 JMART and PAT HEALY on A1 of the NYT, “CANDIDATES PRESS POINTED ATTACKS IN ACERBIC DEBATE -- Trump Raps Clinton on Trade and Email -- She Counters on His Fitness”: “In a relentlessly antagonistic debate, Donald J. Trump and Hillary Clinton clashed over trade, the Iraq war, his refusal to release his tax returns and her use of a private email server, with Mr. Trump frequently showing impatience and political inexperience as Mrs. Clinton pushed him to defend his past denigration of women and President Obama. Mr. Trump repeatedly interrupted Mrs. Clinton and at times talked over her throughout the 90-minute debate, making slashing attacks that surely pleased his Republican base but may have been off-putting to women and undecided voters. He also left unchallenged her assertion that he paid no federal taxes for years.” http://nyti.ms/2cyicen … A1 PDF http://nyti.ms/2cZMY2O --WaPo leadall by Phil Rucker and Anne Gearan: “Donald Trump unrelentingly blamed the nation’s chronic problems on ‘typical politician’ Hillary Clinton, yet he found himself mostly on the defensive in their first debate here Monday night as she denounced him for racial insensitivity, hiding potential conflicts of interest and ‘stiffing’ those who helped build his business empire … Trump … spent much of the evening explaining himself — over his temperament, treatment of women and minorities, business practices and readiness to be commander in chief, as well as over his long perpetuation of a falsehood about Barack Obama’s birthplace to delegitimize his presidency. ‘He has a long record of engaging in racist behavior, and the birther lie was a very hurtful one,’ said Clinton ... ‘Barack Obama is a man of great dignity, and I could tell how much it bothered him and annoyed him that this was being touted and used against him.’ Trump, who earlier this month at last acknowledged Obama’s birth in Hawaii, replied by invoking Clinton’s 2008 rivalry with Obama: ‘When you try to act holier than thou, it really doesn’t work.’” http://wapo.st/2dokMt5 FOR REFERENCE -- The full transcript http://politi.co/2doh9Dw GOTHAM WATCH -- N.Y. Post (with photo of a grimacing Trump): “DON, NOT OUT -- Brawler Trump survives debate” http://nyp.st/2czNBSK … N.Y. Daily News (with large Clinton photo, and a grimacing Trump): “FACE OF THE NATION -- Hillary’s look says it all as Trump buries himself in bumbling blather” http://nydn.us/2czNfvr **** A message from BP: Over the past 10 years, no energy company has invested more in the U.S. than BP – $90 billion in total. Take 90 seconds to see what else we’re doing to help keep America moving forward. ****** GLENN THRUSH’s “OFF MESSAGE” -- “5 takeaways from the first presidential debate: Clinton hits him where it hurts, and Trump’s boorish reaction hands her a win”: “Trump was wimpy on defense. Trump is supposed to be the big meanie but it was Clinton who hit him where it hurt most … What about the Clinton Foundation? The former secretary's debate team … expected him to savage her on the various questions raised about her family's foundation. They were worried about it. While he hammered her ever-so-briefly on emails, he was so engaged in self-justification, he flat-out forgot to pursue an attack that could have made the night a lot less lousy. His ‘30 years’ attack worked - and he’ll use it again … [T]here were a few gold nuggets strewn in the wreckage of Hofstra - the most valuable an assault (demonstrable and fact-checker-friendly) on Clinton’s effectiveness in 25-plus years of public life … “Clinton effectively attacked his business career … Clinton plucked the strains of what could be a genuine crossover hit this fall among ever-elusive white working-class voters and independents: Trump’s failure to turn over his tax returns. Clinton went there with a vengeance – engaging in a little Trump-esque fact-free speculation about the motives of the billionaire developer-turned-reality TV star … Her most effective attack - and his worst answer. If the GOP nominee needed any more proof that preparation trumps bombast in a general election debate, he got it when Clinton launched a merciless attack on his habit of stiffing contractors who have labored on his construction projects over the years.” http://politi.co/2czumZu --@realDonaldTrump: “Nothing on emails. Nothing on the corrupt Clinton Foundation. And nothing on #Benghazi. #Debates2016 #debatenight … Wow, did great in the debate polls (except for @CNN - which I don’t watch). Thank you! … @newtgingrich just said ‘a historic victory for Trump.’ NICE! … @DRUDGE_REPORT’s First Presidential Debate Poll: Trump: 80% Clinton: 20% Join the MOVEMENT today & lets #MAGA! http://www.DonaldJTrump.com” TEXT FROM TRUMP -- “Tonight’s WIN is for hard-working Americans like YOU. Let’s keep pushing. Our movement must finish strong. Fund our POST DEBATE RESPONSE ->” www.bit.ly/2dns1C9 BEHIND THE SCENES: The CLINTON campaign set http://politi.co/2cH2QaJ … The TRUMP campaign set http://politi.co/2cYTcjB … Pins in the Anheuser-Busch tent http://politi.co/2dfJOJH … The bar in the Anheuser-Busch tent, which served beer and food throughout the debate http://bit.ly/2cxPEBI … Don King gaggling on behalf of Donald Trump http://bit.ly/2dfoQak … House Homeland Security Chairman Mike McCaul (R-Texas) huddling with retired Lt. Gen Michael Flynn http://bit.ly/2cygNVh … Megyn Kelly doing a post-debate standup from the media filing tent http://bit.ly/2dg4Ioj … Clinton spokesman Brian Fallon’s much buzzed-about festive coat http://bit.ly/2d2QBs8 SPOTTED: Bob Barnett talking to Corey Lewandowski in the Anheuser-Busch tent … Reps. Marsha Blackburn (R-Tenn.), Paul Tonko (D-N.Y.), Chris Collins (R-N.Y.), Xavier Becerra (D-Calif.), Cedric Richmond (D-La.), Joe Crowley (D-N.Y.), Charlie Rangel (D-N.Y.), Eliot Engel (D-N.Y.), Mike Kelly (R-Pa.) and Steve Israel (D-N.Y.) all at Hofstra for the main event … Don King waving an Israeli flag … Rick Lazio at the Long Island Marriott … Sheldon Adelson pulling up close to the debate hall in a stretch limo… Trump supporters Woody Johnson, Ray Washburne, David Tamasi and Rick Hohlt … Rev. Jesse Jackson, Vernon Jordan, Jay Dunn, David Jones, Al Mottur, Peter O’Keefe, J.B. Pritzker, Gene Karpinski of the League of Conservation Voters, Google’s Eric Schmidt … Scott Brown! BLAME GAME -- “Trump: My mic was ‘defective’,” by Yousef Saba: “[Donald] Trump complained in the spin room that his debate mic wasn’t working right, according to a video posted by a CBS journalist. ‘They gave me a defective mic!’ he told reporters. ‘[I] wonder, was that on purpose?’” http://politi.co/2cRZYFM -- “Giuliani: I’d skip next debates if I were Trump,” by Matthew Nussbaum: “Donald Trump should skip the next two debates unless he gets special guarantees from the moderators, former New York mayor and top Trump adviser Rudy Giuliani told reporters after the debate. ‘If I were Donald Trump I wouldn’t participate in another debate unless I was promised that the journalist would act like a journalist and not an incorrect, ignorant fact checker,’ Giuliani said. ‘The moderator would have to promise that there would be a moderator and not a fact checker and in two particular cases an enormously ignorant, completely misinformed fact checker.’” http://politi.co/2cyiLEW --@RosieGray: “.@JasonMillerinDC, asked several times by reporters, won't say if Trump pays federal income taxes” BY THE NUMBERS -- 18.6 million people engaged on Facebook creating 73.8 million likes, posts, comments and shares related to the debate. CNN/ORC POLL -- “Post-debate poll: Hillary Clinton takes round one,” by CNN polling director Jennifer Agiesta: “Hillary Clinton was deemed the winner of Monday night's debate by 62% of voters who tuned in to watch, while just 27% said they thought Donald Trump had the better night, according to a CNN/ORC Poll of voters who watched the debate … “Voters who watched said Clinton expressed her views more clearly than Trump and had a better understanding of the issues by a margin of more than 2-to-1. Clinton also was seen as having done a better job addressing concerns voters might have about her potential presidency by a 57% to 35% margin, and as the stronger leader by a 56% to 39% margin. The gap was smaller on which candidate appeared more sincere and authentic, though still broke in Clinton's favor, with 53% saying she was more sincere vs. 40% who felt Trump did better on that score. Trump topped Clinton 56% to 33% as the debater who spent more time attacking their opponent.” http://cnn.it/2cHKPZQ --@NateSilver538: “Clinton’s 35-point win in the CNN post-debate poll is the 3rd largest margin ever, after Romney-Obama I and Clinton-Bush 92 townhall.” LUNTZ’S FOCUS GROUP -- CLINTON WINS -- “Hillary Clinton came better prepared for tonight’s debate than any candidate in recent memory. She knew when to attack and when to explain – and how to pace it all over 90 minutes. Donald Trump started off great for the first few questions. He had an effective refrain of slamming Clinton’s ‘30 years’ of nothing, which resonated particularly well with independent voters. For the first 15-20 minutes, Trump’s numbers consistently went up whenever he railed against the current system and all its problems. Trump talked a lot about problems. But Clinton talked about solutions. ... “At the end of the night, Clinton moved the dials more with my group – 16 voters declared her the debate winner, while five said Trump won. Focus group consisted of 27 participants, all undecided voters from Pennsylvania. Pre-Debate: 10 leaned toward Clinton, six leaned toward Trump, and 11 were neutral. Post-Debate: 13 leaned toward Clinton, five leaned toward Trump, and nine were neutral.” NEW ADS -- Priorities USA is up with a new TV swing-state ad called “My Temperament” in Ohio, Florida, Nevada, Pennsylvania, Iowa, New Hampshire and North Carolina. http://bit.ly/2dg6vtN … Future45 -- a super PAC backed by the Ricketts and Adelson families -- is rotating this new ad called “Bad Experience” into its national TV buy http://bit.ly/2cyrrv1 HAPPENING TODAY -- Today is National Voter Registration Day. Hillary Clinton is in Raleigh. Tim Kaine is in Miami, Lakeland and Orlando. Anne Holton is in Detroit, Ann Arbor, Lansing and Grand Rapids. Bill Clinton is in Toledo and Cleveland. Donald Trump is going to Little Havana, Fla. for a town hall at 2 p.m. and Melbourne, Fla. for an for a 7 p.m. rally at the Orlando Melbourne International Airport’s AeroMod Hangar. He will also have two fundraisers: at Doral at noon and in Longwood, Fla. at 5 p.m. Mike Pence’s event in Waukesha, Wisconsin, has been canceled. EVENT TOMORROW -- Jake and Anna will sit down for a chat Wednesday morning with theSkimm co-founders and co-CEOs Carly Zakin and Danielle Weisberg at Twitter’s D.C. office. October is National Women’s Small Business Month, and Zakin and Weisberg recently were named to Fortune’s 40 under 40 list. Just this week, it became public that the New York Times invested in theSkimm. Join us for breakfast, conversation and networking. Join in on the conversation on Twitter at #POLITICOSkimm and send us a message at politicoevents@politico.com to learn more. HOW IT PLAYED -- Des Moines Register (banner headline under large banner photo) “ROUND 1 TO CLINTON -- Several Iowa political experts say she showed competence, but are unsure of impact” http://politi.co/2docO3M … L.A. Times (banner headline), “A TESTY OPENING ROUND -- Clinton and Trump engage fiercely over their pasts and their plans” http://politi.co/2dovXlG … Las Vegas Review-Journal (banner headline), “FIRST-ROUND FIREWORKS” http://politi.co/2czTfnR … Arizona Republic (banner headline, with two pull quotes) “ON THE OFFENSIVE” http://politi.co/2docVMK … Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (banner headline), “Clashing contenders … Clinton, Trump trade harsh attacks on records, temperament” http://politi.co/2dov64w … Cincinnati Enquirer (banner headline, with Trump quote about Clinton’s emails, and Clinton quote about Trump’s comments on race), “GLOVES COME OFF IN FIRST DEBATE” http://politi.co/2d00fIR HUFFPOST banner, “ORANGE CRUSH: DON DEMOLISHED AT DEBATE” ... Drudge, “Fire!” (an early banner featured a reader poll saying Trump won the debate) MEDIAWATCH -- “Lester Holt stays out of the way,” by Hadas Gold: “Lester Holt was on an island on Monday night. And for most of the first presidential debate, he stayed there, letting the battleships of Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump shoot their missiles at one another. It made for some memorable exchanges between Trump and Clinton, matched in close-up on most networks. For some debate watchers, that’s what they want their moderators to do: say ‘go’ and let them run. But it also left some gaps where viewers probably expected sharp questions. “There was no probing of Trump’s wall with Mexico, and vow to get the Mexicans to pay for it, or the Republican nominee’s ban on Muslims entering the country. And he barely prodded Clinton to explain her private email server in a question so gently worded that she was able to dispatch the issue with a few taut sentences.The Clinton Foundation? Wasn’t discussed; neither was the Benghazi attack. Few moderators have faced such intense scrutiny in the days leading up to the debate as Holt did, with Clinton’s allies demanding he serve as a fact-checker and Trump’s backers insisting that he allow the candidates to have their say.” http://politi.co/2dyVlEm -- “Donald Trump Says Lester Holt Did ‘Great Job,’ but Some Surrogates Disagree,” by WSJ’s Reid Epstein in Hempstead: “‘There were a few issues I felt like he should have raised, like the Clinton Foundation, that were not raised,’ Alabama Sen. Jeff Sessions said. ‘I would liked to have had a good discussion of [immigration]. … A good discussion of it would have been healthy.’ … ‘I thought he could have asked her more questions,’ [New York GOP Rep. Peter] King said. ‘If he was going to ask Donald Trump about his taxes he certainly could have asked Hillary Clinton about all the money she got from Wall Street and refuses to disclose the speeches that she made. You know, you have the moderator you have and you don’t complain about it.’” http://on.wsj.com/2doqqvs INSIDE THE CAMPAIGNS -- “The Myth Of ‘Trump-Whisperer’ Kellyanne Conway,” by BuzzFeed’s McKay Coppins: “[A]s the race has narrowed, Conway has emerged in the popular imagination of politicos and pundits as the deft handler who’s finally succeeded in domesticating Trump. … Interviews this week with more than half a dozen GOP sources close to the campaign suggest her ‘Trump-whisperer’ status is more made-for-TV myth than reality. ... [T]he biggest factor driving Conway’s outsize public reputation is her omnipresence on television. She spends far more time in front of the cameras than typical campaign managers do, appearing constantly on cable news, network morning shows, and even Bill Maher’s HBO talk show Real Time … Some have questioned whether it’s possible for her to effectively manage a national presidential campaign from a green room.” http://bzfd.it/2cZOsdn **** A message from BP: We’ve donated $147 million to U.S. community programs over the past five years. Check out the programs we support in your community. ****** BEYOND THE BELTWAY -- “Uprising activists: Charlotte mayor, police chief should resign,” by Charlotte Observer’s Ann Doss Helms: “Local and state activists called Monday for Police Chief Kerr Putney and Charlotte Mayor Jennifer Roberts to resign, as the city’s latest round of tension between police and the black community moves into its second week. At a Monday news conference held by Charlotte Uprising, a coalition that emerged during last week’s protests, speakers said both officials have failed to protect the city’s African American and working class citizens and withheld information about two fatal shootings last week.” http://bit.ly/2dcErt3 FIRST IN PLAYBOOK – New Hillary video: “Which version of Donald Trump showed up at the debate?” http://bit.ly/2d5ISHg -- Former Rep. Gabby Giffords and her husband Captain Mark Kelly on gun violence in the first debate: “Donald Trump paid lip service to gun safety, which is no surprise because it's this year's political high ground. However, we know he supports the gun lobby's efforts to protect loopholes that let criminals get guns. That's dangerous, and it puts our communities at risk. Hillary, on the other hand, was passionate and forceful in her support of stronger gun laws that save lives.” The statement comes as they are launching a 14-state “Vocal Majority Tour” to try and make the 2016 election a referendum on gun safety. FUTURECAST – “Uber is researching a new vertical-takeoff ride offering that flies you around,” by Re/code’s Kara Swisher: “[T]he fast-growing ride-sharing company [is] seriously looking at a new form of transportation to offer its customers: Short-haul flying in cities. The technology is called VTOL — which stands for vertical takeoff and landing. Simply put, VTOL is an aircraft that can hover, take off and land vertically, which would also describe a helicopter. But, unlike the typical helicopter, these planes have multiple rotors, could have fixed wings and perhaps eventually would use batteries and be more silent. In time, like cars, such aircraft would be autonomous.” http://on.recode.net/2cRVjDT VALLEY WATCH -- “Disney Considers Offer for Twitter: Sale process in early stages and follows announcement of Twitter talks with Salesforce,” by WSJ’s Dana Cimilluca, Joann Lublin and Erich Schwartzel: “Twitter, with a stock-market value of about $20 billion, has also held preliminary talks with Salesforce.com Inc. … The sale process is in early stages and it is far from guaranteed that anyone will end up buying Twitter.” http://on.wsj.com/2cypu1E  Cuccinelli bumoer sticker in the rear window of a pickup (presumably second hand from VA) in Phnom Penh A photo posted by Jon Fasman (@jonfasman) on Sep 25, 2016 at 11:38pm PDT SPOTTED at the debate, per pooler Zeke Miller: “Mark Cuban (who appears to be seated in the front row), Dan Malloy, Jesse Jackson, Andrew Cuomo and Sandra Lee, Reince and Sally Priebus, Donna Brazile, Don King, Rudy Giuliani in conversation with Sheldon Adelson ... Mike Flynn, One of the Baldwin brothers with a Trump button, Bill de Blasio, Ray Washbourne, Several members of the NY delegation taking a selfie, Charles Rangel calling out to Don King ‘welcome home, welcome home, we missed you.’ ... Mike Pence sitting up front” 2016 PLAYERS -- “How a Young Campaign Staffer Battling Stage 4 Cancer Helped Hillary Clinton Decide Her VP,” by People’s Sandra Sobieraj Westfall: “When Hillary Clinton and Tim Kaine talked with PEOPLE about their budding partnership, one mysterious bit in the interview stood out: ‘Some of my staffers,’ the senator from Virginia said to Clinton softly, ‘we have been through some challenging times, and you have taken good care of them.’ Enter Tyrone Gayle. Because the ‘some of my staffers’ turns out to be Gayle – and the ‘some challenging times’ is Gayle's life-and-death battle with Stage 4 colon cancer. Gayle, 28, was just about marking his one-year anniversary as a domestic-policy spokesman at Clinton's Brooklyn, New York, campaign headquarters last March when the diagnosis upended his world.” http://bit.ly/2d5OTDY HOT DOC -- WELCOME TO THE NEIGHBORHOOD! -- Rep. Mark DeSaulnier (D-Calif.) bought a new condo on North Carolina Avenue, SE. He picked up the studio apartment in September for $252,000, according to D.C. property records. DeSaulnier was elected for the first time in 2014. He replaced longtime California Democrat George Miller, and he represents a heavily Democratic district in the East Bay. TV TONIGHT – PBS’ “The Contenders: 16 for ’16” tonight looks at reasons why Michael Dukakis and Mitt Romney lost their chance at the presidency, in an episode called “The Technocrats”. “Was it Dukakis’ goofy grin in the seat of a war machine or, perhaps, Romney’s failure to follow in his father’s footsteps as a proponent of Civil Rights?” Preview clips http://bit.ly/2dgsnZD ... http://bit.ly/2dosXWe TRANSITIONS -- “Bill Corr and Kristi Martin Join Waxman Strategies”: “Corr comes to Waxman with decades of experience in health policy work, most recently as Deputy Secretary of HHS. ... Kristi Martin has left her post as a Senior Advisor in the Office of Health Reform at HHS to serve as Vice President at Waxman.” http://politi.co/2d687YC BIRTHDAYS: Juleanna Glover (hat tips: Becca, Pepper) … DNC Chair Debbie Wasserman Schultz is 5-0 ... Politico’s Tony Romm … Lucy McCalmont, coordinating producer at the Sports Tribune ... New America Foundation head Anne-Marie Slaughter ... Carl Woog, director of strategic comms at NSC and a DoD and Ash Carter alum and the pride of Phoenix … Megan Grant, VP for strategic comms at Glover Park Group and a CNN alum ... Jeff Birnbaum, president of BGR Public Relations and longtime D.C. journalist, is 6-0 ... Brian Killheffer, the king of Delaware, is 35 ... ex-CAPer Christina DiPasquale (h/t DJW) ... LaVerne Alexander, COS to Rep. Donald Payne (h/t Jamie Oh) ... David Ratcliff (h/t Jon Haber) ... Meridith McGraw of ABC News (h/t Natalie Boyse) … Will Bredderman … Marcus Sebastian Mason, senior partner of the Madison Group (h/t Robb Watters) ... Caitlyn “Oh Word?” Schneeweiss ... Christina DiPasquale, founder and CEO of Balestra Media … … Ed Niles, lead media strategist at BlueLabs and a DCCC alum ... Deloitte’s Alexa Wertman is 26 ... AP’s Pablo Gorondi … Sara Chieffo of the League of Conservation Voters … Concetta Cantelmo of Budd Lake, N.J. ... Martin D. Franks, who served in the Carter administration before becoming the longtime head of lobbying (and many other things) for CBS Corporation ... WJLA alum Tim Traylor … Charles Percy … Rene Carbone Bardorf, chief comms officer at National Defense Industrial Association ... Earl Plante is 44 ... Georgi Tsakonis is 61 ... Sean Miller ... NBC News’ Matthew Vann ... PwC’s Scott Moshier is 31 ... former Rep. Ed Case (D-HI) is 64 ... Geoff Burgan, DWS’ press secretary … Michelle Carrier ... Kathy Heinan ... Lee Wasserman ... John Loredo ... Abby Curran (h/ts Teresa Vilmain) ... Shaun Cassidy is 58 ... comedian Marc Maron is 53 ... Gwyneth Paltrow is 44 ... Lil’ Wayne is 34 ... singer Avril Lavigne is 32 (h/ts AP) SUBSCRIBE to the Playbook family: POLITICO Playbook http://politi.co/1M75UbX ... New York Playbook http://politi.co/1ON8bqW … Florida Playbook http://politi.co/1OypFe9 ... New Jersey Playbook http://politi.co/1HLKltF ... Massachusetts Playbook http://politi.co/1Nhtq5v ... Illinois Playbook http://politi.co/1N7u5sb ... California Playbookhttp://politi.co/2bLvcPl ... Brussels Playbook http://politi.co/1FZeLcw ... All our political and policy tipsheets http://politi.co/1M75UbX
Donald Trump pushed back against criticism he received from Hillary Clinton during last night's debate regarding his treatment of former Miss Universe Alicia Machado, saying "she gained a massive amount of weight, and it was a real problem." Trump made his remarks on "Fox and Friends" this morning in response to Clinton's pointing out that Trump called Machado "Miss Piggy" and blasting the Republican nominee's overall treatment of women. "She was the winner, and, you know, she gained a massive amount of weight, and it was a real problem," Trump said of Machado. "We had a real problem. Not only that, her attitude, and we had a real problem with her." Trump spoke about Machado's appearance today while answering a question about whether Clinton had gotten under his skin. He said she hadn't, and he went on to compare Machado with other Miss Universes, describing her as "the worst we ever had."    Machado, representing Venezuela, won Miss Universe in 1996 when she was 19 years old. She gained weight after the competition and accused Trump of humiliating her over her appearance shortly thereafter. After her reign as Miss Universe, she acted in international soap operas and had a brief stint promoting a weight loss product. She appeared in a 2006 edition of Mexican Playboy. She became a U.S. citizen in May of 2016 and has become a supporter of Clinton. "Donald, she has a name. Her name is Alicia Machado," Clinton said last night. "And she has become a U.S. citizen, and you can bet she is going to vote this November." Trump later told a gaggle of reporters that he was proud that he did not bring up former President Bill Clinton's history of infidelity. “I'm very happy that I was able to hold back on the indiscretions with respect to Bill Clinton," Trump said. “Because I have a lot of respect for Chelsea Clinton, and I just didn't want to say what I was going to say."
Washington (CNN)Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton are in a tight race in in Georgia, a traditionally deep red state, according to a new poll. The Republican candidate has 45% to Clinton's 42% in the Monmouth University poll, within the poll's margin of error. Libertarian Gary Johnson had the support of 8% of likely voters. Trump is underperforming previous GOP candidates. Mitt Romney won the state by 8 points in 2012 over President Barack Obama. The incumbent Republican senator is also out-polling Trump. Sen. Johnny Isakson has a 16-point lead over challenger Jim Barksdale, 50% to 34%. Clinton's strength comes from the Atlanta area, where she leads Trump 55% to 35%. But Trump leads her 51% to 33% elsewhere in the Peach State. She leads 88% to 4% among the state's black voters, but trails 20% to 66% among white voters. Clinton and Trump have similar favorability ratings in the state. Clinton is viewed 32% favorably and 56% unfavorably. Trump is viewed favorably by 33% of likely voters and unfavorably by 50%. Monmouth surveyed 401 like Georgia voters from September 15 to 18 for the poll, which has a margin of error of plus or minus 4.9 percentage points. 
NEW YORK — There's at least one Muslim country that Donald Trump has "great respect" for. The Republican presidential nominee Monday showered Egypt's increasingly autocratic ruler, Abdel Fattah al-Sisi, with kind words during a special meeting on the sidelines of the United Nations General Assembly. Story Continued Below Trump, who has called for a ban on immigration from countries "compromised by terrorism," which presumably would include Egypt, promised to invite Sisi to visit the White House if he's elected president. Trump also suggested he'd like to visit Egypt. In a strikingly praise-filled summary of the meeting released by his campaign, the Republican was said to express to Sisi "his strong support for Egypt’s war on terrorism, and how under a Trump administration, the United States of America will be a loyal friend, not simply an ally, that Egypt can count on in the days and years ahead." Trump also was said to have "emphasized" to Sisi "his high regard for peace-loving Muslims." The statement came the same day that the real estate mogul, responding to a suspected terrorist attack in New York, lamented that police officers weren't allowed to use racial profiling. Sisi also met with Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton. Both the 2016 candidates have been criticized by people across the political spectrum for sparing any time for Sisi, whose harsh rule has infuriated human rights activists. But Egypt is still considered a vital ally for the United States, not least because it maintains a peace deal with Israel and is a relatively stable Arab country in an increasingly volatile Middle East. It also is considered an important partner in the battle against Islamist militancy. The meeting between Trump and Sisi also included Trump advisers, Sen. Jeff Sessions (R-Ala.) and retired Lt. Gen. Michael Flynn, former director of the Defense Intelligence Agency. According to the readout, Trump expressed "great respect for Egypt’s history" and a "great fondness" for the Egyptian people. The readout did not say what Sisi said in return to Trump. Egyptian officials did not immediately respond to requests for comment Monday from POLITICO.
(CNN)The nation's billionaires -- energized by a presidential race heading down to the wire and led to believe that their money can tip the balance -- are digging deep. Sheldon Adelson has now pledged $45 million to Republicans, with $20 million to the Senate Leadership Fund announced this week. Facebook co-founder Dustin Moskovitz this month promised $20 million to Democrats. And Michael Bloomberg is likely to dedicate $15 million to his pro-gun control group that has backed both parties, CNN has learned. The investments come as the value of hefty fundraising and television advertising has been thrown into question this year thanks to Donald Trump's largely free-media driven campaign. Meanwhile, the failure of big-money candidates like Jeb Bush and the ability of Bernie Sanders to raise tens of millions of dollars from small donors underscored questions about whether big money packs the same punch this election cycle as it once did. But as Election Day nears, many of the top 1 percent decided they still think their checks matter. "The fundraisers have been calling for a while. Now we're all kind of settled back in, the summer's over, and you look up and, man, this election's right on top of ya," said Steve Mostyn, a Democratic trial lawyer who gave $1 million to Hillary Clinton's super PAC and is prepared to give another $1 million to it before the election wraps. Mostyn, like other donors, said the increasing competitiveness of the presidential and Senate races made him feel he needed to join in. In a non-competitive race, an extra million might just be gravy. So Tom Steyer, the billionaire environmental activist, committed another $15 million to his Democratic super PAC. The Ricketts family of the Midwest -- which financed substantial amounts of the barrage against Donald Trump during the Republican primary -- is now organizing millions to support him. And a batch of out-of-nowhere megadonors -- whether it's pro-Israel philanthropist Cherna Moskowitz on the right or Hollywood filmmaker Thomas Tull on the left — are leaving their mark. Too much, too late? And TV, or not TV? Yet the biggest givers may have waited too long, depending on how they want to spend their money. With each passing week, the millions have smaller utility as advertising rates spike and early votes are cast. Steyer is an exception, routing his millions to his own personal super PAC, Next Gen Climate Action, along with a super PAC co-run with a labor unions, For our Future. Both of the groups are funneling their money into a field program -- not paid media. "We believe in the traditional American democratic process where neighbors talk to neighbors about the most important issues affecting their lives," Steyer said in a statement to CNN. "That's something you can't squeeze into a 15 second ad." The other rising Democratic donor: Moskovitz, who sent ripples through the donor world when he pledged $20 million to a variety of liberal and Democratic Party groups, but didn't give to Clinton TV ad powerhouse Priorities USA. Moskovitz told CNN that he had "nothing more to announce" about any potential gift to Priorities. While he is "primarily focused on the top" of the ticket, he described Priorities as "distinguished by focusing on TV more than anything else." Bloomberg, the former Republican-turned-independent New York City mayor who has endorsed Clinton, does not plan to give to Priorities USA either, according to Howard Wolfson, a Bloomberg political adviser. But he will likely end up spending $15 million for his Independence USA, Wolfson said. The group has already spent in Senate races for Republican incumbent Pat Toomey in Pennsylvania and Democratic challenger Maggie Hassan in New Hampshire, and is assessing whether to air advertisements in other states, Wolfson said. For the GOP, the pro-Trump, Ricketts-led effort, is a bet that TV does indeed work. The Ricketts are donating $1 million to their group, Future 45, and hope to raise a total of $25 million in this campaign's closing weeks. They plan to run ads in six states with competitive Senate races: Florida, Nevada, Ohio, New Hampshire, Pennsylvania and Iowa, according to the head of the PAC, Brian Baker. It's unclear how many of the traditional donors that have been allied with the Ricketts family are following them into the fray. Future 45 was dormant for months after Trump won the nomination. Several major donors who have given to Ricketts-led groups in the past did not respond to requests for comment Wednesday about whether they would fund Future 45. Some, like Home Deport founder Bernie Marcus and former US Senate candidate Linda McMahon, are publicly backing Trump and looking for ways to give. Others, like California investor Bill Obendorf and Chicago hedge funder Ken Griffin, are not. Offered a chance to say whether Griffin planned to support the group, a Griffin spokesman declined to comment. John Jordan, a California vinter and large Republican donor who has worked closely with the Ricketts family, said he regarded their political operation as savvy and effective. But he said that the late infusion of cash would have little impact. "I feel bad for the people who wrote the checks," said Jordan. "You can only spend so much effectively at the last minute." Adelson's impact The decision by Adelson to partner with the Ricketts operation is a blow to the Trump super PACs that have been trying to land him as a landmark donor. One group, Rebuilding America Now, has secured million-dollar checks from Marcus thanks in part due to the fundraising skills of Florida Gov. Rick Scott, who leads the group. But many other well-heeled Trump supporters are still on the sidelines. Foster Friess, the Wyoming social conservative, told CNN earlier this month that while Scott's "leadership is reassuring," he is not investing his dollars in the super PAC. A second group run by a billionaire family close to Trump, Bob and Rebekah Mercer, appears to be in favor, and they won a new $1 million last month from Moskowitz, a California philanthropist. She did not respond to a request for comment Wednesday about her donation plans. The Adelson's gift to the pro-Trump effort -- likely to be around $5 million -- is substantially smaller than some had hoped, and the decision to relinquish control over their dollars to a separate donor family direct the effort is surprising. Yet some Democrats appear willing to go dollar-for-dollar with their Republican rivals. Mostyn, the Democratic lawyer who is hosting Tim Kaine for a fundraiser later this week in Houston, said he found the donation sizes of Adelson and Ricketts to be underwhelming, but that Trump's recent strength has him more eager to return fundraising calls. "On my list of things to do today," Mostyn said, "getting back to them has gone way up." 
With red lips, blue eyes and big blond hair, a former newscaster and lounge singer named Gennifer Flowers had talked to a supermarket tabloid about how she had been presidential candidate Bill Clinton’s mistress for 12 years. It was up to his wife to fix it. So on Sunday, January 26, 1992, on 60 Minutes on CBS, in a time slot immediately following the Super Bowl, Hillary Clinton responded fiercely to questions about her husband’s reported infidelity and the nature of their marriage—by invoking the name of a country music star. “You know, I’m not sitting here, some little woman standing by my man like Tammy Wynette,” she said, wearing gold earrings and a black headband, perched next to him on a couch in a hotel suite in Boston and waving her clenched right hand. “I’m sitting here because I love him, and I respect him, and I honor what he’s been through and what we’ve been through together. And you know, if that’s not enough for people, then heck—don’t vote for him.” Story Continued Below This was America’s introduction to Hillary Clinton, and it worked—for her husband. What she did on 60 Minutes saved his candidacy and his political career. Most agree he would not have become president without it. For her, however, it came at a steep cost. In 10 minutes of television, she projected a set of complicated, even conflicting images—forthright but defensive, feisty but dutiful—triggering the mix of skeptical, antagonistic feelings that have defined her with a share of the American public ever since. Now, as she gets closer to the presidency than any woman ever has, she is struggling with unfavorable ratings that would be historically high if it weren’t for her opponent’s being even higher. There are substantive reasons, as with any politician with a long public record, but underlying them are the same frictions that came to the fore in that 60 Minutes interview—sentiments that, fair or not, have grown only more pronounced with Clinton’s perennial, awkward and generally unsuccessful efforts to re-introduce herself, to redefine herself. It didn’t have to be this way. Some of her key staffers from the ’92 campaign said in interviews with Politico that they feel deep, lasting regret about this legacy. There was so much to work with, they explained—her education reform, her advocacy for children, her role as a mother, as opposed to the harder, more threatening persona of an ambitious corporate attorney or do-anything operator—and yet “there was little strategic thought given to how to present her to a broader audience,” according to Richard Mintz, her staff director during that campaign. This, he and others said, was because of time constraints, and because the Clinton bid early on was seen as a long shot, and because everybody was understandably more worried about how to package him, not her, and because staffers saw her as so intelligent and capable that it didn’t dawn on them that she would need political help herself. In retrospect, though, there was one chance to help her make a first impression, they said. And they blew it. “It’s one of the great regrets, seriously, of my life,” Mintz said. “Certainly I feel like we could have done, and should have done, a better job. There is a lot of regret in me,” said Patti Solis Doyle, the veteran political strategist who was a young senior adviser to Hillary Clinton in that campaign. “There was never any, ‘Oh, Hillary could be a problem …” There was, though, a problem—albeit one that wouldn’t be fully understood for years to come. Because of the dire circumstances under which she was forced to enter the national glare, the enduring paradox of Hillary Clinton was cemented before the Super Bowl champion Washington Redskins had flown home. The appearance on 60 Minutes amounted to a mandate to come off strong enough to help him but not so strong as to hurt him, an almost impossible balancing act. Even as she was putting up an effective unified front, she was presenting to an estimated 50 million viewers a tangle of contradictions. She wanted to show her independence—a quality that ended up alienating a whole set of traditionalist voters—but she was standing by her man—a decision that still today alienates younger people who see it as a kind of surrender. She had her own career, but she was also the “wife of.” It was a continuation of the fundamental tension that had underscored her almost two decades living in Arkansas—but now this knotty push-pull was laid bare in the harshest of national spotlights. That image of an assertive, outspoken woman was reinforced seven weeks later when on March 16, 1992, she responded to questions about the appearance of conflicts of interest between her work as a partner at one of the most prestigious law firms in Arkansas and her husband’s position as the governor of the state by unleashing a headstrong remark many women found insulting. “I suppose I could have stayed home and baked cookies and had teas,” Clinton snapped to reporters at a restaurant called the Busy Bee during a campaign stop in Chicago, “but what I decided to do was to fulfill my profession, which I entered before my husband was in public life.” These two sound-bite snapshots and the time between turned Clinton into a Rorschach test through which people from coast to coast wrestled with a woman’s role at home, at work and in politics. She became a contentious issue in the coverage of the campaign, which led to a too-little, too-late effort to amend the approach and “soften” the look of the highest-profile surrogate, which led to the initial round of discussion in the national media about who she “really” was and whether her marriage was true love or a calculating political partnership. Here heading into the last month and a half of this mad, hinge-of-history election, and as Clinton prepares for another high-stakes TV moment—the hotly anticipated first debate against Donald Trump—her former staffers and longtime friends can’t help but look back to the 60 Minutes interview and the comment about “cookies” and “teas” and see the unmistakable roots of her penchant for stilted caution and the public’s implacable suspicions. “Boy,” said Nancy Wanderer, who’s been friends with Clinton since they were classmates at Wellesley College. “Two short little sentences that packed a lot of punch. … I just said the other day, ‘When did this business start, when people began to not like her, not trust her?’ And I think it’s the 60 Minutes interview.” “There was this way of seeing her in a certain light,” said Jan Piercy, another close friend from Wellesley, “that she couldn’t shake.” “The great tragedy is that we lost the thread that was at her core,” said Mintz, her staff director. “It’s probably one of the great political missed opportunities of all time.” *** He always needed her more than she needed him. “Hillary doesn’t have to stay with Bill Clinton,” her friend Linda Bloodworth-Thomason said in 1992. “She could get to the Senate or possibly the White House on her own—and she knows it.” “She had more choices than any woman in America,” her friend Susan Thomases said the same year. “But she chose this and chose to make her life with him.” And the choice was forged from an essential compromise: A whip-smart, aggressive, Yale-prepared attorney, she had left behind opportunities in East Coast power cities and moved to rural, out-of-the-way Arkansas to marry one of the most promising political talents of her generation. Her almost two decades in the state spooled out as a series of assertions of independence—rural health care reform, state education reform, helping to start the Arkansas Advocates for Children and Families and the state’s first neonatal nursery, national recognition for her work as a lawyer, seats on boards—but also concessions. She did corporate law, which wasn’t her passion, instead of children and family law, which was, because it allowed her to be a better provider—to make a salary three to four times what her husband made as the governor. She took off her glasses and put in contact lenses. She changed her hair. She changed her clothes. She changed her name. For her own career, she wanted to be Hillary Rodham. For her husband’s career, she had to be Hillary Clinton. “I think that people who are married to politicians are under a tremendous strain,” Clinton said back in 1979, in an interview on local TV weeks into her time as the wife of a governor, “because unless you have a pretty strong sense of your own self-identity, it becomes very easy to be buffeted about by all the people who are around your husband.” “She had to do this, she had to do that—and she acquiesced,” said Ann Henry of Fayetteville, who’s been her friend for more than 40 years. “Because that’s what they wanted her to do, OK? That’s what Arkansas wanted her to do!” “I said, ‘Hey, wait a minute, this is the woman that rose to the top at Wellesley, that was president of our college government, because we thought she was so competent and intelligent,’” Wanderer said. “The person she was,” Wanderer said, “wasn’t going to be acceptable down there. It was a huge sacrifice.” The sacrifices continued. The fall before the 60 Minutes interview, in a trip to Chicago shortly after her husband had announced his presidential candidacy, she spent a night with Piercy, another college friend. “She said to me, ‘You know, Bill’s been attorney general and governor, and we’ve been in the public eye for years now—but there’s something that’s absolutely a different universe when you step into this running for the presidency,’” Piercy said. “It really was a moment of stepping across a line, and it worried her.” Two events introduced her to the nation, cementing an image of her in place in voters’ minds. It is only with the benefit of hindsight, of course, that everybody agrees Bill Clinton wouldn’t have been president without what Hillary Clinton did on January 26, 1992. It took a second-place finish in the New Hampshire primary some three weeks later, after which he practically declared victory by dubbing himself “the Comeback Kid.” It took a faltering economy. It took a vulnerable incumbent in George H.W. Bush. It took, in the end, a win in November that made him the 42nd president of the United States. He hadn’t announced he was running until October of the previous year, and in those first few months, another former staffer said in an interview, “the campaign leadership was focused on Bill Clinton and had not yet fully considered Hillary’s role.” But all of a sudden, with the eruption of the Flowers story, it couldn’t have been more clear: “We bet a whole campaign on a single interview,” communications director George Stephanopoulos would write in his memoir—and Hillary Clinton, not Bill Clinton, was by far the most critical cog. “We were under pressure from the stories that had been printed in the trash tabloid,” campaign chairman Mickey Kantor said in an interview. “We thought the best person to address these, of anybody, was her.” As top strategist James Carville would say later: “No her, no go.” “Did she want to do that interview,” Doyle said. “Abso-frickin’-lutely not. This was survival. She was going to fight. She was fighting for her husband, for herself, for their political careers.” So in the post-Super Bowl interview on CBS, Hillary Clinton used the phrase “zone of privacy,” and he “acknowledged wrongdoing” and “causing pain in my marriage” but stopped short of an outright denial he couldn’t give without lying. But what elicited what became the most unforgettable comment from either one of them was a question from 60 Minutes’ Steve Kroft in which he expressed the notion that their marriage was “an understanding,” “an arrangement.” “Wait a minute,” Bill Clinton said. “You’re looking at two people who love each other. This is not an arrangement or an understanding. This is a marriage.” At which point Hillary Clinton piped up and said what she said about Tammy Wynette. “I wish I had let him have the last word,” she would write a little more than a decade later. Still, at the time, what came across on the screen, at least to her friends all over the country, was … authentically her. “That was my friend,” said Little Rock’s Skip Rutherford, who watched at a Super Bowl party turned Clinton viewing. “That was my friend Hillary.” *** She called Doyle the night it aired. “She called me to ask how I thought it went,” Doyle said. “I told her I thought she was really strong, really forceful, and appeared really committed to her husband and to her family.” Clinton thanked her. “She was definitely pleased,” Doyle added. “She was happy with it because she was truthful. She said what she had to say. I love this guy. I respect this guy. Very matter of fact.” And in many corners of the press, she was praised. The Economist called her “sharp-tongued” and “attractive.” “Tough woman, this Hillary Clinton,” wrote a columnist for the Los Angeles Daily News. The TV critic at the Washington Post said Bill Clinton “looked like a scared kid. Not a presidential image. Hillary Clinton, on the other hand, appeared impressively impervious, suggesting perhaps that the wrong Clinton is running for office.” She was lauded even by a leading New Hampshire Republican. Said Tom Rath, then a George H.W. Bush appointee as a director of the Legal Services Corporation and now a POLITICO Insider, to the Atlanta Journal-Constitution the day after 60 Minutes: “The big winner was Hillary Clinton. I think he’s got a problem still.” But she also drew some fire from outside the pundit class. “Tammy’s madder than hell,” Wynette’s fifth husband told USA Today. Wynette wrote a plainspoken open letter in which she actually cut right to the crux, demanding an apology and portraying the aspiring West Wing spouse as an elitist enabler riding her husband’s coattails. “I believe you have offended every person who has made it on their own with no one to take them to the White House,” the singer said. She challenged Clinton to “stand toe to toe with me. I can assure you, in spite of your education, you will find me to be just as bright.” Told of Wynette’s reaction during a meeting with the editorial board of a small newspaper in Grand Junction, Colorado, Clinton rolled her eyes and slapped her forehead, according to an account from the Associated Press. “I didn’t mean to hurt Tammy Wynette as a person,” she said. “I happen to be a country-western fan.” But Clinton couldn’t find the right tone and stick with it. She seemed to vacillate between apologetic and apoplectic. She said sorry to Wynette, again, two nights later on national TV on ABC’s Primetime Live—in a lengthy feature in which she also offered up a withering dismissal of Flowers, calling her a money-grubber, a fame-chaser, “some failed cabaret singer who doesn’t have much of a resume to fall back on.” And the world offered its critique. Even Richard Nixon weighed in. “If the wife comes through as being too strong and too intelligent, it makes the husband look like a wimp,” the former president told the New York Times a week and a half after the 60 Minutes interview. Nixon cited Barbara Bush as the model wife—somebody who has her own opinions but doesn’t upstage her husband. By March, a new narrative had emerged. Said the Washington Post: “Hillary Clinton, Trying to Have it All; Lawyer, Author, Activist, Strategist, Mother, Political Wife … and Now, Political Problem?” Further complicating matters for her: the first story in the Times about the money-losing real estate deal in Northwest Arkansas that ultimately would metastasize into the Whitewater scandal and an article in the Post headlined, “The Uncertain Intersection: Politics and Private Interests; Hillary Clinton’s Law Firm is Influential With State.” Jerry Brown, the governor of California and an opponent in the presidential primaries, brought up the Post article in a debate, accusing Bill Clinton of funneling money to his wife’s firm—a false representation. He responded to Brown’s charge of “corruption” by calling him a liar and saying he “ought to be ashamed” for “jumping on my wife.” The next day, the day before the Illinois and Michigan primaries, with stress mounting, reporters approached Hillary Clinton at the Busy Bee. “Back then,” said Jim Cullinan, a staff aide doing her advance work, who was there, “it was much more casual in terms of the press being close to her.” Out came the comment about “cookies” and “teas.” “Exasperation,” said Piercy, her friend. “Complete exasperation.” “Just pure frustration,” said Jody Franklin, her chief of staff on that campaign. “I think this country wasn’t ready for a professional, strong, highly competent, feminist first lady—I think the country was not ready for that, and the campaign didn’t understand that,” Franklin said. “And there she was, getting humiliated on 60 Minutes, saving him—and then she gets shit for it. And then she gets shit for … working, for simply having a job.” *** The Clinton brain trust knew immediately “cookies” and “teas” would be a big problem. “As soon as I heard that,” Paul Begala, a chief strategist for the campaign, would say in 2000, “I thought, ‘People are going to take that out of context. They’re going to suggest she doesn’t care about stay-at-home moms.’ So I went up to her and I told her that. I pulled her aside, and I said, ‘You know, Hillary, you’ve got to go restate this. People are going to think that’s an attack on stay-at-home moms.’ And she had the most wounded and naïve look on her face. … She had no idea that might be taken out of context. She said, ‘No one could think that.’ She said, ‘I would have given anything to be a stay-at-home mom. My mother was a stay-at-home mom. I just didn’t have a choice because Bill was making $35,000 a year and we needed to support the family.’ I said, ‘I know that.’ And she said, ‘Oh, you worry too much.’ I mean, it was unimaginable to her that that would be a firestorm. I was certain it would be.” So outside, on the sidewalk in the cold, she tried to clean it up. “The work that I’ve done as a professional,” she explained, “as a public advocate, has been aimed in part to assure that women can make the choices that they should make—whether it’s full-time career, full-time motherhood, some combination, depending upon what stage of life they are at.” It didn’t help. And there she was, getting humiliated on 60 Minutes, saving him—and then she gets shit for it.” The next day, her husband won the primaries in Michigan and Illinois, closing in on the Democratic nomination—but headlines were about her. “Hillary Clinton Law Career Brings Up Spouse Role Issue,” said the Los Angeles Times. “Hillary Clinton is fair political game,” said the Chicago Tribune. “Hillary Clinton defends herself,” said the Boston Globe. And on NBC, making a connection that would calcify from there, correspondent Lisa Myers tied “cookies” and “teas” to 60 Minutes. “Hillary Clinton’s strong performance during the Gennifer Flowers episode helped save her husband’s candidacy,” Myers reported. “But now, she may be fast becoming an issue herself.” Times columnist William Safire gave it a name: “The Hillary Problem.” Gloria Cabe, the campaign’s congressional liaison and the manager of its office in Washington, worried that it had the potential to be “fatal.” “We got lots of phone calls,” Cabe later said. “And it was apparent to me that not only were we hearing from traditional women who had chosen, for whatever reason, to stay at home with their children, but we were inundated with calls from professional women who felt it had insulted them, who had made the decision to take a few years off—and many of them talked about baking cookies.” The campaign devised a course shift—the sort of Hillary-specific strategy her advisers say hadn’t totally existed up until that point—and it happened quickly. “Hillary Clinton,” Newsweek noticed in late March, two weeks post-Busy Bee, “has clearly lowered her profile on the campaign trail.” Bill Clinton pulled back his “buy one, get one free” stump-speech catchphrase, which had prompted talk of a kind of “co-presidency,” and Hillary Clinton started talking less about policy and more about family. She agreed to participate in a cookie bake-off sponsored by Family Circle magazine. She agreed to an interview for a puffy People profile about their friends, family and faith. She got her hair styled. She took off her unfussy professional woman headband. In May, she gave the graduation speech at her alma mater, 23 years after she spoke at commencement as a student. “As women today, you face tough choices,” she told the Wellesley College Class of 1992. “You know the rules are basically as follows,” she said. “If you don’t get married, you’re abnormal. If you get married but don’t have children, you’re a selfish yuppie. If you get married and have children, but work outside the home, you’re a bad mother. If you get married and have children, but stay home, you’ve wasted your education. “So you see,” she concluded, “if you listen to all the people who make these rules, you might just conclude that the safest course of action is just to take your diploma and crawl under your bed.” So you see,” Hillary concluded, “if you listen to all the people who make these rules, you might just conclude that the safest course of action is just to take your diploma and crawl under your bed.” She didn’t do that. But she did agree to adjustments—the latest in a sequence that had started with her acquiescences in Arkansas. “My recollection is that after the convention,” said Franklin, her chief of staff, “there was a very significant, purposeful shift in strategy.” It included appearances like a stop at a vocational school, Doyle remembered, to stage a photo-op of her getting her nails done by the cosmetology students. “She was like, ‘Really? This is what I’m doing now?’” “After those situations”—Tammy Wynette, “cookies” and “teas”—“the campaign … decided to use her to rally the base, a broad Democratic base who adored her. But that was like putting her in a box,” Franklin said. “She was put in a box for the rest of the campaign—and it worked.” “The political image makers are hard at it this year,” Tom Brokaw said on NBC News in early August, a few weeks after the convention. “They worried that Hillary Clinton was coming off as too bright, too outspoken, too upfront. So, they asked her to warm it up a bit.” It wasn’t lost on everybody—including some in the press—that her principal transgression actually seemed to be that she was a woman who said what she thought instead of quietly receding into the conventionally accepted political staging. “Women who are not clearly submissive are seen as dominating and reviled for it. Women who do fit the images [of submissiveness] are not taken seriously. Like Hillary Clinton, you are damned if you do and damned if you don’t.” “Politicians in both parties like to say that this is the Year of the Woman,” correspondent Andrea Mitchell pointed out in her Brokaw-introduced report. “But that doesn’t necessarily apply to the politician’s wife.” She compared the Hillary Clinton of the primaries with the Hillary Clinton of the general election. “When the wives are introduced these days,” Mitchell said, referring to Hillary Clinton and running mate Al Gore’s wife, Tipper, “it’s to take a bow and step back.” Throughout the summer and fall, a shorthand tag developed among newspapers, news magazines and the TV networks. “The Hillary Factor,” they started calling it. “Is She Helping or Hurting Her Husband,” Time asked on its cover in September. “But the real Hillary Factor,” argued Deborah Tannen, then a fellow at Stanford’s Center for Advanced Study in Behavioral Sciences, in an op-ed in October in the Times, “is the double bind that affects all successful or accomplished women—indeed, all women who do not fit stereotypical images of femininity: women who are not clearly submissive are seen as dominating and reviled for it. Women who do fit the images are not taken seriously. Like Hillary Clinton, you are damned if you do and damned if you don’t.” *** That November, obviously, Bill Clinton won—but his wife discovered that the tightrope she had walked in the 60 Minutes interview just kept going. She walked it as she took her place as a policy advisor with an office in the West Wing instead of the customary first lady quarters on the other side of the White House. She walked it as she led health care reform—and then stumbled, necessitating another recalibration, another “softening.” She walked it in 1998 through the Monica Lewinsky scandal, returning to national TV to mount another defense of her husband that he ultimately didn’t deserve—this time on The Today Show on NBC, this time alone, this time talking not about Tammy Wynette but a “vast right-wing conspiracy,” sparking echoes of 60 Minutes and bolstering the skepticism about their marriage, that it was mostly a union of political expedience. She walked the tightrope out of the White House, too, her eye on a political prize of her own—which she won. In the Senate, she walked it still, the world-famous former first lady who tried at the start to be head-down, back-bench anonymous, the aisle-crossing policy wonk who attempted to show a stern side with her vote to support the invasion of Iraq. And she walked it in 2007 and 2008, through her first presidential bid, beating Barack Obama in the New Hampshire primary only after she cracked just a tad at a campaign stop at another eatery—16 years after the Busy Bee—and almost cried. “Re-Re-Re-Reintroducing Hillary Clinton,” the New York Times Magazine headlined a story last summer at the outset of her current campaign. The “issue of her political authenticity,” University of Maryland communications professor Shawn J. Parry-Giles wrote in her 2014 book Hillary Clinton in the News: Gender and Authenticity in American Politics, has been a “preouccupation” of the press that has “dogged” Clinton “from 1992 onward.” All these questions—Why is she so stiff? Why is she so scripted? Why is she so cautious? Why is she so secretive?—I think it all goes back to 1992.” “I don’t know that Mrs. Clinton has ever fully recovered from the difficulties of the early stages of that campaign,” said Russell Riley, a professor and co-chair of the University of Virginia’s presidential oral history program. “All these questions—Why is she so stiff? Why is she so scripted? Why is she so cautious? Why is she so secretive?—I think it all goes back to 1992,” said Tannen, now a professor of linguistics at Georgetown. That interview plus “cookies” and “teas,” said Wanderer, her friend from Wellesley, added up to “an odd introduction, because I think both of those moments represented her trying to explain who she really is. But instead of saying what she actually is—a person dedicated to making positive changes to move the country forward in what you might call a progressive way—I think she felt very defensive about it, like this wasn’t going to be acceptable.” I’m not sitting here, some little woman … I suppose I could have … “Is she guarded all the time?” Franklin, her chief of staff in that ’92 campaign, said this week. “I think she is. And I understand why.” In both the 60 Minutes interview and the comment at the Busy Bee, Franklin said, “she was herself, she said what she believed, and with personality. But it was misinterpreted. And she got screwed for it.” To Doyle, one of Clinton’s closest advisers throughout that campaign, it all started with the 60 Minutes interview—about which, she said, there are two great truths. The first? “He would not have been president had she not defended him, period, end of story.” And the second? “There was no way for her to win in that situation, no way for her to win there, as a woman.”
(CNN)Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko says he and Donald Trump missed a chance to meet this week due to scheduling problems -- a different version of events than put forward by a Democratic senator. Sen. Chris Coons of Delaware said Wednesday that Poroshenko sought a meeting with the GOP nominee during the United Nations General Assembly in New York but was ignored. "Earlier this summer, I led a bipartisan delegation to Eastern Europe. We visited Ukraine in particular, and I know President Poroshenko of Ukraine was seeking a meeting with Donald Trump while he was in New York meeting with the president of Egypt, and was rejected," the Delaware Democrat told CNN "New Day" host Chris Cuomo. But Poroshenko says that's not how it happened. "We don't have any refusal," the Ukrainian president said in an interview on CNN's "Fareed Zakaria GPS," chalking it up to a scheduling conflict during a crammed few days of meeting with 22 heads of state. Poroshenko said he didn't take the lack of a meeting with Trump as a snub, citing bipartisan support in for his country in Congress. Earlier Wednesday a Ukrainian official confirmed to CNN that Poroshenko's office requested a meeting with both Trump and Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton but only received a response from Clinton, who agreed to the meeting. A message left with Trump's campaign Wednesday was not immediately returned. Trump did meet Monday with Egyptian President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi, during which the two discussed "the strategic bilateral relationship between the US and Egypt," according to a Trump campaign statement after the meeting. Clinton's meeting with Poroshenko took place just a few minutes before Trump met with el Sisi a short distance away. Before that meeting the Democratic nominee said she was looking forward to talking about the challenges Ukraine faces, primarily "the very real problems and threats from Russian aggression." Clinton added that she was "anxious to know how we can be supportive of those efforts." Coons -- a vocal supporter of Clinton for president -- was quick to link Trump's decision not to meet with Poroshenko to positive comments Trump has made about Russian President Vladimir Putin and his country, a primary geopolitical antagonist to Ukraine. "Donald Trump's statements about Ukraine and Putin suggest a dangerous lack of familiarity with Putin's actual record of invading a neighboring country and a dangerous lack of respect for or familiarity with our NATO treaty alliances," he said. Coons continued, "In meetings I had with heads of state in recent days here in New York City, they all expressed real concern or questions about Donald Trump's readiness or fitness to serve as president." Trump's rhetoric on Ukraine and Russia throughout the US presidential election has prompted criticism and scrutiny, even from members of his own party. The GOP nominee has praised Putin as "a leader far more than our President has been a leader," and suggested that the United States shouldn't automatically come to the defense of NATO allies in Eastern Europe who are threatened by an increasingly aggressive Russia if those countries don't adequately fund their own militaries. 
Hours ahead of its face-off with Hillary Clinton on Monday night, Donald Trump’s campaign suggested that it won’t be treated fairly in the aftermath, surmising that headlines have already been written before either candidate has taken the stage. “I’m worried, Mika, about not being treated fairly afterwards. I’m worried that some of the headlines are already written, that they’re conclusions in search of evidence,” Trump campaign manager Kellyanne Conway told MSNBC’s “Morning Joe” co-hosts Mika Brzezinski and Joe Scarborough in an interview Monday morning. “You saw — and others were talking about it in the earlier segment — that this weekend was spent by editorial writers and people on Twitter and elsewhere really just trying to undercut Donald Trump before the debate.” Story Continued Below Those same people, Conway continued, are “somehow putting the burden on the media to prop up Hillary Clinton and pregame the debate,” adding, “That’s not the role of the media.” Scarborough interjected, remarking that “it’s almost like they don’t think Hillary Clinton is strong enough to do it on her own.” “That’s the key,” Conway said. “We can scream bias and unfairness, but what Joe just said is really the key here, that they’re worried about her debating skills.” Conway, a pollster who was promoted to run the third iteration of the real estate mogul’s campaign, said despite Clinton’s participation in nearly three dozen debates, “There’s no connection that we can see between her debate performances and any type of major lift in the polls thereafter, and I think they know that over in Brooklyn.” But Trump’s biggest problem Monday night will be what Barack Obama said during his bitter 2008 primary battle against Clinton: that she’ll say anything to get elected, Conway said. “So if she ends up saying to him, ‘That’s just not true, you’re distorting my record, you’re being mean to a woman,’ and then people will say, ‘He was mean to a woman,’ and the headlines will scream and Twitter will blow up — even if it’s not true,” she said. “So that would be my concern, that he’s not able to get out all of his responses because, as Joe correctly points out, people are so worried that she’s not a great debater, that she’s not really ready for tonight the way he is, that she’s going to try to interrupt him and confuse the people watching in such a way that he was somehow rude to a woman and he somehow lied on the stage.”
White Plains, New York (CNN)Hillary Clinton cast herself Monday morning as the only presidential candidate who has fought terrorism and slammed Donald Trump's response to the incidents in New York, New Jersey and Minnesota over the weekend as "demagogic." In a news conference on the tarmac of Westchester County Airport, the Democratic presidential nominee said she has been "part of the hard decision to take terrorists off the battlefield," and contrasted her steadiness to what she called Trump's "irresponsible, reckless rhetoric." "It is like so much else he says: It is not grounded in fact, it is meant to make some kind of demagogic point," Clinton said. "I am prepared to, ready to actually take on those challenges, not engage in a lot of irresponsible, reckless rhetoric." An explosive device went off in the Chelsea neighborhood of Manhattan over the weekend, once again thrusting the politics of terror into the center of the 2016 election. Clinton and Trump initially responded to the incident in contrasting styles: Trump was quick to announce that a bomb had gone off in New York, even before there was much information about the incident; Clinton, meanwhile, urged caution, and the importance of waiting to draw conclusions until more information was available. Trump campaign spokesman Jason Miller said that the Clinton campaign accused the Republican nominee of treason and criticized her previous stances on the war in Iraq. "If Clinton really wants to find the real cause of ISIS, she needs to take a long, hard look in the mirror," Miller said. In her news conference Monday morning, Clinton also warned against the instinct to villainize entire groups of people based on religion. Asked about Ahmad Khan Rahami -- in custody following a police shootout after he was allegedly seen on video near the bombing -- and whether his Afghan descent will help Trump politically, Clinton said: "There are millions of law-abiding, peaceful Muslim Americans." "That is why I have been very clear. We are going after the bad guys and we are going to get them, but we are not going to go after an entire religion and give ISIS exactly what it is wanting," Clinton said. Clinton's news conference offered no new policies to fight terror. She argued, as she has before, that the United States needs to invest more in intelligence to combat lone wolf attacks. The former secretary of state also called on tech companies in Silicon Valley to "give us the tools and lead us to those who are attempting to promote attacks like we have seen." Clinton has given speeches on defeating terror multiple times throughout the 2016 campaign, including policy-focused addresses in Minneapolis and New York earlier this year. 
Washington (CNN)At least 858 people that had been ordered deported or removed under another name were improperly granted US citizenship due to a failure to maintain adequate fingerprint records, according to a new report. The failure occurred, in part, because older fingerprint records were not digitized as part of DHS or the FBI fingerprint databases and therefore could not be readily searched thereby preventing those who had been ordered deported or removed from being identified. The Department of Homeland Security Inspector General report said there are still "about 148,000 older fingerprint records that have not been digitized of aliens with final deportation orders or who are criminals or fugitives." Failure to digitize these records risks "making naturalization decisions without complete information and, as a result, naturalizing additional individuals who may be ineligible for citizenship or who may be trying to obtain US citizenship fraudulently," the report added. "US Citizenship and Immigration Services granted US citizenship to at least 858 individuals from special interest countries who had been ordered deported or removed under another name," according to the Department of Homeland Security Inspector General report. The report describes special interest countries as "generally defined as countries that are of concern to the national security of the United States." At least one of the people identified as having improperly been granted citizenship is now working in law enforcement, the report said. It recommends the remaining older fingerprint records be digitized and that DHS review "the eligibility of each naturalized citizen whose fingerprint records reveal deportation orders under a different identity" and decide whether to seek denaturalization. The report noted that the department has concurred with its recommendations and has begun implementing corrective actions. Department of Homeland Security spokesperson Neema Hakim told CNN that "DHS is and has been taking steps to address this issue" including working to digitize the 1990s-era fingerprint records. But Hakim added, "The fact that fingerprint records in these cases may have been incomplete at the time of the naturalization interview does not necessarily mean that the applicant was in fact granted naturalization, or that the applicant obtained naturalization fraudulently." "Where the DHS review process finds that naturalization was obtained fraudulently, DHS will appropriately refer the case to the Department of Justice for civil or criminal proceedings, including for denaturalization," Hakim said. "This failure represents a significant risk to America's national security as these naturalized individuals have access to serve in positions of public trust and the ability to obtain security clearances," Republican Sen. Ron Johnson of Wisconsin, the chairman of the Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee, wrote in an open letter to Secretary of Homeland Security Jeh Johnson. Failure to properly screen applicants for US citizenship, particularly from "special interest countries," is likely to further fuel controversy over the screening of immigrants, a contentious topic during the 2016 election cycle. Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump has called for immigration bans targeted at countries with connections to terrorism. He had previously called for a temporary prohibition of Muslim immigrants. The apprehension of Ahmad Khan Rahami, the suspected perpetrator of the recent bombings in New York and New Jersey, is similarly likely to draw attention to the screening process as Rahami immigrated to the US from Afghanistan and subsequently was granted US citizenship. 
As millions of voters tune in to watch the first presidential debate of the 2016 campaign, there are several key issues to keep in mind. The general election has been playing out for about two months now, with Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton taking direct aim at each other, but tonight will be the first time that they square off directly. Watch the first presidential debate on ABC News and ABCNews.com at 9 p.m. Eastern time. on Monday.    Clinton has been preparing for her 35th presidential election debate for weeks. Aides say the former secretary of state — who is known for doing her homework — has been poring over briefing books and practicing in mock debates with a Trump stand-in, Clinton's longtime aide Philippe Reines. She has said she expects it to be a "difficult, challenging" debate. Her campaign has even consulted with "The Art of the Deal" ghostwriter Tony Schwartz on how to beat him in a debate. Trump was in debate prep meetings all day Friday after focusing more on campaigning than studying up for the showdown. Though no mock debates occurred, he was asked rounds of questions he could face from tonight's moderator. The sessions were led by Trump surrogate and former New York City Mayor Rudy Giuliani, along with the campaign leadership.    Acknowledging that there are concerns about his tone, Trump has repeatedly said that he plans to be polite — but only to a point. "I'm going to be very respectful of her," Trump said during a interview on Fox News on Thursday. "I think she deserves that, and I'm going to be nice. And if she's respectful of me, that’ll be nice. We'll have something that I think people will respect as a debate, but we'll see where it all goes. You really never know exactly how it's going to turn out, and that's why we're going to have a lot of people watching," he said. For her part, Clinton and her team have spoken about how they had to prep by facing off against two versions of Trump: the more professional, contained version that has been present on the trail more recently and the more bombastic, uncontrolled version that was seen more during the primaries.  Chelsea Clinton will attend the debate, a first for her this election cycle, after not attending any of the Democratic primary debates. And another familiar face is expected to be in the front row supporting Team Clinton: Mark Cuban. The billionaire Dallas Mavericks owner is a vocal Clinton supporter and reportedly went so far as to volunteer to play Trump in her mock debates. He said earlier this week that the Clinton team never returned his email offer, but they did keep him in mind for another move.  Just got a front row seat to watch @HillaryClinton overwhelm @realDonaldTrump at the "Humbling at Hofstra" on Monday. It Is On !  If Cuban is being put in the front row as some kind of psychological ploy, the television audience shouldn't expect to enjoy his presence. Peter Eyre, a senior adviser with the Commission on Presidential Debates, the independent organization that sponsors the events, told ABC News that the live audience will not be on camera during the debate at Hofstra University tonight. There are expected to be about 1,000 people in the audience.    Lester Holt from NBC's "Nightly News" has been tasked with moderating tonight's debate, and he's under some pressure. NBC hosted the recent Commander in Chief Forum, during which both candidates fielded questions about their plans for the military, and Holt's colleague Matt Lauer was widely criticized for his performance. Critics complained that he focused more on Clinton's email scandal than anything to do with the military and that he let Trump make claims that were false without any intervention. The question of how much fact-checking moderators should do during the debates has been raised. Trump has said that he does not believe the moderators should intervene to fact-check, and Clinton raised money off Lauer's lack of fact-checking after the forum, indicating that she would be in favor of moderators' playing a role.  It's estimated that tens of millions of people will watch the debate in real time, and many more will be influenced by the social media spin in the aftermath, when the debate about the debate takes place online. Clinton's campaign is well aware that the outcome of the debate depends not just on what the two candidates say onstage but also on the conversation that takes place around it. On a conference call with supporters on Friday, a top aide to Clinton directly asked their supporters to use social media during and after the debate to help shape the conversation positively around the Democratic nominee. The campaign's digital director, Jenna Lowenstein, said two of the campaign's goals for the night are to amplify Clinton's best moments online and to influence the narrative about who is winning. "It's important that we're not just turning this into the Donald Trump show," Lowenstein said. She instructed, "Tweet early, tweet her name, use those hashtags." Watch the first presidential debate Monday at 9 p.m. ET. Full live coverage and analysis of the debate will begin on ABCNews.com/Live at 7 p.m. ET.
Washington (CNN)The Donald Trump-Rosie O'Donnell feud is back in the 2016 spotlight. O'Donnell slammed Trump on Twitter Monday night after he resurrected their longtime feud during the first presidential debate, saying that comments he made about the comedian and TV host in the past — including calling her a "pig" — were justified. Declaring her support for Clinton, O'Donnell tweeted, "HE WILL NEVER BE PRESIDENT" and then later called on people to "shame the Donald." Trump's comments on O'Donnell came after Clinton accused Trump of sexism during the debate, saying, "This is a man who has called women pigs, slobs and dogs." "Hillary is hitting me with tremendous commercials. Some of it I said in entertainment, some of it said to somebody who has been very vicious to me, Rosie O'Donnell," Trump responded. "I said very tough things to her and I think everybody would agree she deserves it and nobody feels sorry for her." The Clinton campaign launched an ad called "Mirrors" last week that features young girls looking in the mirror as Trump insults various women. The spot includes comments Trump made about O'Donnell in 2006, calling the former host of "The View," a "slob" with a "fat ugly face," and comments Trump made in a 2007 interview with Larry King where called O'Donnell a "pig." Trump slammed the ad as "inappropriate" and accused Clinton of misrepresenting his views. "It's inappropriate. It's not nice, but she spent hundreds of millions of dollars on negative ads on me — many of which are absolutely untrue," Trump continued. "They're untrue and they're misrepresentations and I will tell you this, Lester, it's not nice and I don't deserve that." Trump told Larry King in 2007 that his relationship with O'Donnell prior to their 2006 feud "was OK," but O'Donnell "was never a friend" and added that she "ate like a pig" while attending his 1993 wedding to now ex-wife, Marla Maples. "She came to my wedding. She ate like a pig. And — I mean, seriously, the wedding cake was — was — it was like missing in action. I couldn't stand there," Trump said. "I didn't like it, but a particular woman wanted her at the wedding — Marla. I think they were friendly or something. And so I said, 'What's Rosie O'Donnell doing here?'" Some celebrities came to O'Donnell's defense Monday night. "Mess with my girl Rosie and you're messing with me!" Madonna tweeted. Other celebrities, including Lena Dunham, Seth MacFarlane, Leslie Jones and Andy Cohen also chimed in. Trump's feud with O'Donnell first came into the spotlight of the 2016 campaign during the first Republican primary debate in August 2015 when Fox News host Megyn Kelly asked Trump about past comments he made about women, calling them "fat pigs, dogs, slobs and disgusting animals." "Only Rosie O'Donnell," Trump quipped before unleashing attacks against Kelly and sparking a months-long feud between the two. 
WashingtonSince we last updated the CNN battleground map, Donald Trump has clearly improved his poll numbers both in some national polls and in some critical battleground states. The Republican nominee has also upped his game (as have his allied outside group friends) with television ad spending.  And, yet, Hillary Clinton maintains her advantage on the Road to 270 when it comes to piecing together the electoral math needed to win the presidency. Why two congressional districts could be key to this election With four days to go before the highly anticipated first presidential debate and just under 7 weeks before all the votes are cast, Hillary Clinton still sits above that key threshold in the latest CNN outlook. When you add up all the states either solidly or currently leaning Clinton's way, she has 272 electoral votes in her column in our new estimate. What's changed? -- Iowa (6) moves from from "battleground" to "lean Republican" -- Utah (6) moves from "lean Republican" to "solid Republican" -- Maine's 2nd Congressional District (1) moves from "solid Democrat" to "battleground" -- Nebraska's 2nd Congressional District (1) moves from "solid Republican" to "battleground" Explore the map and make your choices Road to 270: Electoral College map Note: The split congressional district ratings are symbolized with diagonal lines. The state of play Donald Trump has improved his standing in our electoral college outlook due to Iowa (a state Barack Obama won twice) and its six electoral votes moving from the true toss-up "battleground" category into the "lean Republican" category, giving Trump a total of 196 electoral votes either solidly or leaning in his favor.  That leaves 70 electoral votes up for grabs across four states (plus two congressional districts) -- Florida, Nevada, Ohio, and North Carolina.  Maine and Nebraska award individual electoral votes by congressional district in addition to the multiple electoral votes based on statewide results. Both Maine and Nebraska's second congressional district have moved into battleground status in this latest estimate. Maine's second congressional district has moved from "solid Democrat" to "battleground" and Nebraska's second congressional district has moved from "solid Republican" to "battleground," providing an opportunity for a candidate to pick up a single electoral vote in what otherwise might be hostile territory.  Finally, Utah moves back from "leaning Republican" to being solidly being in Trump's column.  There is no doubt that Trump has improved his chances in the last several weeks and that he is extremely competitive in all of the remaining critical battleground states, but Clinton's firewall is not yet showing any significant cracks and that is what makes Trump's path to 270 electoral votes still quite challenging. For all of the endless talk about Florida, Ohio and North Carolina, it is perhaps most important to keep your eye on Clinton's performance in the states that are leaning her way, but not solidly in her camp. Pennsylvania, Colorado, Michigan, and Virginia are the core of Clinton's current stronger and more viable path to 270. If Trump begins to find significant inroads to any of those blue-leaning states, that will set off some alarm bells at her Brooklyn HQ and suggest a more viable path for Trump. It is not enough for Trump to simply win the remaining 70 electoral votes in the battleground states -- that only gets him to 266. He still needs to chip away at Clinton's Democratic leaning firewall. Ohio poised to go down to the line on Election Day That's why we see both Trump and Clinton and their surrogates returning again and again to Pennsylvania, for example. And that's why Clinton and pro-Clinton forces spent more than $16 million on television ads in the Keystone State compared to the $5.3 million we've seen from Trump and pro-Trump forces. In fact, Pennsylvania is the state with the third-highest number of ad dollars spent this cycle, behind only Florida and Ohio. Clinton and Trump will surely continue the fully engaged battle for the votes of Floridians and Ohioans, but until and unless Trump can put one of those Democratic leaning states back on the board as a battleground or even make one lean his way, Clinton's electoral college advantage holds. Solid Republican: Alabama (9), Alaska (3), Arkansas (6), Idaho (4), Indiana (11), Kansas (6), Kentucky (8), Louisiana (8), Mississippi (6), Missouri (10), Montana (3), Nebraska (4), North Dakota (3), Oklahoma (7), South Carolina (9), South Dakota (3), Tennessee (11), Texas (38), Utah (6)West Virginia (5), Wyoming (3) (163 total) Leans Republican: Arizona (11), Georgia (16), Iowa (6), (33 total) Battleground states: Florida (29), Nevada (6), Ohio (18), Maine 2nd Congressional District (1) Nebraska 2nd Congressional District (1), North Carolina (15) (70 total) Leans Democratic: Colorado (9), Michigan (16), New Hampshire (4), Pennsylvania (20), Virginia (13), Wisconsin (10), (72 total) Solid Democratic: California (55), Connecticut (7), Delaware (3), DC (3), Hawaii (4), Illinois (20), Maine (3), Maryland (10), Massachusetts (11), New Jersey (14), New York (29), Oregon (7), Rhode Island (4), Vermont (3), Washington (12), Minnesota (10), New Mexico (5) (200 total) Will Mullery and Tal Yellin contributed to this story.
The latest national presidential poll has some encouraging news for the campaign of Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton, showing a 6-point lead for her over Republican candidate Donald Trump. Clinton received 43 percent support from likely voters in the poll, from NBC and The Wall Street Journal, compared with Trump's 37 percent. Libertarian candidate Gary Johnson maintained his third position with 9 percent, and Green Party nominee Jill Stein trailed with 3 percent. In a head-to-head matchup, Clinton's lead expands to 7 points over Trump, 48 to 41. The margin of error of the poll is 3.2 percentage points. After the Democratic National Convention in July, polls showed Clinton's lead over Trump ballooning to upward of 10 points in early August before returning to tighter margins in recent weeks. Surveys by Fox News and CBS/New York Times last week showed a spread between the two candidates within the polls' margin of error.     Today's numbers give Clinton her largest margin since Aug. 31, when a Fox News poll gave her a 6-point edge. Clinton received more support than usual from registered male voters in the NBC/Wall Street Journal poll. Trump maintained higher levels of backing from the demographic, garnering 46 percent support to Clinton's 44 percent, but the difference is much narrower than in earlier polls. In additional questions, respondents expressed concern about Trump's words and actions on the campaign trail, with 69 percent of those surveyed reporting that they have reservations about aspects of his campaign, with 54 percent saying they have "major" concerns. Specifically, 33 percent of likely voters reported dismay over Trump's temperament; 27 percent said his comments about women, immigrants and Muslims worry them the most; and 13 percent were most disturbed by his compliments for Russian President Vladimir Putin. On the Democratic side, Clinton's use of a private email server while secretary of state continued to bother voters; 64 percent expressed concern about the issue. ABC's Ryan Struyk contributed to this report.
Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu poked fun at President Barack Obama’s golf obsession Wednesday as he extended an invitation to the president to visit him in Israel. “As you conclude your presidency, I know you’re gonna be busy with many, many things — much more than improving what I hear is a terrific golf game,” Netanyahu said to Obama, as the two appeared before the media, with a backdrop of American and Israeli flags, after meeting on the sidelines of the U.N. General Assembly in New York. “Your voice, your influential voice, will be heard for many decades, and I know you’ll continue to support Israel's right to defend itself and its right to thrive as a Jewish state.” Story Continued Below “So I want you to know, Barack, that you’ll always be a welcome guest in Israel,” the prime minister continued. “And, by the way, I don’t play golf, but right next to my home in Caesarea in Israel is a terrific golf course.” Obama responded in jest, remarking as they shook hands that the pair will “set up a tee time.” “I guarantee you I will visit Israel often because it is a beautiful country with beautiful people, and Michelle and the girls, I think, resent the fact that I have not taken them on most of these trips,” Obama added. “So they’re insistent that I do take them, of course. They will appreciate the fact that the next time I visit Israel I won’t have to sit in bilats but instead can enjoy the sights and sounds of a remarkable country.” While the two heads of state have a strained relationship, both were all smiles Wednesday as they touted the “unbreakable” bond the U.S. shares with Israel. “As Prime Minister Netanyahu mentioned, the bond between the United States and Israel is unbreakable,” Obama said. “It is based on common values, family ties, a recognition that a Jewish state of Israel is one of our most important allies and a guiding principle throughout my presidency. One that I’ve expressed often to the prime minister is that it is important for America’s national security to ensure that we have a safe and secure Israel, one that can defend itself.”
Fox News host Sean Hannity will host another town hall event with Donald Trump on Wednesday, September 21, the cable channel announced Monday. The town hall, which will be held in Cleveland, Ohio, will be broadcast at 10 p.m. on Fox News. Hannity, who is a vocal Trump supporter, will host the town hall along with Ohio-based pastor Darrell Scott, who has made headlines for his support of the Republican candidates. Hannity has hosted a few town halls with Trump both during the Republican primary process and since Trump was confirmed as the GOP nominee. The most recent town hall was in late August. This week's event will focus on the "core issues and concerns surrounding African-Americans," according to the channel.
(CNN)Former President George H.W. Bush said Monday that he will vote for Hillary Clinton in November, according to sources close to the 41st President -- an extraordinary rebuke of his own party's nominee. The sources said this was not the first time Bush had disclosed his intention to vote for Clinton. The comments came during a receiving line for board members of the bipartisan Points of Light Foundation when Bush was speaking to Kathleen Hartington Kennedy Townsend, Robert F. Kennedy's daughter and the former Maryland lieutenant governor. There were roughly 40 people in the room, and it's not clear how many people heard him, though multiple sources did. The Republican former president's embrace of the Democratic nominee represents a dramatic new chapter in the complicated three-decade-old relationship between the two most prominent families in American politics. It's a stunning political move -- one that comes just 49 days from the election, and less than a week before Clinton and Donald Trump square off in their first debate. Trump's campaign manager, Kellyanne Conway, told CNN's Erin Burnett Tuesday that she respects "the 92-year-old former president very much and his decision." "It is ironic that he would vote for the wife of the man who knocked him out of the race," she added on "Erin Burnett OutFront." "But look, this was a bruising primary ... so I know there are a lot of hurt feelings there." News of his support for Clinton came first on Facebook, when Kennedy Townsend posted a photo of herself with George H.W. Bush, along with the caption: "The President told me he's voting for Hillary!!" Kennedy Townsend sits on the advisory board of the Points of Light Foundation. Bush family representatives declined to respond publicly. "The vote President Bush will cast as a private citizen in some 50 days will be just that: a private vote cast in some 50 days. He is not commenting on the presidential race in the interim," Bush spokesman Jim McGrath said in a statement. But sources with knowledge of the conversation told CNN they were surprised and disappointed that Kennedy Townsend had publicly shared a private conversation with the former president. Kennedy Townsend declined to comment through a spokesman at the Rock Creek Group, where she works as managing director. She later took down the Facebook post. GOP's Trump divide Trump's controversial candidacy has split the group of former Republican nominees. Mitt Romney has hammered Trump in speeches and on Twitter, calling him unfit for office. But former Kansas Sen. Bob Dole has endorsed Trump, as has Arizona Sen. John McCain -- though somewhat reluctantly, often referring to "the Republican nominee" rather than Trump by name. Neither George H.W. Bush nor George W. Bush had weighed in on the general election -- even as Trump savaged George W. Bush's decision to go to war in Iraq. However, many of the 41st and 43rd presidents' Cabinet secretaries and national security officials have backed Clinton. George H.W. Bush national security adviser Brent Scowcroft endorsed Clinton in June, saying she "has the wisdom and experience to lead our country at this critical time." George W. Bush Commerce Secretary Carlos Gutierrez said on CNN in August that he "would have preferred Jeb Bush, but I think Hillary is a great choice. I am afraid of what Donald Trump would do to this country." And Louis Wade Sullivan, the Health and Human Services secretary under George H.W. Bush and the only African-American in his Cabinet, said this month that "though my enthusiasm for Hillary Clinton is somewhat tempered, I certainly believe she is an infinitely better choice for president than Donald Trump." But George H.W. Bush isn't speaking for his entire family. Marvin Bush, the former president's youngest son, has said he would vote for Libertarian Gary Johnson. George P. Bush, George H.W. Bush's grandson, has backed Trump. And Jeb Bush, Trump's former primary rival, has said he won't vote for Trump or Clinton. A representative for George W. Bush wouldn't comment on Kennedy Townsend's Facebook post or how George H.W. Bush would vote. The representative simply said George W. Bush is "spending his time working to keep the Senate in Republican hands and is not commenting on the presidential campaign." The Bush-Clinton relationship The evolving relationship between the Bush and Clinton families began in 1992, when Bill Clinton ran against -- and defeated -- incumbent President George H.W. Bush. Eight years later, with Clinton term-limited out of office, Bush's son, then-Texas Gov. George W. Bush, succeeded Clinton on a pledge to "restore honor and dignity" to the White House -- a not-so-subtle knock on Clinton's marital infidelity. But Bill Clinton and George H.W. Bush have also spent their post-presidencies teaming up for philanthropic endeavors. And in recent years, Bill Clinton and George W. Bush have increasingly appeared together. The two grew so close that George W. Bush has referred to Clinton as his "brother from another mother," and Clinton has said the two bonded over becoming grandfathers. A Bush-Clinton matchup Early in the 2016 campaign cycle, it appeared the two families could be headed for another showdown with the presidency on the line: Hillary Clinton was seeking the Democratic nomination, while former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush -- the 41st president's son and the 43rd president's brother -- was a Republican candidate and a fundraising powerhouse. Even if George H.W. Bush hadn't endorsed Hillary Clinton, it was hard to envision him backing Trump. Neither of the former Bush presidents attended the Republican National Convention in Cleveland, where Trump became the GOP's nominee -- with the Bush family staying out of presidential politics after Jeb Bush, denounced repeatedly by Trump as "low-energy," exited the race. CLARIFICATION: This story has been updated to clarify the context in which George H.W. Bush made his comment about voting for Hillary Clinton. CNN's Daniella Diaz contributed to this report.
(CNN)Hanging out with Willie Nelson over the weekend has left a cloud around Virginia Gov. Terry McAuliffe, after a photo of McAuliffe and the legendary marijuana-loving musician tweeted by Nelson's wife, Annie Nelson, included a can of "Willie's Reserve" -- Nelson's brand of weed. It's sold in Colorado and is legal in Washington, but not Virginia -- a reality Annie Nelson might have been alluding to when she captioned the picture: ""UH-OH Trouble!" McAuliffe spokesman Brian Coy told the Richmond Times-Dispatch that the Democratic governor has never used drugs in his life -- and isn't cool enough to know what Willie's Reserve is. "He was not and still is not aware of whatever was on the table or anywhere around him and wouldn't know marijuana or related paraphernalia if it walked up and shook his hand," Coy said. "He's cool, but he's not that cool." The newspaper's political reporter, Graham Moomaw, tweeted a zoomed-in photo of the can of Willie's Reserve weed, next to a pair of glasses and a remote control. Annie Nelson gave McAuliffe some wiggle room in her follow-up tweet, directed at the governor and CNN political commentator (and former Bill Clinton aide) Paul Begala. She wrote: "One of them did not imbibe-guess which one!!!" Nelson was in Bristow, Virginia, at the Jiffy Lube Live music venue for the Farm Aid 2016 concert. 
ABC News is bringing its original livestream series ‘Strait Talk with Matt & LZ’ to the University of Detroit Mercy in front of a live audience on Monday, Sept. 19 at 7 p.m. ET for an open discussion about the biggest issues facing America this election cycle. ABC News Political Contributors Matthew Dowd and LZ Granderson, both Detroit natives, will be joined by Digital Host Amna Nawaz and ABC News Chief Political Correspondent Jonathan Karl as they talk with business leaders and community activists from the Motor City on key issues ranging from politics, race relations and law enforcement to religion and the economy. Dowd and Granderson opened up about the excitement behind bringing the show back to their hometown and why this conversation is needed right now.  "Then there are the topics that are important but not needle movers -- like gentrification. From New York to Los Angeles, the poor are being pushed out by rising rents and property taxes as developers reshape neighborhoods. Nestled in the shadows of the 'Detroit's recovery' narrative is the question of 'What will Detroit look like when it's over?' Take a look at Harlem: beautiful, yet void of the people and the history that made it an essential piece of Americana. Detroit is progressing toward that same fate and yet it cannot stay where it was. Solving this riddle is as important as creating jobs, whether it is on the news or not.” Dowd: “It's our birthplace and what formed us to a large degree as we went into our respective professions. Detroit really is the story of America. From modest beginnings on the frontier, to terrific economic growth from industrial revolution through mass production. Headquarters of the automobile, which symbolizes the freedom American's love. And the building of the middle class which really forms America in its unique position. And through the fall of Detroit because of loss of manufacturing, broken political governmental and corporate institutions. And now, rebuilding Detroit in whole new ways is taking place across America through entrepreneurs and innovation.”  "We are at a point of incredible disruption in all our institutions. And there is fear that our democracy might be broken and we can't do the things that need to be done. With two major party leaders distrusted and disliked by a majority of the country, and Americans facing this choice in a few weeks.” Granderson: “Politically Michigan is an important state and Detroit an important city because it really does capture the rural versus urban vote that can be found in numerous states. There is Miami and then there is Florida. There is Chicago and then Illinois. There is Detroit, then there are huge chunks of the state that couldn't be more different. Those differences are what both candidates are banking on and is a reason why neither is liked." "Honestly this cultural division has been going on for some time. Perhaps it's the personalities of the two doing the dividing that makes this year's campaign season particularly distasteful. But Detroit, a city that is 90 percent black, voted for a white mayor for the first time in decades. So once again Detroit can show the nation what happens when voters actively decide to shake up the status quo in the name of salvation.”   Jessica Care Moore | Poet, Detroit Advocate Ron Fournier | Associate Publisher, Crain’s Business Detroit Peter Cummings | Real Estate Developer Angie Reyes | Executive Director, Detroit Hispanic Development Corp Yusef Shakur | Neighborhood Activist Khaled Beydoun Associate Professor, University of Detroit Mercy Law Fatina Abdrabboh | Director, American Arab Anti-Discrimination Committee in Dearborn Chuck Stokes | Editorial & Public Affairs Director, WXYZ-TV Ashley McGuire | Senior Fellow, The Catholic Association ‘Strait Talk with Matt & LZ’ will be streamed live on ABCNews.com and on ABC News’ apps on mobile and OTT as well as ABC News’ Facebook page. Launched in September 2015, “Strait Talk with Matt & LZ” is an original livestream series on politics and culture, hosted by ABC News Political Contributors Matthew Dowd and LZ Granderson. With over 30 shows to date, Dowd and Granderson host “Strait Talk” from ABC News Headquarters in New York and have brought the show to cities across the U.S, including Los Angeles, Austin and Detroit as well as Manchester for both of ABC News’ primary debates and Cleveland and Philadelphia for the 2016 conventions.
(CNN)Former President George H.W. Bush said Monday that he will vote for Hillary Clinton in November, according to sources close to the 41st President -- an extraordinary rebuke of his own party's nominee. The sources said this was not the first time Bush had disclosed his intention to vote for Clinton. The comments came during a receiving line for board members of the bipartisan Points of Light Foundation when Bush was speaking to Kathleen Hartington Kennedy Townsend, Robert F. Kennedy's daughter and the former Maryland lieutenant governor. There were roughly 40 people in the room, and it's not clear how many people heard him, though multiple sources did. The Republican former president's embrace of the Democratic nominee represents a dramatic new chapter in the complicated three-decade-old relationship between the two most prominent families in American politics. It's a stunning political move -- one that comes just 49 days from the election, and less than a week before Clinton and Donald Trump square off in their first debate. Trump's campaign manager, Kellyanne Conway, told CNN's Erin Burnett Tuesday that she respects "the 92-year-old former president very much and his decision." "It is ironic that he would vote for the wife of the man who knocked him out of the race," she added on "Erin Burnett OutFront." "But look, this was a bruising primary ... so I know there are a lot of hurt feelings there." News of his support for Clinton came first on Facebook, when Kennedy Townsend posted a photo of herself with George H.W. Bush, along with the caption: "The President told me he's voting for Hillary!!" Kennedy Townsend sits on the advisory board of the Points of Light Foundation. Bush family representatives declined to respond publicly. "The vote President Bush will cast as a private citizen in some 50 days will be just that: a private vote cast in some 50 days. He is not commenting on the presidential race in the interim," Bush spokesman Jim McGrath said in a statement. But sources with knowledge of the conversation told CNN they were surprised and disappointed that Kennedy Townsend had publicly shared a private conversation with the former president. Kennedy Townsend declined to comment through a spokesman at the Rock Creek Group, where she works as managing director. She later took down the Facebook post. GOP's Trump divide Trump's controversial candidacy has split the group of former Republican nominees. Mitt Romney has hammered Trump in speeches and on Twitter, calling him unfit for office. But former Kansas Sen. Bob Dole has endorsed Trump, as has Arizona Sen. John McCain -- though somewhat reluctantly, often referring to "the Republican nominee" rather than Trump by name. Neither George H.W. Bush nor George W. Bush had weighed in on the general election -- even as Trump savaged George W. Bush's decision to go to war in Iraq. However, many of the 41st and 43rd presidents' Cabinet secretaries and national security officials have backed Clinton. George H.W. Bush national security adviser Brent Scowcroft endorsed Clinton in June, saying she "has the wisdom and experience to lead our country at this critical time." George W. Bush Commerce Secretary Carlos Gutierrez said on CNN in August that he "would have preferred Jeb Bush, but I think Hillary is a great choice. I am afraid of what Donald Trump would do to this country." And Louis Wade Sullivan, the Health and Human Services secretary under George H.W. Bush and the only African-American in his Cabinet, said this month that "though my enthusiasm for Hillary Clinton is somewhat tempered, I certainly believe she is an infinitely better choice for president than Donald Trump." But George H.W. Bush isn't speaking for his entire family. Marvin Bush, the former president's youngest son, has said he would vote for Libertarian Gary Johnson. George P. Bush, George H.W. Bush's grandson, has backed Trump. And Jeb Bush, Trump's former primary rival, has said he won't vote for Trump or Clinton. A representative for George W. Bush wouldn't comment on Kennedy Townsend's Facebook post or how George H.W. Bush would vote. The representative simply said George W. Bush is "spending his time working to keep the Senate in Republican hands and is not commenting on the presidential campaign." The Bush-Clinton relationship The evolving relationship between the Bush and Clinton families began in 1992, when Bill Clinton ran against -- and defeated -- incumbent President George H.W. Bush. Eight years later, with Clinton term-limited out of office, Bush's son, then-Texas Gov. George W. Bush, succeeded Clinton on a pledge to "restore honor and dignity" to the White House -- a not-so-subtle knock on Clinton's marital infidelity. But Bill Clinton and George H.W. Bush have also spent their post-presidencies teaming up for philanthropic endeavors. And in recent years, Bill Clinton and George W. Bush have increasingly appeared together. The two grew so close that George W. Bush has referred to Clinton as his "brother from another mother," and Clinton has said the two bonded over becoming grandfathers. A Bush-Clinton matchup Early in the 2016 campaign cycle, it appeared the two families could be headed for another showdown with the presidency on the line: Hillary Clinton was seeking the Democratic nomination, while former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush -- the 41st president's son and the 43rd president's brother -- was a Republican candidate and a fundraising powerhouse. Even if George H.W. Bush hadn't endorsed Hillary Clinton, it was hard to envision him backing Trump. Neither of the former Bush presidents attended the Republican National Convention in Cleveland, where Trump became the GOP's nominee -- with the Bush family staying out of presidential politics after Jeb Bush, denounced repeatedly by Trump as "low-energy," exited the race. CLARIFICATION: This story has been updated to clarify the context in which George H.W. Bush made his comment about voting for Hillary Clinton. CNN's Daniella Diaz contributed to this report.
A federal judge lashed out at the State Department on Monday over what he charged was foot-dragging over Freedom of Information Act requests relating to Hillary Clinton's service as secretary of state. “You have a client that, to say the least, is not impressing the judges on this court, myself included. … It is in your client’s interest to start being more obviously cooperative,” U.S. District Court Judge Richard Leon warned Justice Department lawyers representing State during a hearing Monday. “The State Department is at risk of being perceived as obstreperous. [They] need to get with the program.” The 10-minute hearing took place on a suit for records on how — and whether — Clinton and her aides were trained to handle classified information. State had proposed a deadline of Oct. 17 to produce about 450 unclassified documents relating to the training issue sought by the Daily Caller News Foundation. However, Leon ordered the diplomatic agency to complete processing and disclosure of those records by Oct. 10. He also said State must produce the records in three installments “of comparable size” and can’t leave the bulk of the records to the last batch. “We will do our best,” Justice Department attorney Jason Lee told Leon. “Do better than your best. … You do it,” Leon shot back. The issue of classified-information training for Clinton and her aides has drawn attention in recent weeks, after FBI Director James Comey observed that three emails received by Clinton had paragraphs marked with a (C) for information classified as “confidential,” although the entire messages were not properly marked as classified and appeared to have involved a cut-and-paste job. Comey also said that any senior official should have realized the topics being discussed in other emails were not suitable for an unclassified system. According to an FBI report, Clinton said she could not recall receiving any training or briefing on how to handle classified information. However, when the extent of her use of a private email account as secretary was revealed last year, Clinton said: “I’m certainly well-aware of the classification requirements.” An initial search for records responsive to the Daily Caller request turned up no records at all about training for Clinton or deputy chief of staff Huma Abedin, while some were located for chief of staff Cheryl Mills and Director of Policy Planning Jake Sullivan. However, a lawyer representing the Daily Caller, Brad Moss, asked State to do a more thorough search. That turned up over 1,000 records last week, the bulk of them classified files about the process State uses to approve access to a highly classified program and to withdraw it when it is no longer necessary or a person leaves government. In an interview broadcast Monday on NPR, former President Bill Clinton said he trusted the State Department to make sure there was no conflict of interest with the Clinton Foundation while Hillary Clinton was secretary of state. Lee said many of those records are classified “Top Secret or higher than Top Secret.” That complicates the processing because people have to be granted the proper clearances, he said. He offered no estimate when those records will be processed, although most of them are expected to be withheld as classified. Leon also made clear that he believes the case should be prioritized because of the looming presidential election. “It’s time sensitive because it involves a national election for president,” the judge said. Moss had objected to State’s plan to finish production of the roughly 450 documents by Oct. 17, because that is only two days before the final presidential debate. The judge appeared to agree, saying the Daily Caller should have “time to go through them … for whatever newsworthy value they believe they have.” State has been swamped with dozens of lawsuits seeking emails sent or received by Clinton during her four years as secretary, as well as emails of her top aides and records on various other topics related to Clinton’s tenure. As the election draws nigh, State has faced demands from many quarters to get particular records out prior to the election. However, Leon, a George W. Bush appointee, didn’t seem interested in hearing much about that Monday. Instead, he noted that no lawyer from State was present at Monday’s hearing. “Impress upon them this way of doing business needs to stop,” the judge told Lee. “They’re not feeling the heat.” The verbal fusillade prompted Lee to step forward with further explanation, but he only managed to utter the words, “Your honor …” before the judge stood and walked off the bench. “We’ll issue an order,” Leon declared, passing up whatever Lee had planned to say and brusquely leaving the courtroom. State Department spokeswoman Elizabeth Trudeau declined to comment on the case that was in court Monday but sent POLITICO a statement defending her agency's broader transparency efforts. "The Department strongly believes the Freedom of Information Act is a critical part of maintaining transparency to the public. Generally speaking, there has been a significant surge in FOIA requests to the State Department in recent years and we are working diligently to respond," Trudeau wrote. "The volume of FOIA requests received by the Department has increased 300% since 2008 (6,000 requests per year to over 20,000 per year). In fiscal year 2015 alone we received approximately 22,000 FOIA requests." Trudeau also said efforts are underway to improve State's responsiveness to public records requests. "We are taking steps to improve our FOIA process — including conducting FOIA training sessions for staff and working to implement new technologies and best practices. Last year, Secretary Kerry appointed Ambassador Janice Jacobs as Transparency Coordinator to help address records management challenges across the Department," the spokeswoman said. UPDATE (Monday, 4:13 p.m.): This post has been updated with State Department comment.
It’s seven weeks before Election Day, five days before the highly anticipated first debate, and Donald Trump’s television advertisements have all but vanished. Trump’s ads last ran nearly a week ago in four battleground states: Florida, North Carolina, Ohio and Pennsylvania. Since then, the GOP presidential nominee has ceded the airwaves to Hillary Clinton — and is only poised to launch a limited, less-targeted ad campaign in the days before next week’s debate. Story Continued Below While his campaign announced a new ad on Tuesday, it’s only going to run on national cable news stations and during two Sunday morning public-affairs shows, according to data from The Tracking Firm, a company that monitors media buys. And even with that seemingly modest buy — the full extent of which wasn't clear on Wednesday night — Clinton is still outspending him this week many times over. “It’s unprecedented for a major-party nominee in this century to have such an on-again, off-again TV buy,” said Elizabeth Wilner, a former TV-network political director who, until last month, monitored political advertising for Kantar Media/CMAG. The strategy has perplexed political media buyers who aren’t affiliated with the campaign. Trump’s campaign is underfunded compared to Hillary Clinton’s — his campaign had only $50 million on hand as of Aug. 30, according to documents filed with the Federal Election Commission Tuesday night — but Trump’s failure to advertise consistently threatens the efficacy of his entire paid media campaign, limited as it is. The political media buyers, including Republicans who declined to be named in criticizing the nominee, warned that the effects of television ads are fleeting, and any benefit Trump might get from putting his paid advertisements in front of voters can be undone with time if those messages aren’t reinforced. The GOP nominee’s absence is also compounding Clinton’s domination of the airwaves. Last week, Smart Media Group, a media buying firm that works with the Republican National Committee, wrote in a memo to the Trump campaign that through Sept. 12, Trump had spent just $17 million on TV ads, compared to $126 million for Clinton. If outside group spending is counted, the disparity is even more stunning: $244 million for Clinton versus $33 million for Trump. The highly unusual decision to go mostly dark in advance of the debate is emblematic of Trump’s approach to television advertising in the general election, a patchwork effort that has engaged in swing states only in fits and starts. Of the 20 days thus far in September, Trump has advertised in Florida, North Carolina and Pennsylvania for 11 days, and for 12 in Ohio. He’s also run one-week flights in a number of other states beginning over Labor Day weekend, only to let those expire more than a week ago and decline to rebook. A Trump campaign spokesman declined to reply to inquiries on Tuesday and Wednesday about the campaign’s strategy. Clinton, meanwhile, is continuing to blanket eight states in ads. Confusion about Trump’s strategy runs beyond the scale of his advertising — it’s the unpredictable nature of where and when he is advertising. When Trump first launched his TV ads in mid-August, they were focused on four core states: Florida, North Carolina, Ohio and Pennsylvania. Together, those states will award 82 electoral votes — and Trump will win the election if he carries those four and holds all the other states Mitt Romney won in 2012. Trump went on the air in those states on August 19, and he kept advertising in them through September 6 or 7, depending on the state. While those ads were on the air, Trump expanded to six new states: Colorado, Iowa, Michigan, Nevada, New Hampshire and Virginia. Ads began in those states in early September and ran for roughly one week – including an eye-popping, $2.2-million buy in Virginia, where the Clinton campaign stopped advertising last month after pulling comfortably ahead in the polls. But the Trump ads ended between September 7 and September 10, depending on the state. Trump has been off the air in those places ever since. Meanwhile, he reengaged in his four core states — Florida, North Carolina, Ohio and Pennsylvania — on September 12. (Both campaigns abstained from airing ads on the 15th anniversary of the September 11 terrorist attacks.) After nearly a week off the air in those four states most central to his candidacy, Trump last Monday rolled out a combined $2.5-million ad buy over five days. But those reservations ended last Friday. In their place, Trump’s campaign is planning a limited ad campaign, buying time on four cable stations: Fox Business Network, Fox News Channel, MSNBC and CNBC. He’s also planning to run national ads during at least two of the national Sunday morning public affairs programs on broadcast TV: “Fox News Sunday” and NBC’s “Meet the Press.” For political purposes, it’s a relatively inefficient buy. The 11 states that make up POLITICO's Battleground States project hold roughly 29 percent of the population. That means, roughly speaking, that seven-in-10 Americans reached by a national ad buy live outside the battleground states. The Clinton campaign, on the other hand, continues to advertise heavily in eight targeted states: Arizona, Florida, Iowa, North Carolina, New Hampshire, Nevada, Ohio and Pennsylvania, while also, at times, running national advertisements. (The campaign’s investments in Arizona, which has voted Republican in 15 of the last 16 presidential elections, are much smaller than in the other states.) Just this week — from Tuesday through next Monday, the day of the first debate — Clinton is poised to spend nearly $6.8 million on TV ads, backed up by another $5.6 million from pro-Clinton super PAC Priorities USA Action in those states, minus Arizona. Trump’s air cover from outside groups is also far more limited than Clinton’s. Rebuilding America Now, a pro-Trump super PAC, is spending $635,000 in Pennsylvania this week. And an anti-Clinton super PAC based in Wisconsin, Reform America Fund, is spending $332,000 in that state, where neither campaign has advertised thus far. There are some signs Trump’s campaign may be focusing on its seemingly haphazard ad efforts. GOP ad-maker Rex Elsass met with Trump campaign officials last week, POLITICO reported on Tuesday. The campaign has already reserved about $2.8 million in satellite TV ads slated to air beginning on Tuesday, Sept. 27, through the day before Election Day in eight states: Colorado, Florida, Iowa, Nevada, New Hampshire, North Carolina, Ohio and Pennsylvania. For Trump, there’s risk in continuing to delay: Booking ads at the last minute, as Trump’s campaign has been doing, sometimes means spending more money for the same spot as a campaign that makes its reservations earlier. And there are some signs that some of the late decision-making is driven by the candidate: The New York Times reported earlier this month that Trump himself has been selecting the media markets in which the campaign has been advertising. Since research suggests the effects of television ads are short-lived — and with the race tightening in the battleground states in recent weeks, Trump can ill-afford to regress. “It has to be consistent,” said one GOP ad-buyer, “because the recall on these just evaporates when you go dark.” Alex Isenstadt contributed to this report.
There’s one state where Donald Trump’s ground game appears to be a model of efficiency, rather than a ramshackle operation lacking organizers and field offices: Israel. As part of an effort to target what the Israeli chapter of Republicans Overseas says are as many as 300,000 U.S. citizens living there — many of them registered in places ranging from safe Democratic states like New York, New Jersey and California to swing states like Florida and Pennsylvania — the pro-Trump group is employing all the traditional tools long eschewed by the campaign itself. Story Continued Below In some ways, the Trump organizing efforts are more extensive in the West Bank than in West Palm Beach, Fla. While the Trump campaign and its allies spent much of the summer waving off the importance of brick-and-mortar offices in the U.S., the Israeli team is expanding its physical footprint. So far, there are five offices open in areas around Jerusalem and Tel Aviv, as well as in the Israeli-occupied West Bank. And the group has plans to open three more offices starting as soon as this week: In Gush Etzion, which is also in the West Bank, near Jerusalem; and two others around Jerusalem and Tel Aviv. There’s even coalition-specific engagement—a top adviser to the Chief Rabbi of Israel is focused on courting the ultra-Orthodox vote for Trump, according to the campaign manager for the Israel effort. Compare that to the Trump campaign in Florida, for example, where there is little evidence of tailored Jewish outreach at all, much less constituency-focused outreach to various Jewish subgroups. Marc Zell, who heads up Republicans Overseas Israel, said they are “closely coordinated” with both the RNC and the Trump campaign on messaging. But the Israeli-based Trump effort is supported by local fundraising, not the GOP nominee’s campaign or the RNC. A Marco Rubio backer in the GOP primary, Zell tried to resign his GOP leadership position after Trump won, he said, initially distraught over Trump’s nomination. But Zell has since come to support the Republican nominee, heartened by the strong pro-Israel language included in the platform passed at Trump’s convention. Many Israelis who whole-heartedly embrace Trump appreciate his tough talk on terrorism and the fact that he represents a clear break with the Obama administration, which has had a tumultuous relationship with conservative Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu. One poll of Israelis from June, however, found that 42 percent of Israeli citizens overall would vote for Hillary Clinton if they were American citizens, and 35 percent would back Trump. Other organizations estimate that there are only around 200,000 U.S. citizens in Israel. But whatever the number, the pro-Trump forces are targeting a group that includes many Orthodox Jews, who tend to be more conservative — and more likely to vote for Trump. “People, they…come back from work, they’re going to get help through the registration process from our specialists,” said Tzvika Brot, a former Israeli journalist who is campaign manager of the Israel effort. “Every evening, we’ll come to that office or some base in the houses of our volunteers. We even appoint area captains for each area in Israel.” To American political operatives who have worked with the Jewish community stateside, the intensive Israeli efforts to target U.S. citizens on Trump’s behalf underscore how little the Republican is doing to court Jewish voters in key American swing states like Ohio, Pennsylvania and especially Florida. “Instead of focusing on expats who are Floridians who live in Ashdod [in Israel], I would focus on Jewish Americans who live in Boca Raton,” said Michael Fragin, a consultant who worked on Jewish outreach for the Republican National Committee in Florida in 2004, and remains plugged in to the Jewish political world. In the U.S., he continued, “Nobody I know is aware of anything going on specific to Jewish outreach.” Added Lisa Spies, who ran Jewish outreach for Mitt Romney and remains heavily involved on the pro-Israel donor landscape: “With Trump, yes, there are pro-Israel Republicans listed on invites, or that go to events, but what they still haven’t done, and every campaign before has done, and Hillary is doing, is have a concerted Jewish outreach.” While the Jewish vote in the U.S. is traditionally heavily Democratic, there have been major efforts in recent years to convert more Jewish voters to the GOP. In 2012, Romney surrogates like former Sen. Norm Coleman hit the synagogue circuit for Romney and billboards reading “Obama…Oy vey!” littered South Florida roads. Romney personally visited Israel. And four years earlier, former Sen. Joe Lieberman was a top surrogate for John McCain. For several election cycles, Florida Republicans have targeted Orthodox Jews, Israeli-American Jews and Jews from South America, some of whom tend to be more conservative than their generally liberal co-religionists. And Jewish Republicans could claim some success in 2012: President Barack Obama won 69 percent of the Jewish vote in 2012 — down from 78 percent in 2008. But Trump, who has had to spend time swatting down accusations of racism and anti-Semitism following support from bigoted backers like former Ku Klux Klan head David Duke, already has built-in challenges with the community. And his lack of campaign infrastructure and outreach doesn’t help either, some Jewish political operatives say. It’s a missed opportunity, they add, especially in Florida, a battleground state crucial to Trump’s path to victory, where five percent of the electorate is Jewish and presidential elections are routinely close. “Who are their surrogates doing rallies, getting out the vote, speaking to this specific group?” Spies asked. “There doesn’t seem to be an actual effort.” Aaron Keyak, the co-founder of the firm Bluelight Strategies and a former top executive at the National Jewish Democratic Council who worked to counter Republican Jewish outreach in 2012, said he was surprised at the barebones effort in the U.S. this year. “’Incompetence’ was never a word that came up when it came to [Republican] Jewish voter outreach in 2012,” he said. “You don’t even know where to start now.” This time around, Coleman refuses to back Trump, Lieberman is supporting Hillary Clinton — and doing pro-Israel events with moderates and Republicans on her behalf — and Jewish supporters and detractors of Trump both agree there has been virtually no Jewish-focused outreach from his campaign in Florida, something the campaign itself acknowledges. “We welcome and include everybody, so I would say our approach is more general,” said Susie Wiles, who this month took over Trump’s Florida campaign, an operation that until recently had almost no field offices at all. “Our approach is also more aggressive, our outreach, our voter contact is unprecedented, that includes everybody in Florida.” She didn’t deny the absence of a specific Jewish voter outreach plan in Florida. “I would say that’s not wrong,” she said. But the lack of concerted Jewish outreach effort from the campaign itself doesn’t bother some of Trump’s Jewish supporters in Florida, who think the campaign is wise to focus on more sizable, less liberal-leaning constituencies. “Those of us who are Republican Jews are plenty outspoken about the sell-out of Israel by liberal Jews, but there’s no part of us that thinks we’re going to change their minds,” said Sid Dinerstein, a former chair of the Palm Beach County GOP. “There are bigger fish to fry.” The Clinton campaign doesn’t see it that way. They have both a director of Jewish outreach and a Florida-specific Jewish vote coordinator, as well as operatives in Ohio and Pennsylvania who focus on the Jewish vote. They conduct “bubbe banking” — using the Yiddish term for “grandmother” to describe programs through which Jewish senior citizens call their grandchildren and urge them to vote for Hillary Clinton. They’re also encouraging rabbi-to-rabbi phone banking. There are Jewish Women for Hillary events across the swing states, and weekly calls with rabbis and community leaders. The campaign has plans for more surrogates to hit swing-state synagogues, and they are highlighting centrist validators like Lieberman, former New York City Mayor Michael Bloomberg and billionaire Seth Klarman, a major donor to Jewish causes and to Republicans. That’s part of an outreach effort to moderates and Republicans who care about a muscular foreign policy and strong support for Israel. Jews for Progress, a super PAC chaired by former Congressman Ron Klein — who lives in Boca Raton, Fla. — is also planning to advocate on Clinton’s behalf in swing state Jewish communities, with the goal of raising a sum in the seven figures, Klein said, to fund that effort. While there are Clinton volunteers in Israel as part of activities run by Democrats Abroad, their efforts don’t appear as extensive as those from Republicans Overseas Israel. Asked whether there was a similar Democratic effort, Israeli operative Nimrod Dweck replied, “No! No. There’s no reason. Three hundred thousand people, that’s like a small town.” Dweck, who works on center-left issues in Israel and has partnered with 270 Strategies, a consulting firm whose founders played key roles on Obama’s campaigns, continued, “If you want to work on your effort, go to key states in the U.S. Do get-out-the-vote in the United States.”
Reporters following the Donald Trump campaign as part of his pool will no longer travel in the candidate's motorcade, reversing part of a move made last week that was meant to improve press logistics. According to an email sent by organizers of the Trump press pool, the campaign said it was the Secret Service's decision to remove the press pool from the motorcade as their resources are being stretched too thin amid a "heightened state of security" to keep the press' plane clean. "We have communicated that this is an issue that the campaign should have spotted long ago and are vigorously protesting the decision," an email from the pool chairs said. "We have told the campaign that if they are truly committed to transparency, than [sic] they should place the pool on Trump's plane so it is a truly protective pool. They have not been responsive to that request." On Monday, the journalists following Trump began to fly on a new "chase" plane which would more closely follow Trump's plane, and were told they would now travel within the Trump motorcade. The move, which the campaign said was in the works for weeks, was expected to help prevent instances such as last week, when Trump's press pool, caught in traffic on the way from a different airport, was late to a Trump rally in New Hampshire. Instead of delaying his rally, Trump mocked the press for being late. By not being in the motorcade, the pool will have to contend with normal traffic, making it more likely that they could miss or be late to other events. The Trump press pool has been lobbying to travel with Trump on his plane, a move which would solve these logistical problems, and one his campaign has signaled will likely never happen. Nearly all previous presidential candidates, including Hillary Clinton, have their traveling press corps with them on their planes by this point in the campaign. The reversal is the latest in a series of events that has seriously frustrated the reporters who cover Trump. From the campaign blacklisting certain outlets, to the candidate himself calling out certain reporters he feels are unfair (NBC's Katy Tur was once escorted out of a rally by Secret Service for her own protection after Trump called her out), the reporters following Trump have had to deal with a seemingly never-ending series of roadblocks. One of the few positives of Trump's relationship with the media had been that despite the blacklists, he still held many news conferences and gaggles and managed to sit for interviews with a wide range of outlets at any time of day or night. Now those interviews and news conferences have been drastically reduced. Trump has over the past two months mostly stuck to appearances on Fox News, and hasn't held a formal news conference where he takes questions in more than 54 days (he held a small gaggle with reporters on his plane a couple weeks ago). In an ironic contrast, Clinton, who famously went months without a formal news conference has now held several in the past couple of weeks. Secret Service spokeswoman Catherine Milhoan declined to specify whether it was the campaign or the Secret Service's decision to keep the pool from the motorcade. "Historically, the Secret Service has not provided resources to maintain the security of a secondary aircraft used for the domestic transport of press," Milhoan said. "In regards to aircraft security, the Secret Service is only responsible for maintaining the integrity of the protectees aircraft and those accompanying him or her on that aircraft." We've reached out to the Trump campaign for comment and will update here accordingly. This post has been updated with a statement from the Secret Service.
Donald Trump and his campaign complained Tuesday morning that debate moderator Lester Holt targeted him for unfair questioning while neglecting to ask Hillary Clinton about any of her various scandals. “They were leaving all of her little goodies out. They didn't ask her about, you know, much,” Trump said on Fox News’s “Fox and Friends.” “But I was asked about my tax returns, which I've told about 500 times. But, you know, I think I did — I think I really did well when we were asked normal questions. I think I did really well in answering those questions, but those questions are not answerable in a positive light.” Story Continued Below Still, Trump was upbeat overall about the debate, which he said “went really well” despite “some hostile questions.” The Manhattan billionaire gave Holt a C+ for his performance as moderator, praising him for his issue-based questions in the first 45 minutes of the debate but attacking him as biased for a series of more direct questions about a housing discrimination lawsuit filed against Trump’s real estate company in the 1970s, even though it was Clinton who brought up the Justice Department lawsuit. “I didn’t think he did a bad job. You know, when you look at it, you watch the last four questions, he hit me on birther, he hit he on a housing deal from many years ago that I settled with no recourse and no guilt. He asked me about that,” Trump said. “That's a beauty to be asked, you know, 40-year-old lawsuit, or older. I just hate to say it’s older because then you’ll know, then [Fox News anchor Ainsley Earhardt] will say “’Wow I didn’t know Trump was that old.’ Hey, she’ll be unimpressed.” “Well, he didn't ask her about the emails at all. He didn't ask her about her scandals. He didn't ask her about the Benghazi deal that she destroyed,” he said. “He didn't ask her about a lot of things she should have been asked about. I mean, you know, there's no question about it. He didn't ask about her foundation.” Attacking Holt became a running theme from Trump's campaign Tuesday morning, as both his running mate and campaign manager took to the morning shows to criticize the moderator. "I was disappointed that Lester did not get into some of the issues that had been in so much of the forefront of Hillary Clinton’s candidacy – the FBI investigation, pay to play, the whole disastrous events that took place in Benghazi and Libya – that never came up," GOP vice presidential candidate Mike Pence said on Good Morning America. Trump's campaign manager Kellyanne Conway took a similar line, saying on CNN Tuesday that there were topics she wished Holt would have raised. “I just would have liked to have heard more about Benghazi or e-mails or the Clinton foundation since these are very clearly in the news," she said. "You know, one of our guests last night was Mark Geist, not Mark Cuban, Mark Geist, who's a Benghazi hero and survivor. And You know, he was within several feet or yards of them and I think it's a good reminder to be Americans of what her record is on that particular issue." While the Republican nominee insisted that he had outperformed Clinton at the debate, he said that he struggled throughout the night with a defective microphone that made him difficult to hear for the audience in the debate hall. Trump suggested that perhaps his microphone, which he said worked perfectly earlier in the day, had been tampered with. “I had a problem with a microphone that didn't work. I don’t know if you saw that in the room, but my microphone was terrible. I wonder, was it set up that way on purpose,” he said. “My microphone, in the room they couldn't hear me, you know, it was going on and off. Which isn't exactly great. I wonder if it was set up that way, but it was terrible.” Asked if Clinton had successfully managed to get under his skin during their 90-minute back-and-forth, Trump said she had not until the end of the debate, when the former secretary of state brought up Miss Universe winner Alicia Machado, who Trump called “Miss Piggy” and “Miss Housekeeping” because of her Latin heritage. Addressing Trump directly about the name-calling, Clinton said, “Donald, she has a name. Her name is Alicia Machado. And she has become a US citizen and you can bet she is going to vote this November." “I know that person, that person was a Miss Universe person, and she was the worst we ever had. The worst, the absolute worst. She was impossible, and she was a Miss Universe contestant and ultimately a winner who they had a tremendously difficult time with as Miss Universe,” he said. “She was the winner, and, you know, she gained a massive amount of weight, and it was a real problem. We had a real problem. Not only that, her attitude, and we had a real problem with her, so Hillary went back into the years and she found this girl. This was many years ago, and found the girl and talked about her like she was mother Teresa and it wasn't quite that way, but that's okay. Hillary has to do what she has to do.”
Making his case against nationalistic and anti-immigration movements that have grown both in the U.S. and around the globe, President Barack Obama told the United Nations general assembly Tuesday that “today, a nation ringed by walls would only imprison itself.” Obama’s remark appeared to be an allusion to Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump, who has campaigned hard against the president’s record and has pledged to build a wall along America’s southern border with Mexico. In his final address as president before the United Nations general assembly, Obama was critical of the isolationist movement that Trump has championed in the U.S. and others have pushed abroad. Story Continued Below “As these real problems have been neglected, alternative visions of the world have pressed forward, both in the wealthiest countries and in the poorest,” Obama said after discussing economic inequality and other international issues. “Religious fundamentalism, the politics of ethnicity or tribe or sect, aggressive nationalism, a crude populism, sometimes from the far left but more often from the far right, which seeks to restore what they believe was a better, simpler age free of outside contamination. We cannot dismiss these visions. They are powerful. They reflect dissatisfaction among too many of our citizens. ” “Today, a nation ringed by walls would only imprison itself,” the president continued. “So the answer cannot be a simple rejection of global integration. Instead, we must work together to make sure the benefits of such integration are broadly shared.” The president led his speech with a celebration of global accomplishments to which the U.S. has been party during his administration, listing the reduction of terrorists’ safe havens, the landmark nuclear agreement with Iran and the resumption of diplomatic relations with Cuba as successes. But Obama also listed global problems like the flow of refugees, continued financial disruptions, and a lack of basic order and security in the Middle East. The president urged the international community “that we must go forwards and not backwards,” offering a defense of Western values as the best path forward for global growth and success. “I believe that as imperfect as they are, the principles of open markets and accountable governance, of democracy and human rights and international law that we have forged remain the firmest foundation for human progress in this century,” Obama said. “I make this argument not based on theory or ideology but on facts.” In making that case, Obama warned against strongman governments and oppressive tactics like media suppression. He said such strategies are stifling for economies hungry for information and ultimately lead to further crackdowns or the scapegoating of foreign enemies that can lead to war. Speaking specifically of the Middle East, Obama called for the recognition of a “common humanity” that would serve as a stepping stone toward resolving the various conflicts in the region. Again attacking isolationism, Obama said the rest of the world cannot turn its back on conflict in the Middle East in the hope that violence will be contained to the region. “Until basic questions are answered about how communities coexist, the embers of extremism will continue to burn, countless human beings will suffer, most of all in that region, but extremism will continue to be exported overseas,” he said. “And the world is too small for us to simply be able to build a wall and prevent it from affecting our own societies.”
Former Miss Universe Alicia Machado on Tuesday called out Donald Trump, saying his harsh comments about her weight have been like “a really bad dream.” Machado, a Hillary Clinton supporter, was the featured speaker on a press call organization by the Democratic nominee’s campaign, as they try to drive home the message that Trump is a misogynist with a long track record of dissing women. Story Continued Below The former beauty queen used the call to respond to Trump’s attacks against her — including calling her “Miss Piggy” — and express her support for Clinton. “I never thought 20 years later, I would be in this position, watching this guy say stupid things, make stupid comments. I never imagined that,” she said, adding, “It’s a really bad dream for me.” “My story of Miss Universe with this person can open eyes in this election,” she said. “He was not waiting for that—he was like oh my God, why did she pronounce the name?” she said of Trump’s reaction to Clinton bringing up her story. Clinton on Monday night accused Trump of objectifying and publicly shaming women, and invoked Machado in a heated moment on the debate stage. “And one of the worst things he said was about a woman in a beauty contest. He loves beauty contests, supporting them and hanging around them,” Clinton said. “And he called this woman Miss Piggy. Then he called her Ms. Housekeeping, because she was Latina. Donald, she has a name.” “Her name is Alicia Machado and she has become a U.S. citizen, and you can bet she's going to vote this November,” Clinton went on to say. Machado won the Miss Universe beauty pageant in 1996, which Trump was executive producer of. Machado reportedly gained 60 pounds after winning the contest, but she later said it was closer to 15. Rumors surfaced that she would have to give up her title, or lose weight. Trump admitted to the New York Times that he pushed her to lose weight, saying, “To that, I will plead guilty.” In a 1996 interview that BuzzFeed posted on Tuesday, Howard Stern introduced the topic by saying, "The Miss Universe, it turns out, the woman who won last year, blows up to a fat pig. I mean, like obese," while Trump can be heard laughing in the background. In the interview, Trump said, "You know it was an amazing phenomenon. She weighed 118 when she won," adding, "She was as beautiful a woman as I've ever seen." He then went on to say, "She gained about 55 pounds in a period of nine months. She was like an eating machine," then quipped that she, "Ate a lot of everything," when Stern questioned how she could gain that much weight in that time. Machado spoke of Trump's comments to Stern in an interview with Inside Edition in May. She said in the interview that Trump told her she needed to lose weight and even brought her to a gym with a media crew. The Republican presidential nominee praised himself in the Stern interview for bringing her weight to the spotlight, saying, “It has become a major event." Trump said on Tuesday morning that while nothing Clinton did throughout the debate to that point had managed to get under his skin, the former secretary of state’s decision to bring up Machado did frustrate him. And he went on to again attack Machado’s weight. “That person was a Miss Universe person, and she was the worst we ever had. The worst, the absolute worst. She was impossible, and she was a Miss Universe contestant and ultimately a winner who they had a tremendously difficult time with as Miss Universe,” Trump said during an interview with Fox News’s “Fox and Friends.” “She was the winner, and, you know, she gained a massive amount of weight, and it was a real problem. We had a real problem. Not only that, her attitude, and we had a real problem with her, so Hillary went back into the years and she found this girl. This was many years ago, and found the girl and talked about her like she was Mother Teresa and it wasn't quite that way, but that's okay. Hillary has to do what she has to do.” Machado said during the press call Tuesday afternoon that she was trying to forget the “abuse” after the pageant, saying she subsequently spent four years suffering from eating disorders. The former Miss Universe repeatedly offered her support for Clinton’s presidency, saying, “I’m with Mrs. Clinton until the end.”
Writing as a former legislative assistant to Senator Robert F. Kennedy and an enthusiastic supporter of Hillary Clinton for president, I was disappointed to see in Politico the screed written by my former colleague, Adam Walinsky, excoriating Clinton’s record on foreign policy and national security and going on to conclude that Donald Trump should therefore be elected president. It is one thing to disagree with Secretary Clinton, which Walinsky does heatedly, and quite another to turn to Donald Trump. We should be clear that Walinsky’s critique is not confined to Clinton. He lays out (and massively overstates) a dark view not just of Clinton but also of President Obama and almost the entire Democratic Party. The analysis is overwrought, but even one who buys the argument defies all logic in imagining that the solution is Trump. Story Continued Below The question is not whether there is a military-industrial complex in our country. President Eisenhower called us out on that and there is enough responsibility to go around among both parties for it. The 21st century version begins with the Iraq War, which was originated by a Republican President. I am not interested in adjudicating the issue of which party is the war party except to say that Presidents Obama, Clinton and Carter have stood for peace in important and tangible ways. The question here is whether Donald Trump can claim in any way that he is the candidate who stands for a foreign policy of restraint and the answer is that he cannot. Walinsky finds in Trump a rationality and consistency that do not exist. Any reasonable observer of the presidential campaign has seen that at one moment, Trump will represent himself as an isolationist who wants to end ties with NATO and other allies; at another, he will lash out at any perceived insult to the U.S. or to himself, and pledges that America’s pride needs to be vindicated militarily. “America First,” Trump says regularly, bringing the isolationism of Charles Lindbergh to mind—before excoriating President Obama for not using greater force in any number of venues and then insinuating that he has a secret plan to obliterate the Islamic State. To compare John F. Kennedy and Robert F. Kennedy to Donald Trump is—well, I won’t finish the sentence. Yes, Robert Kennedy turned against the Vietnam War, but not because he felt that America should retreat from the world. He opposed the war because it was unjust and was based on a flawed notion of American interests. The result, as we know, was the death of Vietnamese and Americans and others who should not have died. JFK and RFK were internationalists. They understood that World War II left the United States with a responsibility to play an active and constructive role in the world. They understood that America must stand together and dependably with allies who also are committed to pursue a peaceful world. They understood that the use of force was sometimes necessary and that brave men and women would be put at risk. They made those difficult, often excruciating, decisions carefully and as transparently as possible, never rashly, impulsively, or vindictively. Walinsky quotes Robert Kennedy’s statement that if any member of the ExComm other than John F. Kennedy had been president during the Cuban Missile Crisis, we would have had a nuclear war. Ask yourself what a President Trump might have done in that moment. “Restraint” is not the word that comes to mind. This is a man who said he would order the military to kill the families of Muslim terrorists and use interrogation techniques worse than waterboarding and opined that the United States should have seized Iraq’s oil resources as “spoils to the victor.” Yes, we have put too much power in the hands of militarists and profit seekers in both the public and private sectors. But electing Donald Trump is not the answer; it would only compound the problem in new and dangerous ways. The answer is an active citizenry that speaks out against the inappropriate use of force and opposes interference in conflicts that involve neither American security interests nor egregious human rights violations—a topic in which Donald Trump has shown an ostentatious indifference, as his fondness for Vladimir Putin reflects. All the evidence, provided again and again by Donald Trump’s own mouth, tells us not that he is a man of peace, but that he is a man of no principle—a man who will say, and possibly do, whatever happens to cross his mind at a given minute. He is like the weather in New England: If you don’t like it, wait a minute. We do not know what he believes because he does not know what he believes. We do not know what he knows because, from all we can see, he does not know much. Even if Walinsky’s diatribe is correct, which it most certainly is not in its breadth and depth, there is nothing in it that justifies turning to Donald Trump. Of all occasions to break ranks with the Democratic Party, this is the most inappropriate. Of all the ways to misappropriate the memory of John and Robert Kennedy, two of our greatest public servants, this is the most egregious I have ever seen. To say that I am disappointed by what Walinsky has done is an understatement. America, in this election, faces an existential question—and history will judge us by our answer. Walinsky has chosen the wrong side of the struggle.
That Donald Trump’s campaign has had more returns from the dead than a soap opera villain is hardly a novel observation. What is noteworthy is the manner in which he’s bounced back. Time and again, Trump has survived what only a few years ago would have been considered career-ending gaffes—from calling women “pigs,” to boasting about his sexual prowess, to repeatedly insulting war heroes, to offending Mexicans during his off-the-cuff announcement speech, to misspelling basic vocabulary words like “lightweight” and “honor” on his Twitter feed. This is a man, after all, who forged his political identity by questioning loudly, without any real evidence, on multiple occasions, and in defiance of every rule of politics, the place of President Obama’s birth. And yet here he stands—one or two battleground states away from the White House. This defies all the rules of public life as we’ve come to understand them. For decades, a single spontaneous outburst (John Kerry’s “I was for it before I was against it”), a pompous proclamation (whatever Al Gore intended to say about his role in the Internet), a cuckoo pronouncement (George Romney’s claim to have been “brainwashed” about the Vietnam War), or even an embarrassing misspelling (Dan Quayle’s infamous attempt to correctly write the word “potato” on a blackboard), caused irreparable, often campaign-ending damage. Trump has done all these things—some of them multiple times in the same day. The gaffe hasn’t destroyed Trump; it’s made him stronger. The reasons for this are instructive, and they will change the way politics is practiced forever. Story Continued Below At one level, Trump’s survival, so far, is less a testament to his shrewdness—though it is a disservice to claim he hasn’t been shrewd—than it is to Washington’s studied cowardice. Trump is not only making gaffes, he’s brashly owning them, daring the political gods to smite him in what has become an epic rebuke to the dull, predictable, cautious political culture that everyone outside the Beltway has learned to recognize and abhor. In terror of the gaffe, candidates have increasingly immersed their true selves behind carefully vetted talking points, anodyne scripts, and cynical consultants, all with the primary purpose of suffocating in its cradle anything approaching a cavalier statement, never mind a surprising or provocative thought. The culmination of this effort is before us: the enthusiasm-starved campaign of Hillary Clinton, who over her decades in politics has perfected the talent of making even the most cutting-edge idea immediately sound like a cliche. Set against this apotheosis of safe, gaffe-free politics, millions have delightedly embraced a man who seems to recognize their appetite for something recognizably real, even if it’s vulgar and offensive. His gaffes aren’t a sideshow: they’re integral to his pitch. For this cohort, a vote for Trump is a vote to make the safe, protected, consultant-scripted lives of everyone in D.C. miserable every single day, because they’ve earned it. The larger explanation for the Trump phenomenon is even more unsettling for Washington’s political class, especially the media. They have lost their power. Only a decade or two ago, the media world was confined to a group of people in D.C. and New York—a group that largely knew each other, mingled in the same places, vacationed in the same locales. The most influential members of the group routinely defined what constituted a gaffe, others echoed that view, and it became the conventional wisdom for the rest of America. In the age of the Internet, with bloggers spread out across the nation, and multiple platforms across the political spectrum, that’s no longer possible. The growing divergence between these “insiders” and the new “outsiders” has played to Trump’s benefit, every single time he made what was once conceived as a “game-changing” error. The first test of this new dynamic arrived on Trump Day One, when the candidate tossed aside a prepared announcement speech that would have made him sound, well, normal, in favor of a stream-of-consciousness ramble that began with an anecdote about candidates “sweating like dogs,” who were somehow incapable of beating ISIS to claiming that Mexico, in some diabolical frenzy, was shipping rapists and ax murderers to America by the dozens. Commenting that “the U.S. has become a dumping ground for everybody else's problems,” he quickly trained his ire on the influx of illegal immigrants across the Mexican border. He claimed that Mexico, presumably the government of Mexico, was “sending people that have lots of problems, and they're bringing those problems with us. They're bringing drugs. They're bringing crime. They're rapists. And some, I assume, are good people.” Most candidates, of course, know as a general rule that it’s rarely a good idea to include the name of an ethnic group and the word “rapists” in the same sentence. Trump either didn’t know this rule, didn’t appreciate what he was saying in the midst of a full ramble, or didn’t care. The “insider” media went to work, claiming that Trump had insulted not only all Mexicans, but all immigrants. (This was an exaggeration.) Boycotts ensued. Trump lost his deals with Macy’s and NBC. The “outsider” view was very different. Time and again, Republican voters have told their political leaders that illegal immigration was a major concern. The issue led to a rare uprising against George W. Bush during his second term when he pushed what many of his base considered “amnesty,” almost derailed John McCain’s presidential campaign in 2008, and haunted Marco Rubio throughout 2016. But most GOP leaders, believing “comprehensive immigration reform” was the key to attracting Hispanic voters, didn’t get it. They ignored their core voters on the issue. Trump sounded as perplexed and angry as they were. What he said wasn’t a gaffe, not to them. It showed he was listening—a skill Washington lost many election cycles ago. This pattern has repeated itself ever since. If you were a campaign consultant looking to the future, it would be worth studying Trump’s “gaffes”—not to avoid them, but to figure out just why they work so well. If you list them and pick them apart, you could start to see them as a playbook for a new kind of anti-Washington politics, one in which the candidate speaks right past the old “insider” audience of media and Beltway elites, and delivers an outsider electorate exactly what it had been waiting to hear. Here’s how it works, in three examples: 1. Ben Carson the “Psychopath” On the campaign trial, Trump cites Ben Carson’s acclaimed memoir, which discusses Carson’s violent temper during his youth. (Carson is currently threatening Trump’s front-runner status in polls.) “It's in the book that he's got a pathological temper," Trump tells an interviewer. "That's a big problem because you don't cure that ... as an example: child molesting. You don't cure these people. You don't cure a child molester. There's no cure for it. Pathological, there's no cure for that." Insider: Trump destroys himself and permanently alienates Carson and his supporters by comparing Carson to a child molester. (Which Trump, arguably, didn’t exactly do.) Outsider: Trump is a fighter, willing to use Carson’s own words directly against him. The media does this to politicians all the time. What’s the big deal? Outcome: Trump overtakes Carson in polls. Carson ultimately forgives Trump, endorses him for president and serves as a surrogate for him—except when Carson needs to find his luggage. TRUMP WIN 2. McCain the “Captured” War Hero At an Iowa event in June 2015, Trump outrageously questions John McCain’s war hero status (after McCain went after Trump supporters as “crazies.”) “He’s not a war hero,” said Trump, before immediately reversing himself. “He was a war hero because he was captured. I like people who weren’t captured.” Insider View: We all know John McCain—great guy, war hero, very quotable. Who in their right mind would take on a POW who endured torture for more than five years in his nation’s service, especially a guy who never served in uniform himself? Proof positive that Trump’s nuts. Outsider View: Trump probably went too far on this, but many of us don’t like amnesty-supporting McCain all that much anyway. Besides, McCain was taking cracks at Trump. Why shouldn’t he respond? Outcome: Eventually, after much resistance, Trump quasi-apologizes by claiming he didn’t say what he obviously meant to say. McCain endorses Trump for the presidency. TRUMP WIN 3. Bush the Warmonger Fresh off of his victory in New Hampshire, Trump heads to South Carolina, the alleged Bush “firewall” where his brother, George W. Bush, is going to campaign for his brother Jeb. During a televised debate in the veteran-thick state, Trump says W. “lied” about weapons of mass destruction in Iraq in order to go to war: “They said there were weapons of mass destruction, there were none. And they knew there were none.” He is greeted with boos from the audience. Insiders: South Carolina veterans will not forgive Trump for insulting the Bushes or repeating the left’s claims that Bush lied the country into war. We’ve been assured all year long by Bush campaign people that Jeb was going to win in South Carolina, a state with nostalgic love for the Bushes. Trump made a huge miscalculation with his latest outburst. Outsiders: The Bushes are yesterday’s news. And, come to think of it, why did we go into Iraq? Outcome: Trump wins the South Carolina primary by about 10 points. Bush comes in fourth and drops out of the race. TRUMP WIN Care to continue? I didn’t think so. And I still haven’t gotten to how Trump wondered aloud whether Ted Cruz’s dad may have been in or near the grassy knoll the day of the Kennedy assassination—nor to Trump’s brilliant response when called on his epic troll: “They didn’t deny it.” By the time Trump gaffed his way to the Republican nomination, furious and frustrated media outlets had been grappling for months with how to hold him to account, as they’ve managed with other candidates in the past. A journalist asked Trump to identify the “five sources” that he claimed had told him Mexico was deliberately sending criminals across our border. The brilliance, of course, was in the number. Not one. Not two. But five people. Who would make up a number like that? In any event, Trump refused to disclose their names. Were they business colleagues? Informants from the Mexican government? Did all of them have the last name Trump? We’re left to wonder. Most people didn’t seem to care. He’s probably making it up, they think, but whatever. Multiple Web pages and assorted news articles have devoted themselves to chronicling Trump’s habit of making an outrageous statement, and then later denying such statement was ever made. Examples abound: that Marco Rubio was the personal senator for Mark Zuckerberg, that the pro-free-market Trump had supported health care mandates, that he ever told supporters to “knock the crap” out of protesters, after some did just that. Trump’s infuriating ability to wiggle out of all sorts of statements has left fact-checkers—who have labeled him among the biggest fibbers in recent political history—in a state of distress. After all, a decades-long pattern of denying clear and unequivocal statements is the kind of audacity usually reserved for the Clintons. Which, come to think of it, may be why Trump’s dalliances with deception hasn’t seem to outrage people who don’t work in the media. The latest effort is the Instant Fact Check—in which cable news channels, such as CNN, note in real-time whether a candidate is making a truthful claim, as in “Trump (falsely) claims X.” One doesn’t get the impression that these “instant” fact-checks have been applied quite so forcefully to Hillary Clinton. And this, too, seems to have blown up in their collective faces, signaling to outsiders that the mainstream media, as they suspected, is just in the tank for the Democrats. In the years-long battle between Trump and his Javert-like media interlocutors, nothing has led to more perfectly justified hysteria than his pirouette over the Obama birther business. As far as conspiracy theories go, the rock-solid contention that Barack Obama was not born in the United States was always of the nonsensical variety. After all, even if he had been born someplace else, no fault of his own, the president still would have been born to an American citizen, his mother. That alone would qualify him for the presidency, just as much as it does Cruz, or McCain, or George Romney (all of whom were not born in the U.S.) But the dark and daffy corners of the so-called alt-right is no place for logic. Last week, as he began passing Clinton in many polls, Trump seemed to have fallen prey to the “birther” gaffe again by refusing to say whether he believed the president was born in the United States. Media outlets could not believe their luck—Trump was stepping into it again. Or was he? At a news conference devoted to promoting his new D.C. hotel, Trump finally announced his (latest) position: “Hillary Clinton and her campaign of 2008 started the birther controversy. I finished it. President Barack Obama was born in the United States, period.” This was Trump at his most fiendish. Not only had he repudiated his own long history as a “birther,” not only had he lured the national news media into giving wall-to-wall coverage of a hotel opening, he blamed his opponent for the whole thing. No other activity in recent political history engendered as much of an outcry from the insider media, with the possible exception of Sarah Palin’s nomination for the vice presidency of the United States. To the insiders, no single moment in the campaign was more appalling, or revealing of Trump’s singular mendacity. His pirouette not only made fools of the press by getting them to cover an infomercial disguised as a news conference, it was a brazen effort to shift blame for a controversy that Trump did more than any other prominent American to promote. Surely, the press assumed, the public would see this? They saw it, all right—but not in the same way. To an outsider, a savvy businessman had just engineered a brilliant ad for his latest venture, while efficiently backing away from a controversy he probably didn’t take all that seriously anyway. And as he did it, he left the media caught just a bit in a trap of its own. As they rushed to attack Trump on his latest “lie,” most outlets conveniently omitted to mention that in fact there was some truth in Trump’s contention. The Clinton campaign may not have “started” the birther controversy. But it was circulated by her supporters, and Clinton world definitely had a hand in it. According to a former editor with the McClatchy News Service, one of Clinton’s closest confidants, Sidney Blumenthal, personally spread the “birther” story himself. (Blumenthal flatly calls this “false,” leaving the story in “his word against mine” territory.) What an unbiased observer might conclude from all of this is that many mainstream media outlets, so blinded in their distaste for Trump and so determined to unmask him as an unprecedented liar, have now compromised themselves in the process. Which is one more lesson from the Trump playbook: If you make enough gaffes, pretty soon your crazed critics will start making gaffes of their own.
North Carolina Gov. Pat McCrory called for a state of emergency in Charlotte Wednesday night after violence escalated as residents continued to protest the fatal shooting of an African-American man by a police officer a day prior. "I have declared a State of Emergency & initiated efforts to deploy the Nat'l Guard & Highway Patrol to assist local law enforcement in CLT," McCrory tweeted late Wednesday night. Story Continued Below Civil unrest surged Tuesday as reports of the fatal shooting of Keith Lamont Scott spread, prompting mass protests that went into the night. A dozen officers were injured during the unrest, according to a tweet from the local police department early Wednesday morning. As protests continued Wednesday, reports emerged of a shooting that left a protester critically wounded, according to the Associated Press. Charlotte officials at first announced the man was dead but later amended the statement to say he was on life support. The police department has said the shooting was not committed by an officer. "These police officers are showing a tremendous amount of courage and there's obviously a few hundred people who have come to our town center in Charlotte, North Carolina, which is a great city in and their major goal seems to be destruction and harm and that's wrong and it's unacceptable," McCrory said Wednesday night on CNN shortly after making the announcement. "We cannot tolerate violence or tolerate the destruction of property and will not tolerate the attacks towards our police officers occurring right now and I feel very strongly about that right now," McCrory added. "That is not the American way." The North Carolina governor added that though the state of emergency did not include a curfew, the possibility of one remained "a very strong option." According to local reports, police officers saw Scott getting out of his car while holding a gun. The Charlotte-Mecklenburg Police Department said Scott posed an imminent danger to officers, and an officer shot the man.
Washington (CNN)New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie knew about the September 2013 lane closures at the George Washington Bridge while they were going on, federal prosecutors alleged in court Monday during the opening statements for their case against two former Christie confidantes. Prosecutors revealed Monday that they will show Christie was told about the traffic in Fort Lee, New Jersey, and that Fort Lee Mayor Mark Sokolich's public safety concerns were ignored, US Department of Justice Public Affairs Officer, Matthew Reilly told CNN. After an unsuccessful run for president, the governor is now chairing the transition effort of Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump. Assistant US Attorney Vikas Khanna said former Christie confidante and Port Authority executive David Wildstein will testify that he told Christie about the plan to close lanes on the George Washington Bridge while it was causing traffic problems in Fort Lee, New Jersey, where the mayor was a political rival of Christie. Christie's former deputy chief of staff, Bridget Anne Kelly, and former Port Authority deputy executive director Bill Baroni have pleaded not guilty to conspiracy and fraud charges in connection to the lane closures, an incident that has come to be known by some as "Bridgegate." Text about Christie: He 'flat-out lied' Christie has never been named as a conspirator in the case or charged. Wildstein has pled guilty in the case and pointed to the two staffers on trial. When asked whether Monday's assertions mean charges could be coming for Christie, Reilly said, "We have not filed any charges and we never discuss whether we will/won't file charges." CNN has reached out to Christie's office, as well as the offices of Baroni and Kelly's attorneys for comment. A source with ongoing knowledge of the case has told CNN that Monday's assertions by the prosecutor that Christie knew about Bridge-Gate came as a surprise because Christie has never been charged in the case, and because up until now the prosecutors have said they were not bringing charges against the governor. Christie told CNN's Jake Tapper Sunday that he would testify if subpoenaed, but didn't expect to be called as a witness. "Of course I will," Christie told Tapper on "State of the Union." "I have been investigated by three different entities, two of them led by partisan Democrats, who have all found that I had no knowledge of this incident and no involvement in it. And so I would have no problem if called to testify by either side. But the fact is that I won't because I really don't have any knowledge of this incident at all." The traffic headache was allegedly intentionally called for because Sokolich did not endorse Christie's re-election. Baroni and Kelly allegedly "bragged" to Christie about the fact that there were traffic problems in Fort Lee and that Sokolich was not getting his calls returned, prosecutors said in court according to Reilly. Baroni's attorneys have sought to argue that Baroni is being unfairly singled out in the scheme. In a previous court filing, the attorneys released a text message exchange from a Christie aide saying he "flat-out lied" during a news conference about the bridge closures. Christie had said senior staff were not involved in that news event. He later said that staff in his office lied, but that he hadn't known it at the time of the news conference. Attorneys for Kelly and Baroni previously confirmed to CNN that they will both testify in their defense. The trial is expected to last six weeks. Christie has long denied any involvement in the closures and neither the federal investigation nor the New Jersey legislative inquiry has pointed to him. In December 2015, when they were opponents, Trump told an audience in South Carolina Christie "totally knew about it," referring to the Bridgegate closures. The Trump campaign did not respond to a request for comment. 
A video capturing the moments leading up to and following the fatal police shooting of Keith Lamont Scott, which has sparked days of protests across the city of Charlotte, was released by the man’s family today. A woman identified as Scott's wife, Rakeyia Scott, recorded the incident with her cellphone. The footage was provided to ABC News by attorneys for the Scott family today. In the cellphone video, an SUV is seen parked in the street as police repeatedly yell at Scott to "drop the gun." Scott's wife, who is standing several feet away from the scene, pleads with the officers not to harm her husband. "Don't shoot him. Don't shoot him," she says. "He has no weapon. He has no weapon." Police continue to scream at Keith Lamont Scott: "Drop the gun! Drop the f---ing gun!" Rakeyia Scott yells back at police, insisting her husband is harmless and doesn't have a gun. "He doesn't have a gun," she says. "He has a T.B.I. [traumatic brain injury]. He's not going to do anything to you guys. He just took his medicine." One officer can be heard saying, "Let me get a f---ing baton over here." Rakeyia Scott then yells to her husband anxiously, "Keith, don't let them break the windows. Come out the car!" Police order Keith Lamont Scott to "drop the gun" several more times as his wife screams, "Keith! Keith! Don't you do it!" That's when multiple gunshots ring out. The actual shooting is not shown on the video as Rakeyia Scott points her cellphone at the ground and screams, "Did you shoot him?" She then runs closer to the scene, angling the cellphone camera again at the spot where her husband was shot. “He better not be f---ing dead. He better not be f---ing dead,” she yells at police. “He better live. I swear, he better live.” Scott's body is seen lying in the street surrounded by several officers. "Did you all call an ambulance?" Scott's wife asks, before the video cuts out.     According to the Charlotte-Mecklenburg Police Department, Scott was treated immediately and later pronounced dead. The video is the first footage of Scott's encounter with police to be publicly released. Investigators have not released the dashboard and body camera videos. The footage is "not great" for investigative purposes because you don't see the officers and you don't know whom Scott's wife is speaking to or what she is referring to when she says, "Don't do it," said former FBI Special Agent In-Charge Rich Frankel. "You need a lot of information before you can make an informed decision," Frankel told ABC News. "You have a lot of people putting out their opinions on what happened. Until you more information, it's all hyperbole and guesses." One of the attorneys representing the Scott family, Charles G. Monnett, said they released the video "in the name of truth and transparency." "The family is still hopeful that the Charlotte-Mecklenburg Police Department and city of Charlotte will release all available video of the incident to the public so that people can draw their own conclusions about Keith's death," Monnett said. "We encourage everyone to reserve judgment until all the facts are known. This is simply one step in our quest to find the truth for this family." Police say Scott was holding a handgun, which investigators recovered from an apartment complex in Charlotte, and posed a threat because he was not obeying police orders to remain in his vehicle and drop the weapon. An officer subsequently fired his gun, striking Scott. Police have identified that officer as Brentley Vinson, who has been employed with the Charlotte-Mecklenburg Police Department since July 21, 2014, and is currently assigned to the metro division. He has been placed on paid administrative leave as the investigation continues. Vinson was not wearing a body camera at the time, but the other officers who responded to the incident were, police said.   Scott’s family has said he was not armed and was holding a book while waiting for his son to be dropped off from school. Charlotte-Mecklenburg Police Chief Kerr Putney said the video evidence alone does not establish probable cause. But the "intent" is to publicly release the video along with other supporting evidence once it's been fully gathered. Still, the timing has to be right, he said. The probe into Scott's death has now been officially handed over to North Carolina's State Bureau of Investigation, which will be in charge of providing updates and releasing further information on the status of the investigation, according to Putney. ABC News' Brandon Baur, Darrell Calhoun, Julia Jacobo, Eva Pilgrim, Darren Reynolds and Seniboye Tienabeso contributed to this report.
President Barack Obama hailed the timing of the opening of the National Museum of African American History and Culture on Friday, signaling his desire for people of all stripes to visit the new museum and walk away with a better understanding of what it’s like to be black in America. “The timing of this is fascinating,” Obama said during a reception at the White House. The “exceptionally good-looking group” of many friends — so many “that it feels like one of our house parties,” he quipped — applauded in agreement. Story Continued Below “Part of the reason that I am so happy the museum is opening this weekend is because it allows all of us as Americans to put our current circumstances in a historical context,” Obama said. “My hope is that as people are seeing what’s happened in Tulsa or Charlotte on television, and perhaps are less familiar with not only the history of the African-American experience but also how recent some of these challenges have been, upon visiting the museum may step back and say: ‘I understand. I sympathize. I empathize. I can see why folks might feel angry, and I wanna be part of the solution, as opposed to resisting change.’” Obama’s references to Tulsa, Oklahoma, and Charlotte, North Carolina, highlight the most recent officer-involved shootings of black men that have captured the nation’s attention. Officers fatally shot Terence Crutcher, who was unarmed and had his hands raised when he was struck, in Tulsa last Friday and Keith Lamont Scott, who officers contend was armed when he was struck but concede that video doesn’t conclusively corroborate their account, in Charlotte on Tuesday. Obama, flanked by first lady Michelle Obama and the museum’s director, Lonnie Bunch, used a sampling of letters he said he read on Thursday to illustrate the divide among Americans when it comes to policing and talks of racial bias. “I’d say about half of them said, ‘Mr. President, why are you always against police, and why aren’t you doing enough to deal with these rioters and the violence?’” he said. “And then the other half were some black folks [who] said, ‘Mr. President, why aren’t you doing something about the police, and when are we actually gonna get justice?’ And I understand the nature of that argument because this is a dialogue we’ve been having for 400 years.” A key challenge Obama cited in “generating a constructive discussion about how to solve these problems” is rhetoric on TV and the radio that’s “bereft of context and ignores history.” “So people are just responding as if none of what’s represented in this museum ever happened,” Obama said, “adding, “That’s true for all of us, not just some of us.” “My hope is, is that this, this complicated, difficult, sometimes harrowing but I believe ultimately triumphant story, will help us talk to each other,” he continued. “And more important, listen to each other. And even more important, see each other, and recognize the common humanity that makes America what it is.”
(CNN)US forces will be ready within weeks to help Iraqi forces in their battle to retake Mosul from ISIS, according to Gen. Joseph Dunford, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. "Our job is to actually help the Iraqis generate the forces and the support necessary for operations in Mosul and we'll be ready for that in October," Dunford told a small group of reporters traveling with him. "The noose is gradually tightening around Mosul," he added. The city, Iraq's second-largest, is ISIS' last significant stronghold in the country. It and Syria's Raqqa -- the group's self-declared capital -- are the major targets left for the US-led coalition to take back from its control. Dunford's statement is the clearest sign from a senior US military official that the military battle for Mosul could soon begin once the Iraqis make the political decision to proceed. It also means the battle for Mosul may be raging during the US presidential election, with US forces facing dangers on the battlefield. Those troops might also be called upon to help begin providing humanitarian aid. Dunford, along with Defense Secretary Ash Carter, is scheduled to testify before the Senate Armed Services Committee Thursday. Both are expected to face stiff questioning from Republicans on the panel about the Obama administration's strategy to fight ISIS. CNN has learned the Pentagon is now considering setting up new remote bases well outside Mosul as hubs from which US forces can operate. Those types of bases, given their locations, are likely to be less secure than the large bases the US has generally been using. They could be used by US military advisers who are expected to work with the Iraqis in the field. Because of the remote locations, security may be difficult. US forces may move "in and out" of the bases rather than locate there consistently, one official said. These bases are in addition to the large Iraqi base south of Mosul at Qayyarah, where hundreds of US troops are already located to assist with supplies, logistics and support for the Iraqi forces. A key decision to be made is whether additional US conventional and special operations forces will be needed for ensuring the Iraqis succeed, several US defense official told CNN. The US forces will not be on the front lines but will be out in the field with Iraqi units, officials said. Some forces already in Iraq could be reassigned to northern Iraq, or additional forces could be sent. President Barack Obama and Iraqi Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi's meeting in New York Monday also signaled the Mosul operation may soon unfold. "We feel confident that we will be in a position to move forward fairly rapidly," Obama said. Calling Mosul a "challenging battle," Obama also noted that the US will be "prepared to help provide rapid humanitarian assistance" to displaced Iraqis. Abadi underscored the urgency. "We hope within the next few months we're going to kick Daesh out of Mosul and we'll deliver a huge blow to what Daesh believes in," said Abadi, using another name for the terrorist group. 
(CNN)Just one point separates Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump in two states that are critical to both candidates' chances of becoming president, according to new CNN/ORC polls in Pennsylvania and Colorado. In Colorado, likely voters break 42% for Trump, 41% for Clinton, 13% for Libertarian Gary Johnson and 3% for Green Party candidate Jill Stein. Pennsylvania's likely voters split 45% for Clinton, 44% for Trump, 6% for Johnson and 3% for Stein. Those divides are well within each poll's 3.5-point margin of sampling error. Clinton, Trump poised for historic debate battle The new results in two battleground states underscore the closeness of the race and come as the candidates prepare to square off Monday night in their high-stakes first debate at Long Island's Hofstra University. In both states, sharp divisions among whites by education are evident, with white college graduates choosing Clinton over Trump by 11 points in Pennsylvania and 16 points in Colorado, while whites who do not hold four-year degrees break in Trump's favor by 19 points in Pennsylvania and 22 points in Colorado. Read full Colorado results In Colorado, that education gap is a bigger divide than gender or age, and is even larger than the racial gap in the state. Pennsylvania's likely voters are more divided than Colorado's along gender and racial lines. Johnson's appeal among younger voters appears to be working to Clinton's detriment in both states. While Trump's numbers are significantly lower among voters under 45 than among older voters, Clinton's are roughly the same across age groups, while Johnson's support multiplies among younger voters. Clinton fares better in two-way matchups in both states, topping Trump 50% to 47% among likely voters in Pennsylvania and 49% to 47% in Colorado. Though both results are within the polls' margin of sampling error, the finding suggests she could fare better in each state if third party candidate support dipped. The two polls come alongside tight national polls and neck-and-neck poll results in several other key battleground states including Ohio, Florida, Nevada and North Carolina. 8 unforgettable presidential debate blunders In both Colorado and Pennsylvania, the economy stands out as far and away the top voter concern. About half of registered voters in each state, and a similar share of likely voters, call the economy most important out of a list also including terrorism, illegal immigration and foreign policy. And when asked which candidate would better handle the economy, Trump comes out on top in both states, though within each poll's margin of error. Clinton holds broad advantages for handling foreign policy in both states, and she tops Trump by 8 points on handling immigration in Colorado, a state where a Pew Research Center analysis recently estimated that about a quarter of the state's sizable Latino population is foreign born. In Pennsylvania, the two candidates run about even on that issue. And in the wake of terror attacks in New York and New Jersey, voters in both states are about evenly split on who would better handle terrorism. Read full Pennsylvania results The poll suggests Clinton has made an effective case that Trump does not have the temperament to be president -- she is viewed as better suited for the presidency by a nearly two-to-one margin in each state on that score -- and she holds smaller advantages as the better candidate to be commander-in-chief. But Clinton continues to lag behind Trump when voters are asked which of the two is more honest and trustworthy. Trump's contention that Clinton lacks the stamina for the job splits voters in Colorado, 48% see him as having the better stamina, 45% choose Clinton. In Pennsylvania, Trump holds a larger advantage on that, 50% to 45%. Democrats have a narrow edge in the race for Pennsylvania's U.S. Senate seat, with Katie McGinty topping incumbent Pat Toomey 49% to 46% among likely voters, just inside the poll's margin of error, and a broad lead in Colorado's Senate contest, with incumbent Michael Bennet up 53% to 43% over Republican challenger Darryl Glenn. The CNN/ORC Polls in Colorado and Pennsylvania were conducted by telephone Sept. 20-25. The Colorado poll included interviews with 1,010 adult residents of the state, including 784 who are likely to vote in November. In Pennsylvania, interviews were conducted with 1,032 adult residents of the state, including 771 likely voters. Results for likely voters have a margin of sampling error of plus or minus 3.5 percentage points in each state. 
Mitch McConnell is playing hardball — forcing Democrats into a take-it-or-leave-it position on a must-pass government spending bill before funding runs dry at the end of the month. With spending negotiations still stymied at the Capitol, McConnell filed a new short-term government spending measure Thursday that concedes key priorities to Democrats — yet still isn’t enough to get the minority party on board. Story Continued Below Gone is the so-called ICANN provision, an internet-domain issue that had become a top priority for Sen. Ted Cruz (R-Texas) and other GOP senators and just got the seal of endorsement from GOP nominee Donald Trump. It also includes some funding for a sweeping opioids bill that was signed into law earlier this year, as well as a landmark chemical safety measure that became law in June. The new spending measure McConnell filed Thursday — which funds the government until Dec. 9 — also includes language already worked out between Democrats and Republicans to deal with additional funding for the Zika virus epidemic. A procedural vote on the measure is slated for Tuesday afternoon, and McConnell used a parliamentary maneuver to block amendments to the bill, ensuring that the legislation he outlined was essentially the only option. “There have been broad requests for a clean continuing resolution. So that’s what I’ve just offered,” McConnell said. “It’s the result of many, many hours of bipartisan work across the aisle.” But Democrats, who have little incentive to agree quickly to a deal that lets vulnerable Republicans leave Washington, say they object to the legislation because while it includes flood aid for states such as Louisiana, West Virginia and Maryland, it doesn’t include money for the long-running water crisis in Flint, Michigan. “To put Louisiana in without Flint is like waving a red flag. I don't get it," said New York Sen. Chuck Schumer, the third-ranking Senate Democrat. "I haven’t counted votes but our caucus isn’t going to like having Louisiana and not Michigan." It also does not remove language that prohibits the Securities and Exchange Commission from requiring companies to disclose political spending. That is current law, but Democrats have tried to overturn it during the recent negotiations. Democrats also floated a provision related to the Export-Import Bank that would have restored the bank’s full financing authority, but that was not included in the spending measure McConnell filed Thursday. That Ex-Im provision was also important for some Republicans; South Carolina Sen. Lindsey Graham said he would vote against the short-term funding bill because that language was excluded. “The president does not believe that a short-term budget measure that only exists because Congress hasn’t done their job in the first place should be used to pass ideological riders into law,” White House Press Secretary Josh Earnest said Thursday, while slamming Republicans for their opposition to the Ex-Im Bank. Yet McConnell's proposal is also starting to drive a rift through Democrats. While some leading Senate Democrats stood firm in opposing the new funding measure, other Democrats began to side with Republicans. Democratic Sen. Bill Nelson, whose home state of Florida has been the nation's epicenter of the Zika crisis, said he would vote in favor of the new continuing resolution because it sets aside $1.1 billion to combat Zika "with no political riders." "While I support the people of Flint, my priority is the people of Florida," Nelson said. Senate Minority Leader Harry Reid (D-Nev.) signaled his displeasure with the bill shortly before McConnell went to the floor to unveil it Thursday afternoon. “We’re in no hurry to go anyplace, OK? We have all a lot of time,” Reid told reporters. “I’ve talked with [House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi], she’s not going to agree to this. The president is not going to agree to this. It’s really unfair to the American people.” During her weekly news conference earlier Thursday, Pelosi said the legislation, “in my view, is not even worthy of a counter. It falls very short.” Maryland Sen. Barbara Mikulski, the top Democratic appropriator, charged McConnell with filing a “Republican-only bill" and said Democrats would not support the legislation, although details of the measure were still emerging and some senators had yet to review it. House Speaker Paul Ryan, for his part, is trying to project an air of calm, telling reporters that lawmakers in his chamber want "low drama" in order to solve the government funding impasse. But Cruz is pressuring House lawmakers to fight on behalf of the Internet domain provision that he championed. "I am grateful for my Senate colleagues' vigorous support during this debate," Cruz said in a statement. "I encourage my colleagues in the House to continue to stand united to ensure that the government funding bill prevents the Obama administration from permanently undermining free speech on the Internet." Heather Caygle, Louis Nelson, Burgess Everett and Ashley Gold contributed to this report.
Six months after Hurricane Katrina struck New Orleans, my then girlfriend (now wife), Liz, and I first arrived in St. Bernard Parish as volunteers. There we met a World War II veteran named Mr. Andre who like many of his generation had been proud and independent his whole life, never needing assistance and certainly never asking for it if he did. Though he used a walker, he insisted on holding his own food tray at the relief tent where we were working. Mr. Andre was a regular at the tent and after speaking with him at mealtime for three days, he finally broke down sobbing. He told us that every day for the past three months, he’d been sleeping in his pickup truck. Three times a day, before each meal, he would drive to a temporary FEMA site to apply for aid. Each time, he would be denied. Mr. Andre had reached his breaking point right there in front of us. Mr. Andre’s story is all too common after a disaster strikes. Eleven years after Katrina, despite tremendous progress, too many homeowners have not been able to rebuild. Four years after Sandy, thousands of New Yorkers and New Jersey citizens still have no predictable time frame for their return home. Now, after the torrential flooding in South Louisiana in August, more than 70,000 families — the vast majority of which, did not live in mandatory flood insurance zones and, therefore, did not have flood insurance — have just started down the arduous, painful slog that is disaster recovery in America. A delayed, unpredictable, inefficient, or otherwise prolonged recovery takes an enormous human toll. As it works now, the “traditional model” of disaster recovery in this country forces too many of our fellow citizens to stare into the abyss of uncertainty after disaster, not knowing when they’ll get home or how to navigate the myriad steps they’ll need to take to get there. During this time, retirees and seniors are robbed of their golden years as their savings are drained. For the young, fleeting formative years of childhood and adolescence are disrupted, and parents struggle to bring a sense of normalcy to their families while taking on the burden of a rent payment in addition to their mortgage payments. It doesn’t have to be this way. It shouldn’t be this way. People can be resilient to a point, but to maintain mental, physical, emotional and financial stability, they need predictability, certainty and transparency. They need hope and a clear path — one unencumbered by false starts, dead ends and unnecessary red tape. For the past 10 years, Liz and I have been running SBP, a national long-term disaster recovery organization. In that time, we’ve seen firsthand how Americans are hardwired to fix and solve problems, and answer the call in droves after disasters by volunteering or contributing. But we also have realized that, despite all of this generous support, there is only a certain amount of time that disaster survivors can endure, as they try to find the path home. Disasters today are more frequent, inflict more damage and occur in places with no history of such disasters. According to a 2013 study, since 2007, nearly 80 percent of the U.S. population — 243 million people — live in counties that experienced at least one weather-related federally declared disaster. Simply put, at a time when an efficient model is needed more than ever, disaster recovery in this country is not working as efficiently as it should or could. Nearly four years after Superstorm Sandy, only 50 percent of homeowners who qualify for assistance through New York City’s Build it Back program have received it. And yet, Mayor Bill DeBlasio has stated his intention to declare victory and shutter the program at the end of the year. In New Orleans, 11 years after Katrina, 3,000 previously independent homeowners can’t afford to rebuild without additional help. Citizens affected by the most recent flooding in West Virginia and Louisiana are unsure whether regional and partisan politics will prevent the allocation of federal funds. In a time of more frequent, severe and widespread disasters, the status quo in recovery cannot stand. We must not be afraid to adapt, innovate and reform our current long-term disaster recovery strategy. Admittedly, to do so requires a much larger, more nuanced policy conversation, but there are three straightforward suggestions which, if implemented, would greatly help shrink the time between disaster and recovery. First, the government should enable taxpayers to pre-register for FEMA and Small Business Administration Disaster Loans through their IRS tax filing. The majority of the information required to apply for FEMA and SBA aid following disaster is contained in annual taxpayer filings with the IRS. By enabling taxpayers to pre-register with FEMA and the SBA through their tax filings, citizens can be spared the aggravation — imagine trying to produce documentation after several feet of water has flooded your home and town hall — and delay in applying for federal disaster aid. Second, Congress should increase funding for AmeriCorps. National service — specifically through AmeriCorps — provides vital support and capacity to organizations that operate both in the short and long term after a disaster. Besides being a vehicle for citizens to serve their country, the very existence of the post-disaster ecosystem relies upon AmeriCorps and its members. Yet AmeriCorps funding is often uncertain, with lawmakers threatening to decrease or even defund the program on an annual basis. Given the increased pace and severity of disasters, lawmakers should stop viewing AmeriCorps as a line item to be cut for budgetary purposes and instead boost funding for AmeriCorps and provide more opportunities for Americans to serve hard-hit communities. Finally, the government should implement rapid, resilient, HUD-compliant housing recovery programs within the first few days after a disaster. Typically, it takes at least a year for HUD Community Development Block Grant funding to reach disaster affected communities. Waiting a year or more results in homeowner distress, community degradation, and increased costs to the federal government due to the amplified costs of mold and secondary damage. If instead, private capital investment stood up the first year or two of the recovery with a government guarantee, and was coupled with a streamlined environmental review processes that allowed damaged or destroyed properties to be rebuilt on their original footprint without the lengthy review required of new development, communities would recover much sooner. Those initial investments would then be reimbursed by HUD when those funds became available. In doing so, the pace and results of the recovery will have been sustained over the course of the initial year and the federal government would stand to save significant money. The cause of more frequent disasters is not up for debate. Thousand-year storms seem to be happening monthly. The effect too, is plain as day. In South Louisiana last month, more than 70,000 Americans lost their homes when an unnamed and unprecedented rainstorm dumped a record 30 inches of rain on the region over the course of two days. Homeowners who were told they had no need for flood insurance when they purchased their home, took on eight feet of muddy water, and are now staring into the abyss. The good news is that proven, actionable solutions exist to shrink the time between disaster and recovery. Now we must find the political will to fix this broken system. Our fellow Americans are counting on it. Zack Rosenburg is co-founder and CEO of SBP.
Washington (CNN)Donald Trump's rebound in national polls extends to four swing states in which he has either narrowed the margin by which he trailed Hillary Clinton or extended his lead over her, according to a new poll. A Quinnipiac University survey released Thursday shows Trump trailing by just 2 points in Colorado, a state where Clinton had opened up a wide lead and where Democrats had halted advertising. Clinton is ahead 44% to 42%, within the poll's margin of error. It's a similarly tightened race in Virginia, where ads had similarly stopped, as Clinton leads by 6 points, 45% to 39%. In Georgia, Trump is now up by 7 points, 47% to 40%, putting some distance between himself and Clinton in what is typically a reliably Republican state. And in Iowa, which has leaned in Trump's direction for the entire general election, he is also up by 7 points, 44% to 37%. Gary Johnson, the Libertarian candidate, earns 10%, 8%, 9% and 10% in Colorado, Virginia, Georgia and Iowa, respectively. "Leads for Donald Trump in Georgia and Iowa and a virtual tie in Colorado plus a 6-point lead for Clinton in Virginia represent a major improvement overall for him in these states," Peter Brown, the director of the poll, said in a statement. After August, during which Clinton was posting at times double-digit national leads over Trump, the Republican nominee has closed the gap considerably and most surveys show a tight single-digit gap. Yet Clinton still has an easier path to 270 electoral votes, due in no small part to Virginia and Colorado, two states expected to be battlegrounds that Clinton had been thought to have put away early in the race. Trump would have more paths to the White House should those states become more competitive. Quinnipiac surveyed likely voters from September 13 to September 21, and the margin of error is 3.9 percentage points in Colorado and Georgia, 3.8 points in Virginia and 4 points in Iowa. Six hundred and forty-four individuals were polled in Colorado, 638 in Georgia, 659 in Virginia and 612 in Iowa. 
(CNN)Debate stages have long doubled as presidential burial grounds. With a few sharp lines, an acid quip, or just a well-timed nod, the candidates can do more to unravel their opponents than in a hundred speeches or television commercials. Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton have made no secret of their disdain for each another. But on Monday night, there will be no safety net and nowhere to hide -- just two people on stage and, as some analysts believe, 100 million more watching their every move. Clinton, Trump poised for historic debate battle Here are some of the most devastating lines in presidential debate history -- will Trump or Clinton need to be added to this list? Reagan rolls Carter The incumbent President Jimmy Carter wanted to talk about Ronald Reagan's work as governor of California. But Reagan had heard enough -- and bet that voters felt the same way. As Carter finished a long point with a comment on his opponent's "typical" positions, Reagan stepped in with four words: "There you go again." Obama mocks Mitt Mitt Romney had been hammering President Barack Obama for having downsized parts of the armed forces. But Obama turned it around on his 2012 challenger, mocking and painting him as out of touch with modern foreign policy questions. When Romney trounced Obama On the question of the smaller number of Naval ships, Obama said: "Well, Governor, we also have fewer horses and bayonets, because the nature of our military's changed. We have these things called aircraft carriers, where planes land on them. We have these ships that go underwater, nuclear submarines." A killer joke In 1984, Reagan sent Republicans into a panic with a garbled opening debate performance against Walter Mondale. 8 unforgettable presidential debate blunders The Baltimore Sun's Henry Trewhitt asked if the President's age would keep him from being able to do the job. Here is Reagan's cheeky response, which Mondale would later describe as having effectively ended the race: "Not at all. And, Mr. Trewhitt, I want you to know also I will not make age an issue of this campaign. I am not going to exploit for political purposes my opponent's youth and inexperience." Lloyd Bentsen knew Jack Kennedy, then he owned Dan Quayle You can see it about 15 seconds into the clip. Vice presidential candidate Sen. Lloyd Bentsen's brow shoots up as Dan Quayle, George H.W. Bush's 1988 running mate, answers a question about his relative inexperience, saying, "I have as much experience in the Congress as Jack Kennedy did when he sought the presidency." Bentsen fired back: "Senator, I served with Jack Kennedy. I knew Jack Kennedy. Jack Kennedy was a friend of mine. Senator, you're no Jack Kennedy." Mondale buries the "hatchet man" Before he was a warmly remembered war hero who lost his own presidential race in a 1996 landslide to Bill Clinton, Bob Dole had a different kind of notoriety. During a 1976 vice presidential debate with Walter Mondale, he showed why. Asked if Watergate, and then President Gerald Ford's pardon of Richard Nixon, were off-limits, Dole launched into a long rant essentially blaming "Democrat wars" for killing millions of Americans. Mondale hit back with one line: "I think Sen. Dole has richly earned his reputation as a hatchet man tonight." Perot sets himself apart With his Texas twang, Ross Perot made a serious dent in the 1992 presidential race. Here he underlines why his lack of experience in government was going to be a political asset: "I don't have any experience in running up a $4 trillion debt. I don't have any experience in gridlock government, where nobody takes responsibility for anything and everybody blames everybody else. I don't have any experience in creating the worst public school system in the industrialized world, the most violent crime-ridden society in the industrialized world. But I do have a lot of experience in getting things done." Lincoln prints and publishes his debate zingers Though the words were spoken during one of their celebrated 1858 Senate debates, Abraham Lincoln was so pleased with his performance against Stephen A. Douglas, he took the transcripts (which he edited, liberally, on his own) and published them in a book before their 1860 presidential rematch. In arguing that Douglas was using a flimsy principle as a bogus pretext for spreading slavery nationwide, Lincoln mockingly asked what remained of the substance of his rival's position: "Has it not got down as thin as the homeopathic soup that was made by boiling the shadow of a pigeon that had starved to death?" Gore questions (the first) Bush's resume Al Gore was running for vice president in 1992, but that didn't mean he wasn't aiming high. Here is the shot he took at George H.W. Bush, who had sought to attach his record to that of his former boss Reagan, during a three-way debate with Dan Quayle and Adm. James Stockdale: "George Bush taking credit for the Berlin Wall coming down is like the rooster taking credit for the sunrise." Bush shakes off Gore Sometimes, words are unnecessary. At 11:58 in this clip, early on in his debate with Al Gore, George W. Bush responds to the vice president's ill-timed stroll and apparent attempt to intimidate him with a simple -- but devastating -- silent shake of his head. 
Donald Trump on Wednesday called for the controversial “stop-and-frisk” policing practice to be instituted nationwide as a means of combating violent crime in America’s inner cities. In a pre-taped interview on Fox News scheduled to air Wednesday night, Trump was asked by an audience member what he would do to address “violence in the black community” and “black-on-black crime.” Trump responded by proposing that “stop-and-frisk” policing, in which an officer is empowered to stop an individual and frisk them for weapons or any other illegal contraband, be adopted nationwide. Story Continued Below “I would do stop-and-frisk. I think you have to. We did it in New York, it worked incredibly well and you have to be proactive and, you know, you really help people sort of change their mind automatically,” Trump told the questioner. “You understand, you have to have, in my opinion, I see what’s going on here, I see what’s going on in Chicago, I think stop-and-frisk. In New York City it was so incredible, the way it worked. Now, we had a very good mayor, but New York City was incredible, the way that worked, so I think that could be one step you could do.” The practice, carried out most famously in New York but also by other police departments, is frequently criticized as an avenue for officers commit acts of racial profiling. Others tout it as responsible for a dramatic drop in New York City’s crime rate, although former NYPD Commissioner Bill Bratton said in 2015 that the practice is “not a significant factor in the crime rate of this city.”
(CNN)Hillary Clinton's campaign has a question for voters: Is Donald Trump the president we want for our daughters? The Clinton campaign will begin airing a new ad Friday that intercuts Trump insulting women with shots of young girls looking in the mirror. "I'd look her right in that fat ugly face of hers," Trump says in the ad, a comment he made in 2006 about comedian Rosie O'Donnell. "She is a slob." The ad, entitled "Mirrors," also features Trump saying "A person who is flat chested is very hard to be a 10" -- a comment he made about actress Nicollette Sheridan -- and "Does she have a good body, no? Does she have a fat (expletive)? Absolutely." -- a comment he made about Kim Kardashian in 2013. While these comments are playing, the ad features a diverse group of young women looking in the mirror, appearing to evaluate themselves as Trump's voice makes demeaning comments. The end of the ad features a black slate with this question: "Is this the president we want for our daughters?" The ad will air Ohio, New Hampshire, Iowa, Florida, Nevada, North Carolina, Pennsylvania and on national cable, according to a campaign release. The release did not say how much money was being spent on the ad. Throughout her campaign, Clinton has argued that Trump would be ill-equipped president to handle issues that matter to women and girls. "Anyone who wants to defund Planned Parenthood and wipe out safe, legal abortion has no idea what's best for women," Clinton said in June. "And after all, this is a man who has called women 'pigs,' 'dogs,' and 'disgusting animals.' Kind of hard to imagine counting on him to respect our fundamental rights." Clinton's new ad is the latest that goes after Trump's character and mimics an ad Priorities USA, her top-dollar super PAC, released in May that similarly questioned a comment Trump made about respecting women. 
Charlotte Mayor Jennifer Roberts on Friday blasted Donald Trump explanation of the violence and unrest in her city, a day after the Republican nominee pointed to "drugs" as "a very, very big factor in what you're watching on television." "I think it's presumptuous for him to make a conclusion like that without having thorough conversations with some of the folks who are here on the ground and really aware of what is going on and what the reasoning is," Roberts, a Democrat, told CNN. "Several of our council members were out in the crowd last night, talking to people. I've been listening to folks. I've gotten lots of phone calls, I’ve talked to a lot of folks on the street. We have a much better understanding than Mr. Trump." Story Continued Below Asked to ascribe a cause to the recent unrest, Roberts remarked that there are "a couple of things," citing "distrust" with how police handle African-Americans compared to whites, despite a "strong history of community policing." "There's also a concern when you look at what's happening nationally and having this occur in other cities as well," Roberts went on to say. "But even deeper than that, you know, we have a history of racial disparity. And we are working very hard in our city to bridge that gap, to make sure that whether we're looking at education or economic opportunity, social justice, all of those things, we are working very hard to make sure opportunity -- equally around our city." Trump spoke with North Carolina Gov. Pat McCrory on Thursday, while Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton spoke with Roberts and Democratic Rep. Alma Adams.
Washington (CNN)Eager to motivate his own base of supporters to vote in this year's contest, President Barack Obama will begin appearing in more advertising for Hillary Clinton, the White House said Tuesday. Speaking a day after the first presidential debate, Press Secretary Josh Earnest said Obama would ramp up his role in the 2016 race as Election Day nears. "I think through October, the President will be increasing his involvement in this race, and that doesn't just mean through travel," Earnest said. "That also means that the President will feature more prominently in the advertising efforts of Secretary Clinton and Democrats across the country." Earnest said the ads would appear on television, radio and online. A message left with the Clinton campaign about the spots, including how much money would be spent on them, was not immediately returned. Obama has appeared at two campaign stops for Clinton, and further stops are expected to be announced in the coming days. Both Vice President Joe Biden and First Lady Michelle Obama are making campaign stops for Clinton in Pennsylvania this week. Democrats hope Obama can convince the bloc of supporters who backed him in 2008 and 2012 -- comprised of African-Americans, young people and women -- to get behind Clinton this cycle. While Earnest didn't specify Tuesday when or where the ads featuring Obama would run, aides have identified North Carolina, Pennsylvania, Ohio and Florida as states where the President is likely to hold sway. "I think you're going to continue to hear the President warn against complacency," Earnest said Tuesday. "He'll be looking to maximize the time he is able to make available to support Secretary Clinton." He said Obama would spend "one to two" days per week on the trail for Clinton in early October, with a ramp-up possible at the end of the month. But he cautioned against using travel alone as a gauge of Obama's engagement. "There are a variety of other ways for the President to get engaged," he said, citing radio interviews and ads. "I think the President will be visible, but that doesn't always include headlining a rally." CNN's Dan Merica contributed to this report.
Washington (CNN)The United States has reached the preliminary conclusion that Russian warplanes bombed an aid convoy and warehouse belonging to the Syrian Arab Red Crescent, two US officials told CNN. "All the evidence we have points to that conclusion," one of the officials said. The White House position is that Russia is responsible, whether it was Russian planes -- or the Syrian regime's -- that carried out Monday night's attack. The aid convoy was hit in the area of Urum al-Kubra, west of Aleppo, prompting the United Nations to halt its aid operations in Syria. It is not clear who was responsible for the strike, which the International Committee of the Red Cross said killed about 20 people as well as the director of the Red Crescent's Urum al-Kubra branch, Omar Barakat. "All of our information indicates clearly that this was an airstrike. That means there only could have been two entities responsible," deputy national security adviser Ben Rhodes said Tuesday night, referring to Russia and Syria. He didn't specify which country's planes carried out the strike. "We hold the Russian government responsible for airstrikes in this airspace given their commitment under the cessation of hostilities was to ground air operations where humanitarian assistance was flowing," Rhodes said, referring to the terms of a recent ceasefire brokered between the United States and Russia. Is there any hope left for Syria? Denials from Russia, Syria Russia denies it was responsible and says that terrorists carried out the attack. Defense Ministry spokesman Igor Konashenkov said Tuesday that analysis of video footage from drones of the strike show that militants were following the convoy, according to the Russian state news site Tass. "It is clearly seen in the video that a terrorists' pickup truck with a towed large-caliber mortar is moving along with the convoy," he said. Syria has also strongly its forces were behind the attack. UN outrage UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon called the attack "sickening, savage and apparently deliberate." "Just when we think it cannot get any worse, the power of depravity sinks lower," Ban told world leaders convening Tuesday at the UN General Assembly annual meeting. Eighteen of the convoy's 31 trucks were hit, the United Nations said. The convoy was due to deliver food and medical aid for some 78,000 people in eastern Aleppo, where an estimated 250,000 civilians are facing severe shortages as a result of a government siege. Current intelligence Rebels, locked in a vicious civil war with the Syrian government, reportedly hold the area where the convoy was struck. Russia has been helping Syrian President Bashar al-Assad in the fight, though it has said its efforts are focused on attacking terror groups such as ISIS that have flourished during the conflict. The US military has been reviewing classified radar, signals and aerial surveillance intelligence. Based on that intelligence and reports from the ground, it has concluded that only Russian warplanes were in a position to attack this location at the time, the official said. UN chief calls convoy attackers in Syria 'cowards' For now, no intelligence indicates Syrian aircraft or helicopters were in the area, though that type of information could come to light later, the official said. The official added that reports from the ground appear accurate about at least two waves of airstrikes -- a common Russian military practice. Trucks inside as well as outside the compound on the road were hit. But the Obama administration has not yet fully decided how much information it wants to reveal, concerned that it will expose sensitive military intelligence capabilities to the Russians. What about the the ceasefire? Monday night's attack came just hours after Syrian authorities declared an end to the fragile ceasefire, which began September 12. Soon afterward, Syrian warplanes resumed airstrikes in Aleppo, according to the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, and deadly violence returned across parts of the country. The events have left the hard-fought ceasefire brokered by Russia and the US in tatters, although US officials said they believe the ceasefire agreement is still in place. Rhodes, the deputy national security adviser, said the US preference is to continue with the ceasefire effort, paving the way for more cooperation between the Russian and US militaries in Syria, but that Moscow's actions could prevent further coordination. "We have not seen good faith. This was an outrageous action," Rhodes told CNN's Michelle Kosinski. "It raises serious questions about whether or not this agreement moves forward." He added, "In conflicts like this I think we have an obligation to continue to pursue whether there are diplomatic openings. If we can't, we walk away." US Secretary of State John Kerry said before the convoy was struck Monday that any decisions about the ceasefire would be made between Washington and Moscow. "The Syrians didn't make the deal," he said, "the Russians made the agreement." CNN's Elise Labott, Tim Hume, Joshua Berlinger and Kevin Liptak contributed to this report.
Hillary Clinton’s campaign on Friday held a conference call urging reporters to “lift up the lies” it expects Donald Trump will tell at Monday's debate. Capitol Hill Republicans leaked news that former Clinton aide Cheryl Mills had been granted partial immunity in the FBI’s email investigation. Democrats and Republicans alike are aiming to influence the debate before the candidates take the stage, with Clinton officials targeting Trump’s slipperiness with the facts and Republicans taking aim at Clinton’s struggles with transparency. Story Continued Below And in their own ways, both sides are aiming to make the debate a referendum on which candidate American voters can trust. “Donald Trump has shown a clear pattern of repeating provably false lies and hoping no one corrects him,” Clinton’s communications director Jennifer Palmieri said in a statement Friday. “Voters and viewers should keep track: any candidate who tells this many lies clearly can’t win the debate on the merits.” The trust issue continues to be the major stumbling block for both candidates. A recent CBS/NYT poll showed that 63 percent of likely voters believe Clinton is not honest or trustworthy, and 60 percent of voters who view Trump as untrustworthy. As a pre-buttal to the debate, the Clinton campaign laid out seven lies that they say Trump should be fact-checked on in real time, including his claim that he has always opposed the war in Iraq (a statement left wholly unchallenged by NBC host Matt Lauer in a presidential forum earlier this month). Meanwhile, Republicans expressed outrage at the latest news from inside the FBI’s investigation of Clinton’s email use at the State Department. The immunity deal for Mills and another former Clinton aide, Heather Samuelson, were narrow and covered only their handover of laptops used in 2014 when they were sorting Clinton’s work-related and personal emails. It did not cover any of their statements to the FBI. But that didn't stop the outrage from those trying to prevent Clinton from winning the White House. “The fact that Hillary Clinton’s top aide and attorney was granted immunity by the FBI is shocking,” RNC chairman Reince Priebus said in a statement. “We now know it wasn’t mere IT staffers that were given a pass, but individuals at the highest levels of this dangerous scheme that jeopardized national security.” Trump’s former campaign manager Corey Lewandowski, who remains on his campaign's payroll, tweeted; “Who needs this if NO laws broken?” Clinton campaign officials downplayed the revelation, calling it old information from a closed case that was being leaked for political reasons. “House Republicans are trying to make something out of nothing by rummaging through the files of a Justice Department investigation that was closed months ago, and leaking selective details three days before the first presidential debate,” said Clinton spokesman Brian Fallon. They predicted the Mills revelation would be a “non-factor” by Monday night, and noted that cable news wasn’t even picking up the story on a busy news day filled with cell phone footage of a fatal police shooting in Charlotte, N.C. Some Clinton allies, however, worried that Lewandowski wasn’t completely wrong in his assessment -- that the previously undisclosed immunity deal, however narrow, fed into the narrative that the Clintons try to hide information in the hopes of gliding past it. “How is it not like pneumonia?” said one Clinton ally worried it gave the appearance of wrong-doing. “It leads to the interference that her top aides needed it. Why did they keep it a secret?” And the ill-timed leak guaranteed that Clinton will not cross the finish line of the election, now just 46 days away, shaking free of the email scandal. But Clinton’s debate prep team, insiders said, has already been anticipating that Trump will grill her hardest on her emails, and don't expect the tidbit of new information to change the narrative. One longtime Clinton ally familiar with the process said the candidate typically spends most of the time in debate prep “working and reworking the answers to the difficult questions.” In this case, the ally said, that section would include “anything to do with the Foundation, anything to do with your illness, and everything to do with your email.”
Washington (CNN)A daughter of Robert Kennedy, Kathleen Kennedy Townsend, said in a Facebook post that former Republican President George H.W. Bush told her he's voting for -- wait for it -- Hillary Clinton. Townsend, a Democrat who served as Maryland lieutenant governor for eight years and goes by Hartington online, posted a photo with the former president to Facebook: "The President told me he's voting for Hillary!!" wrote Kennedy Townsend, a niece of President John F. Kennedy. Jim McGrath, a spokesman for Bush, did not confirm nor deny the claim. "The vote President Bush will cast as a private citizen in some 50 days will be just that: a private vote cast in some 50 days," McGrath told CNN. "He is not commenting on the presidential race in the interim." Townsend met with Bush at the family compound in Kennebunkport, Maine, during a board meeting for the bipartisan Points of Light Foundation. Sources with knowledge of the conversation told CNN's Jamie Gangel they were surprised and disappointed that she had publicly shared a private conversation with the former president. Find out all you need to know for the 2016 election on "The Daily DC" podcast If George H.W. Bush ultimately votes for Clinton, he isn't likely to sway his entire family. Marvin Bush, the former president's youngest son, has said he would vote for Libertarian Gary Johnson. George P. Bush, George H.W. Bush's grandson, has backed Donald Trump. And Jeb Bush, Trump's former primary rival, has said he won't vote for Trump or Clinton. 
(CNN)CNN announced Monday a nationwide tour of key swing states, presidential debate sites and destinations around the country on the #MyVote camper and projection tour, in partnership with Instagram, Facebook and CA Technologies. #MyVote launched steps from the White House at the Newseum in Washington, where the camper displayed the first in a series of campaign trail photos taken by the Instagram community via an immersive, one-of-a-kind virtual projection experience. The public can see these images at each debate stop and more locations to be announced as the tour unfolds. CNN correspondents Chris Moody and Vanessa Yurkevich will travel with the #MyVote camper, report from the ground and talk to citizens to capture the faces and voices of the people. They aim to go beyond the polls and the noise to grasp the real pulse of America. At the tour stops, members of the community are invited to enter the #MyVote camper and take a photo with either a red, blue or purple background filter. They can then share that photo on Instagram, using the #MyVote hashtag. CNN will be gathering the data collected on the tour and folding it into the election coverage. The #MyVote camper will serve as CNN's Facebook Live HQ and the social media hub on the road trip and at each presidential debate location stop in New York, Missouri, Virginia and Nevada. 
Washington (CNN)The American-led military coalition against ISIS said Tuesday that a final laboratory test of the weapon ISIS fired at a US-Iraqi base in northern Iraq last week did not contain a mustard agent as earlier believed. Col. John Dorrian, a spokesperson for the anti-ISIS coalition, tweeted that "definitive" lab results show the munitions that hit Qayyara air base on September 20 was not a chemical weapon. Initial field tests of what has been described as either a rocket or artillery shell did indeed test positive for the chemical weapon and US personnel were required to undergo decontamination. Last week, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Gen. Joseph Dunford, told the Senate Armed Services Committee that "we assess it to be a sulfur mustard blister agent" when asked about the attack. Military officials had told CNN that a second test of the weapon had produced negative results while a third lab test was inconclusive. The most recent test announced by Dorrian represents the final test of the weapon. A US defense official told CNN that ISIS has carried out dozens of chemical weapons attacks against civilians and US allies in northern Iraq and Syria, and that the US military considers itself to be operating in a chemical environment. The official added that while the latest test of a chemical weapon proved negative, he said he expected such attacks to happen in the future. Dunford said the military has targeted over 30 ISIS installations involved in the production of chemical weapons. US Navy Capt. Jeff Davis, a Pentagon spokesman, told reporters Monday that the US has issued 50,000 gas masks to the Iraqi forces in order to counter ISIS chemical weapons attacks. Barbara Starr contributed to this report
Egyptian President Abdel Fattah al-Sisi has no qualms about the strength of Donald Trump as president of the United States. Sitting down with CNN’s Erin Burnett in an interview set to air Wednesday night, Sisi had two words when asked whether he thought Trump would make a strong leader: “No doubt.” Story Continued Below Asked whether he and Trump discussed the Republican nominee’s past proposals and remarks about Muslim immigration, Sisi made note of the U.S.’ existing “very strict security measures for everyone who wishes to visit it which has been in place for quite a few years.” “It’s also important to know that during election campaigns many statements are made and many things are said, however afterwards governing the country would be something different,” Sisi told Burnett. “And will be subject to many factors.” Burnett pressed, asking whether Sisi meant to say that Trump “is saying what he needs to say to be elected but that he might not follow through with the plan.” “I don’t want to be unfair to anyone here. During election campaigns there is a perception based on a certain vision and a point of view,” Sisi remarked. “Then that vision or point of view gets corrected and develops as a result of experience, reports and advice from experts." As far as his separate meeting with Hillary Clinton, Sisi suggested the Democratic nominee would make a good president as well. “Political parties in the United States would not allow candidates to reach that level unless they are qualified to lead a country the size of the United States of America,” Sisi replied. Asked about Clinton’s comments in a past debate in which she referred the “army dictatorship” under Sisi, the Egyptian leader hedged his response. “I will answer this question in two ways. I believe that that statement was not made after our most recent meeting between myself and Mrs. Clinton,” Sisi said. “But also in Egypt there will not be a chance for any dictatorship because in Egypt there is a constitution, there is law, and there the will of the people which will refuse to allow any leader to stay in his position for any period longer than his term which is four years."
Using Skittles to make a point about "our Syrian refugee problem" didn't go over too well with Mars Inc., but the candy maker's rebuke of Donald Trump Jr.'s controversial tweet is hardly a first. The eldest Trump son posted a photo of a bowl of Skittles and a caption that reads, "If I had a bowl of skittles and I told you just three would kill you. Would you take a handful? That's our Syrian refugee problem."  This image says it all. Let's end the politically correct agenda that doesn't put America first. #trump2016 pic.twitter.com/9fHwog7ssN  The condemnation was swift, though he appears to be standing by the sentiment and has not removed the post. He also didn't remove his Instagram post of Sept. 11, which was meant to be a play on Hillary Clinton's reference to some of his father's supporters as "a basket of deplorables." That photo, which he wrote was sent to him by "a friend," replaced images from the movie "The Expendables" with pictures of Donald Trump Sr., alt-right conspiracy theorist Alex Jones, alt-right blogger Milo Yiannopolous and other well-known Trump supporters like Gov. Chris Christie, Dr. Ben Carson and political strategist Roger Stone. It also included a cartoon frog named Pepe, which is regularly used by alt-right supporters.  A friend sent me this. Apparently I made the cut as one of the Deplorables?????? All kidding aside I am honored to be grouped with the hard working men and women of this great nation that have supported @realdonaldtrump and know that he can fix the mess created by politicians in Washington. He's fighting for you and won't ever quit. Thanks for your trust! #trump2016 #maga #makeamericagreatagain #basketofdeplorables A photo posted by Donald Trump Jr. (@donaldjtrumpjr) on Sep 10, 2016 at 7:18pm PDT  Donald Trump Jr. has been actively involved in his father's campaign, in public and private. He was the one to cast the convention floor vote for his father that put the Republican presidential candidate over the top and secured him the nomination. Of the three Trump children active in their father's campaign, Donald Trump Jr. was the first to give a speech at the party convention in Cleveland this summer — which was well received by many in the audience.   "Donald Trump Jr. was so excellent that my brain was already thinking, ‘What should we run him for?'" Trisha Turner, the president of the New York State Federation of Republican Women, told ABC News at the convention. He has also played a significant role behind the scenes of his father's campaign. Donald Trump Jr. was extensively involved in the vice presidential selection process, even meeting with V.P. hopeful Christie, along with his siblings Ivanka Trump and Eric Trump, without their father present.   In May, Donald Trump Jr. met on his own with Republican officials and the National Rifle Association on Capitol Hill. A registered gun owner and known hunter, he was the one to lead the negotiations with the NRA leading up to the gun rights lobbying group's endorsement of his father, sources told ABC News.
United Nations (CNN)President Barack Obama made an impassioned plea Tuesday for countries to fulfill a moral obligation to alleviate a global refugee crisis "of epic proportions," despite a political backlash in the US against absorbing those fleeing Middle East violence. The President's interest in calling attention to the tens of millions of displaced people around the world, and pushing back against the anti-refugee tenor, was underscored by his decision to convene a Leaders' Summit on Refugees at the United Nations Tuesday. At the summit, he also rejected another aspect of the American political debate swirling around accepting foreigners -- GOP presidential nominee Donald Trump's call to build a wall along the US-Mexico border. "This crisis is a test of our common humanity. Whether we give into suspicion and fear and build walls, or whether we see ourselves in another," Obama said, though he didn't mention Trump by name. Obama singled out the situation in Syria, which has displaced 4.8 million people so far, as particularly "unacceptable." "We are not as unified as we should be in pushing to make it stop," he said, describing the global refugee crisis as both a humanitarian and security challenge that tests countries' ability to take collective action. "I called this summit because this crisis is one of the most urgent tests of our time," he said. "Just as failure to act in the past -- for example, by turning away Jews fleeing Nazi Germany -- is a stain on our collective conscience, I believe history will judge us harshly if we do not rise to this moment." The refugee issue is one that's captured the world's attention more in the past two years than at perhaps any time since World War II, seared into the public's consciousness by photos like that of a 3-year-old Syrian boy who drowned in the Mediterranean and the flood of migrants into Europe. A recent study by from the UN's refugee agency estimated 65.3 million people were displaced from their homes by conflict or persecution in 2015, up by over five million from the prior year. Many are internally displaced within the borders of their own countries, but about 21.3 million are classified as refugees. Obama's summit follows a similar UN-led meeting on the issue Monday, which drew attention to the crisis but offered little in the way of binding commitments. RELATED: Donald Trump Jr. likens Syrian refugees to Skittles candy "Make no mistake," US Secretary of State John Kerry said at the UN meeting, "additional efforts are urgently needed." Leaders also called for a more orderly and equitable system to manage refugee flows -- acknowledging the burden is shouldered disproportionally by certain regions. "You have to know that today the European Union has a clear objective to restore order on its external borders," European Council President Donald Tusk said in his remarks, signaling a growing sense that patience in Europe with the migrant flow is wearing thin. "There will be no repeat of the year 2015 with more than one and a half million irregular migrants," he added. The Obama administration is hopeful the Leader's Summit on Tuesday afternoon can build momentum for more action. National Security Advisor Susan Rice in June announced that the gathering -- co-hosted along with the US by Canada, Ethiopia, Germany, Jordan, Mexico, Sweden and the UN Secretary General -- would seek an increase in funding of at least 30%, a doubling of permanent resettlement, and expanded access to education and work rights for refugees. "Reaching these ambitious objectives will be challenging, yet the level of need demands no less," Rice said in a statement. But aid groups are skeptical the summit will prompt the kind of action they say is desperately needed. "We have to be optimistic that we'll see some real concrete commitments," said Amnesty International's Interim Executive Director Margaret Huang. "But the truth is, even if those numbers are hit, it's nowhere near what's actually needed." The US is a major contributor of humanitarian aid for countries that host large numbers of refugees -- particularly Syria's neighbors -- and plans to increase the number of refugees it will take in to America from 85,000 in 2016 to 110,000 next year. The President's chief spokesman last week conceded that even as the administration calls for greater global action, it is limited in what it can do. "The President's commitment to ensuring that the United States plays a leading role on this issue is not shared by a lot of people in Congress, including by a lot of people in the Republican majority in Congress," Press Secretary Josh Earnest told reporters. "And that has an impact in terms of the resources that are dedicated to this effort." Vetting efforts to screen refugees, he noted, "are not cheap." RELATED: Boat survivor: I am a refugee with a voice David Miliband, president of the International Rescue Committee and a former British Foreign Secretary, said he's hopeful but waiting to see whether any agreements are backed up with action. "The scale of the global refugee problem demands an appropriate scale of response," Miliband told CNN. "Governments around the world haven't, in the main, been responding with the right degree of compassion or competence up to now." But the co-hosts of the Leaders' Summit said in a statement they were pleased with "new and significant humanitarian contributions" from world leaders. "We sought a $3 billion increase in global humanitarian financing and commitments to maintain funding in future years," they said. "Through our mutual efforts, over the course of 2016, the 32 donors participating today have contributed this year roughly 4.5 billion additional dollars to UN appeals and international humanitarian organizations than in 2015." As they await action from world leaders in New York, a group of volunteers in London laid out a "life jacket graveyard" Monday to draw attention to the plight of thousands of migrants who've lost their lives attempting hazardous boat crossings in the Mediterranean. The conflict in Syria and resulting migrant crisis in the Middle East and Europe have dominated headlines over the past 18 months, but refugees are a global problem. Perhaps nowhere are they more prevalent than in the so-called "global south" -- the developing countries of the southern hemisphere. Last week, South Sudan joined the ranks of Syria, Afghanistan, and Somalia -- countries with over 1 million of their citizens living as refugees abroad. And protracted conflict in places like Somalia have led to a generation of lifelong refugees -- men and women in their twenties who've never known life outside of a camp. "These are not people who can envision what life would be like if they were returned to their home countries," Huang said. 
A federal prosecutor told jurors on Monday that a witness will testify that Republican Gov. Chris Christie was told about a plan to close traffic lanes near the George Washington Bridge as part of a political vendetta while the shutdown was happening, a claim Christie has contested for years. The trial comes three years after gridlock paralyzed a town next to the busy bridge, which connects New Jersey and New York City, for four days. Prosecutors said two former Christie allies, Bill Baroni and Bridget Kelly, had sought political revenge against Democratic Fort Lee Mayor Mark Sokolich, who didn't endorse Christie for re-election. Baroni was a top Christie appointee to the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, which runs area bridges, tunnels and transit hubs. Kelly was Christie's former deputy chief of staff. Assistant U.S. Attorney Vikas Khanna told jurors that another Port Authority official, David Wildstein, who pleaded guilty in connection with the scandal last year, will testify he and Baroni made Christie aware of the plan during a Sept. 11 memorial in New York in 2013, three days after the gridlock started. "The evidence will show that ... they bragged about the fact that there were traffic problems in Fort Lee and that Mayor Sokolich was not getting his calls returned," Khanna said. Christie has denied knowing about the scheme until well after it was carried out, and a taxpayer-funded report he commissioned absolved him of wrongdoing. He wasn't charged in the federal investigation. A message left at his office seeking comment wasn't immediately returned Monday. Christie, an unsuccessful candidate for the 2016 Republican presidential nomination, conceded last week that the bridge scandal was a factor in GOP nominee Donald Trump's not picking him as a running mate. Defense attorneys spent considerable time in their opening statements castigating Wildstein, a former political blogger and high school classmate of Christie who they called the governor's hatchet man at the Port Authority. They characterized him as a vulgar, power-smitten opportunist aiming to ride Christie's coattails to Washington, D.C., at a time when Christie, about to easily win re-election in his heavily Democratic state, was seen as a top presidential hopeful. Kelly's attorney, Michael Critchley, called Wildstein and others in Christie's inner circle "cowards who were addicted to power" and said Kelly, who had been deputy chief of staff for three months at the time of the lane closures, was a sacrificial lamb. "The idea that Bridget Kelly is directing the affairs of the state of New Jersey is almost laughable," he said. "They wanted to throw her, in some sense, under the presidential bus." Baroni's lawyer, Michael Baldassare, called Wildstein a liar and "a horrible person, a vindictive individual who would destroy your life." In the government's opening, Khanna described how crushing gridlock engulfed Fort Lee on four days beginning Sept. 9, 2013, and how the defendants ignored Sokolich's texts, emails and voicemails seeking help. Kelly's "Time for some traffic problems in Fort Lee" email to Wildstein was sent Aug. 13, 2013, a day after she was notified Sokolich wouldn't endorse Christie, Khanna said. He added that although the lane realignment was Wildstein's idea, Wildstein "will also tell you Kelly instructed him to take that action and Baroni blessed it. And the three of them worked hand in hand." Critchley, Kelly's attorney, said Kelly regretted sending the email but it was merely joking banter taken out of context. He told jurors Kelly believed Wildstein's proffer that the three access lanes from Fort Lee to the bridge were part of a "corrupt political deal" years ago and should be re-examined. Baroni and Kelly face counts of wire fraud, conspiracy, deprivation of civil rights and misusing an organization receiving federal funds, the Port Authority. The most serious charge in the indictment, wire fraud conspiracy, carries a maximum 20-year prison term upon conviction. Witness testimony is scheduled to begin Tuesday, with Fort Lee's police chief. ——— This story has been corrected to show that Kelly was former deputy chief of staff, not chief of staff.
Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump wasted little time going for each other's jugulars Monday, each stampeding over the other's talking points as their intensely anticipated first debate began. Each candidate knows that the perception of their performance — from their command of policy issues and ability to articulate a vision for the country to their ability to parry barbs and attacks from their rival — could set the trajectory for the rest of the campaign. Here are the most memorable and important moments of the night: Story Continued Below 1) Trump: Clinton doesn’t look presidential Trump reiterated that Clinton “doesn’t have the look” of a president and said “she doesn’t have the stamina.” Clinton had a quick rebuke. “Well, as soon as he travels to 112 countries and negotiates a peace deal, a cease-fire, a release of dissidents, an opening of new opportunities in nations around the world or even spends 11 hours testifying in front of a congressional committee, he can talk to me about stamina.” Clinton attempted to turn the topic back to Trump’s derogatory comments toward women, invoking a beauty pageant contestant she claimed Trump had called “Ms. Piggy” and “Ms. Housekeeping.” “Donald, she has a name,” Clinton said, as Trump interjected, saying, “Where did you find this?” Trump argued that his comments were largely aimed at Rosie O’Donnell (who he had a long running feud with) and then he offered a subtle suggestion he had considered invoking of the Clintons’ marital strife – including her husband’s infidelity. “I said to myself, I can't do it. I just can't do it. It's inappropriate. It's not nice,” he said. “But she's (spent) hundreds of millions of dollars on negative ads even me, many of which are untrue, and they're misrepresentations, and I will tell you this, Lester, it's not nice, and I don't deserve that, but it's certainly not a nice thing that she's done.” 2) Trump to Americans on racial healing: 'I say nothing' As Holt pressed Trump on his role in perpetuating the birther controversy against President Barack Obama, he asked Trump what he’d say to Americans about the need for racial healing. “I say nothing,” Trump replied, “because I was able to get him to produce [his birth certificate]. He should have produced it a long time before. I say nothing.” Trump struggled to respond to charges that he fomented the debunked claim that Obama was born outside the United States for years after Obama produced his long-form birth certificate. Instead, he reiterated his claim that Clinton’s own advisers pushed the controversy during their divisive primary in 2008. “I'll tell you just simple to say, Sidney Blumenthal works for the campaign and close -- very close friend of Secretary Clinton. And her campaign manager, Patty Doyle went to -- during the campaign, her campaign against president Obama fought very hard, and you can go look it up and you can check it out,” he said. “If you look at CNN this past week, Patty Doyle was on Wolf Blitzer saying that this happened, Blumenthal sent McClatchy to Kenya to find out about it, they were pressing very hard. They failed to get the birth certificate.” “I was the one that got him to produce the birth certificate, and I think I did a good job,” he continued, adding of Clinton, “just like she can't bring back jobs she can't produce.” 3) The fact check fight As Donald Trump excoriated Hillary Clinton for once describing the Trans-Pacific Partnership as the "gold standard" of trade deals, Clinton shot back that he was mischaracterizing her position against the deal. "I know you live in your own reality, but those are not the facts," she said. Soon after, she plugged her home page and urged viewers to visit her campaign's live Trump fact check. Trump cut in to plug his own website next. After a tussle over taxes, Trump fired back. "Look at her website. It's no different than this," he said. "She's telling us how to fight ISIS. She tells you how to fight ISIS on her website. I don't think general MacArthur would like that too much." Trump repeatedly slammed Clinton for the Obama administration's fiscal policies. She again retorted. "I have a feeling by the end of this evening I'm going to be blamed for everything that's ever happened," she said. "Why not?" he mused. "Yeah. Why not? Just join the debate by saying more crazy things," she said. 4) Paying no income tax 'makes me smart' Trump parried a question about his still-hidden tax returns by vowing emphatically to release them as soon as Clinton produces 33,000 deleted emails from her private server. "I will release my tax returns, against my lawyer's wishes, when she releases her 33,000 emails that have been deleted," he said. "As soon as she releases them, I will release my tax returns and that's against my lawyers say don't do it." The audience broke into cheers, violating the rules of decorum set out by moderator Lester Holt. Clinton replied that Trump's comment was "another example of bait and switch here." "You've got to ask yourself, why won't he release his tax returns? And I think there may be a couple of reasons. First, maybe he's not as rich as he says he is. Second, maybe he's not as charitable as he claims to be. Third, we don't know all of his business dealings," she said, adding that he may not have paid any income tax. "That makes me smart," he interjected. 5) Trump defends business practices After Clinton slammed Trump for "stiffing" his workers and bringing companies into bankruptcy, Trump defended his dealings. "Look, it's all words. It's all sound bites," he said. "I built an unbelievable company, some of the greatest assets anywhere in the world, real estate assets in the world beyond the United States and it's an unbelievable company. But on occasion, four times, we used certain laws that are there." As for Clinton's contention about his workers, Trump said: "First of all, they did get paid a lot but taking advantage of the laws of the nation. ... Now, if you want to change the laws, you've been there a long time, change the laws. But I take advantage of the laws of the nation because I'm running a company." Trump also seemed to contemplate losing the presidential race, noting the hotel he just opened on Pennsylvania Avenue in Washington D.C. "If I don't get there in one way, I'm going to get to Pennsylvania Ave. another," he said. 6) Trump hints at Clinton’s stamina Trump attempted to stoke his campaign’s insinuation that Clinton lacks the stamina to be president. In a discussion of his travels to urban areas to speak to African American voters, Trump noted he’d been to Detroit and Philadelphia. “You've seen me, I've been all over the place. You decided to stay home and that's okay,” he said. Clinton counterpunched. “I think Donald just criticized me for preparing for this debate,” she said. “And yes, I did. And you know what else I prepared for? I prepared to be president. And I think that's a good thing." 7) Trump to Clinton: 'We agree.' The first interaction of the night wasn't the haymaker many people expected. Trump's first comment directed at Clinton was about an area of agreement: Child care. "As far as child care is concerned and so many other things, I think Hillary and I agree on that," Trump said after Clinton opened with a call for more family friendly economic policies. "We probably disagree a little bit as to numbers and amounts and what we're going to do but perhaps we'll be talking about that later." 8) Trump continues to mislead on his Iraq war stance Trump continued to mislead on his position on the Iraq War, insisting that he was against it prior to the invasion despite the only evidence – a 2002 Howard Stern interview – suggesting he was in favor of it. “I did not support the war in Iraq. That is a mainstream media nonsense put out by her,” Trump said of Clinton. “The record shows otherwise,” Holt said. Trump urged reporters to call Fox’s Sean Hannity, a close ally, to vouch for his opposition to the war beforehand. Clinton said she hoped “fact checkers are turning up the volume and really working hard.” 9) Clinton laughs off Trump’s temperament barb Trump, who’s been dogged by questions about his temperament to be president, sought to turn the issue around on Clinton, saying she’s actually too volatile. Trump said that at the AFL-CIO “the other day, behind the blue screen, I don't know who you were talking to, secretary, Clinton, but you were totally out of control,” he said. Clinton grinned and delivered an exasperated “Woo! Okay.” Her voice trailed off and she moved on. 10) Trump backs off “rigged” suggestions Trump poured cold water on the notion that he might challenge the results of the presidential election. “If she wins, I will absolutely support her,” he said. Clinton set the table for Trump’s walkback by saying that in democracy, “sometimes you win. Sometimes you lose. But I certainly will support the outcome of this election.”
Its prospects are far from clear, but talk about the impeachment of Gov. Chris Christie is no longer relegated to whispers between insiders. The prosecution’s opening argument in the Bridgegate case — which featured the claim that Christie was told of the George Washington Bridge lane closures as they happened by two high ranking Port Authority of New York and New Jersey appointees — brought the talk into the open. Story Continued Below Now Democratic lawmakers who control the Assembly and state Senate are watching the trial carefully to see if any more revelations could warrant the attempted removal of the governor from office. “All we know are the coming attractions that were given to us by each of the attorneys during their opening statements. They’ve all told us there will be proof at the trial that he governor knew about this,” said Assemblyman John Wisniewski, who helped break the controversy open as the leader of a committee investigating the Fort Lee bridge access lane closures that tied up traffic for days. “We don’t know exactly what that proof is,” Wisniewski said. “For instance, is it merely the photograph of the three of them talking before 9/11? That’s something we’ve already known about and in my opinion it’s hard to make a strong case for the photo alone that the governor knew.” A Democratic assemblyman who refused to discuss impeachment publicly confirmed a Friday morning NBC New York report that legislative staffers have begun researching the impeachment process. No governor in the state has been impeached before. The process would have to start in the Assembly. Earlier this week, the liberal group NJ Working Families called for Christie’s impeachment. Assembly Speaker Vincent Prieto, who would make the call to begin the proceedings, said through a spokesman he “won't be commenting on the trial until it's completed and all evidence has been presented.” Still, even if the Assembly votes by a simple majority to initiate impeachment, it would then have to be tried in the Senate. Removing Christie from office would require a two-thirds majority there, which Democrats don’t have on their own. That could be complicated by the fact that Senate President Stephen Sweeney, under the state constitution, would not be allowed to participate in the trial — a vestige of New Jersey’s pre-lieutenant governor system when the Senate president was next in line for the governorship. Montclair State political science professor Brigid Harrison, who recently penned an op-ed that upped the intensity of impeachment talk, said that her interpretation of the constitution is that the Senate president would still be able to vote, though it might require some legal interpretation. The constitution states that the Senate trial would be presided over by the chief justice of the state Supreme Court and that “the President of the Senate shall not participate in the trial.” If Sweeney could not vote and the remaining 23 Senate Democrats were in lock step in favor of impeachment, at least four Republicans would have to join them to successfully remove Christie from office. Barring damning new evidence, it’s hard to see Senate Republicans going that way. The governor has had tremendous sway over the votes of GOP lawmakers. Only once have enough Senate Republicans joined Democrats to vote to override Christie’s veto of a piece of legislation, despite dozens of attempts. State Senate Republican Leader Tom Kean Jr. did not return a call seeking comment. It's also far from certain that Senate Democrats would vote in lock step to remove Christie from office. South Jersey Democratic power broker George Norcross, a close ally of Gov. Chris Christie, is the political benefactor for several of them, including Sweeney. Other Democratic senators have been staunch Christie allies, and one, Sandra Cunningham, is a personal friend. And Christie is close with Essex County Executive Joseph DiVincenzo, whose deputy chief of staff is Democratic state Sen. Teresa Ruiz. Democrats would also be creating a political obstacle for themselves through impeachment. Christie’s popularity is mired at 26 percent, making him one of the least popular governors in the nation. He’s so disliked in New Jersey that Democrats are considered near shoo-ins to win the governorship in 2017. Handing the governor’s office to Lt. Gov. Kim Guadagno, who is already laying the groundwork for a run in 2017, would not only give her the power of incumbency, but a potential easy way to make a fresh start while distancing herself from Christie. “It’s easier to run against Christie’s legacy than it would be to run against Guadagno,” Harrison said. Monmouth University pollster Patrick Murray said Wisniewski, who's considering a run for governor, may benefit from impeachment. But it's far from certain other hopefuls, like Sweeney, would welcome it. "There’s too many gubernatorial wannabees that don’t want to deal with an impeachment and, two, an incumbent Kim Guadgano as their opponent," Murray said. “The politics of it — there are too many people who have more to lose from that spectacle for a variety of reasons."
It’s time for Episode 21 of the 2016 Nerdcast, POLITICO’s podcast on the race for the White House. Tune in each week to geek out with us as we dive deep into this amazing presidential race, the latest numbers that actually matter, plus backstage dope on how politics really works. We’re the people who spend Friday nights poring over poll numbers or the latest Federal Election Commission reports — so if you want to understand how the modern politics game is played, this is the podcast for you. (Subscribe to the 2016 Nerdcast on iTunes or download from Soundcloud here.) Story Continued Below POLITICO’s Kristin Roberts, Ken Vogel, Hadas Gold, Scott Bland and Katie Glueck discuss what can we expect from the first debate, the religious right’s conversion to Donald Trump, Trump as “strongman” and more.
Former House Speaker Newt Gingrich praised Donald Trump's outreach to inner cities in an appearance on Fox News on Thursday morning. "The core problem is that people are trapped in the neighborhoods with no hope, no future, no jobs. There have been over 3,000 people shot in Chicago so far this year. One every two hours," Gingrich said, adding, "one thing I'll say about Trump, he's the first conservative I've seen willing to go into the inner city and talk about the need for dramatic change." Story Continued Below Gingrich, a Trump supporter, criticized Democratic leadership in inner cities, and suggested Barack Obama could have done more as president to diffuse racial tensions in the country. When asked how Obama may have missed an opportunity to repair race relations, he said, "I think the biggest aspect was that all of the major inner cities, all of them governed by Democrats, are all disasters," citing statistics reflecting low primary school passing rates in several cities. "More Americans have been killed while Obama was president, in Chicago, than in Iraq and Afghanistan combined. And I think the president had a unique opportunity, but my guess is he was afraid it would make him a black president in a narrowing sense," he said.
(CNN)President Barack Obama sharply criticized Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump for saying earlier this week that the black community is in the worst shape it's "ever been in before." "I think even most 8-year-olds will tell you that whole slavery thing wasn't very good for black people," Obama told ABC News in an interview that aired Friday on "Good Morning America." "Jim Crow wasn't very good for black people. What we have to do is use our history to propel us to make even more progress in the future." Obama's comments reflected the wide gulf between the President and Trump that came into greater focus this week as race again became a top issue in the 2016 campaign following fatal police shootings of African-American men in Oklahoma and North Carolina. Speaking before a mostly white audience Tuesday in Kenansville, North Carolina, Trump spoke of the need to "rebuild our inner cities." "Our African-American communities are absolutely in the worst shape that they've ever been in before. Ever. Ever. Ever," Trump said. The speech was part of a high-profile push by the Trump campaign to plug gaps in poll numbers with minority voters, and also to win over white voters turned off by divisive rhetoric from Trump that critics have repeatedly labeled as racist. Still, the effort has stumbled. By proposing the expansion of the controversial "stop-and-frisk" program as a way to improve urban policing -- and by engaging in a public re-litigation of the baseless "birther" controversy that critics labeled racist -- Trump spent much of the last week doing damage control with the same voters he'd hoped to attract. All the while, Obama has positioned himself as one of Trump's most vocal critics -- and rival Hillary Clinton's biggest cheerleader. Speaking to reporters gathered in the Oval Office last Friday, Obama sarcastically dismissed Trump's "birther" capitulation. "I was pretty confident about where I was born, I think most people were as well," he said. "My hope would be the presidential election reflects more serious issues than that." And the president made a more earnest effort to rebut Trump when he spoke at the Congressional Black Caucus gala on Saturday, and said that he would consider it a "personal insult" to his legacy if black voters didn't turn out for Clinton. Newest absentee, registration numbers promising for Clinton "If I hear anybody saying their vote does not matter, that it doesn't matter who we elect -- read up on your history. It matters. We've got to get people to vote," Obama said. "I will consider it a personal insult -- an insult to my legacy -- if this community lets down its guard and fails to activate itself in this election. You want to give me a good sendoff? Go vote." At the event, Obama also criticized Trump for using hyperbolic language when discussing African-Americans, and suggested that Trump visit the Smithsonian's new National Museum of African American History and Culture for perspective. "You may have heard Hillary's opponent in this election say that there's never been a worse time to be a black person. I mean, he missed that whole civics lesson about slavery or Jim Crow," he said. "But we've got a museum for him to visit, so he can tune in. We will educate him." Obama speaks at the museum's opening Friday. 
A group of Senate Democrats have asked the U.S. Department of Labor to open an investigation into whether Wells Fargo violated the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA). The letter follows a hearing on Capitol Hill this week that saw bank CEO John Stumpf face blistering questions from senators over a scandal involving allegations from regulators that employees opened accounts without customers' knowledge or permission. Separately, Stumpf resigned from his position on the Federal Advisory Council effective today, the San Francisco Federal Reserve Bank told ABC News. The council generally meets with the Federal Reserve four times a year to advise it on banking and economic issues.     The FLSA establishes standards for wage, overtime, youth employment and record-keeping for both the private and public sector, according to the DOL's website. Among other stipulations, the FLSA mandates that non-exempt employees receive overtime pay equal to 1.5 times his or her regular rate, if the employee works more than 40 hours per week. Describing Wells Fargo's opening or attempted opening of the accounts as "fraud," the senators wrote in a letter to Labor Secretary Tom Perez and DOL Administrator David Weil that "the suggestion last week by Chief Executive John Stumpf that '[t]here was no incentive to do bad things' at Wells Fargo -- a company that fired 5,300 employees over five years due to improper selling but made little effort to change its policies -- does not appear to be grounded in reality." The reason for that, the senators claimed, citing media reports, is that "dozens of former and current Wells Fargo employees have come forward to describe the lengths they went to in order to meet the bank's aggressive sales quotas," and, "When quotas weren't met, employees faced threats of termination; mandated hours of unpaid overtime; harassment; and other forms of retaliation." DOL spokesman Jason Surbey acknowledged that the agency had received the letter, and said: "While we cannot discuss details of potential law enforcement decision-making, we do take the concerns raised in the letter very seriously." On Sept. 13, the bank said that it would end its sales goals program effective Jan. 1, 2017. In response to the senators' request to the DOL, Wells Fargo spokeswoman Jennifer G. Dunn told ABC News today that "our team members are our greatest asset." "We strive to make every one of them feel valued, rewarded and recognized and we pride ourselves on creating a positive environment for our team members, including market competitive compensation, career-development opportunities, a broad array of benefits, and a strong offering of work-life programs," Dunn added. Sens. Elizabeth Warren, D-Mass., Sherrod Brown, D-Ohio, Jack Reed, D-R.I., Robert Menendez, D-N.J., Bernie Sanders, I-Vt., Jeff Merkley, D-Ore., Kirsten Gillibrand, D-N.Y., and Mazie Hirono, D-Hawaii, sent the letter two days after many of them grilled Stumpf for nearly three hours in a Senate Banking Committee hearing on Capitol Hill.
11/19/16, 3:14 PM CET BY Chris Spillane So is anti-establishment message of Nigel Farage, the Labour leader said. 11/19/16, 1:55 PM CET BY Sarah Wheaton Alumni of the Obama White House spent days mourning Trump’s win. Now they’re ready to fight. 11/19/16, 11:37 AM CET BY Chris Spillane Dick Schoof: ‘Chance of attack in the Netherlands is real.’ 11/19/16, 10:38 AM CET BY Chris Spillane Government could focus on starting the process of leaving the bloc sooner. 11/19/16, 10:13 AM CET BY Benjamin Oreskes Diplomats say the president-elect already has a playbook to undermine the global body. 11/19/16, 10:01 AM CET BY Michael Crowley and Nahal Toosi Flynn, Bannon represent ‘Islamophobic’ thinking of the type rejected by Bush and Obama, critics say. 11/19/16, 5:25 AM CET BY Michael Kruse The blue-collar workers who put Donald Trump in the White House are ready for him to deliver. How much time will they give him? 11/19/16, 5:20 AM CET BY Ryan Heath, Tara Palmeri, Harry Cooper and Quentin Ariès  11/18/16, 9:09 PM CET BY Harry Cooper A Polish political party’s links to a pan-European group raise questions about funding. 11/18/16, 6:31 PM CET BY Tom McTague Signs that Britain’s political class is coming to terms with June’s EU referendum. 11/18/16, 6:26 PM CET BY Hortense Goulard Conservative MEP denounced Juncker’s efforts to drum up support for Schulz as ‘outrageous.’ 11/18/16, 5:31 PM CET BY Ivo Oliveira Drawing the top stories around the globe. 11/18/16, 4:55 PM CET BY Cynthia Kroet Italians are likely to reject prime minister’s reform package in next month’s vote. 11/18/16, 4:48 PM CET BY Elana Schor, Kyle Cheney and Louis Nelson The president-elect starts building out his administration with loyalists. 11/18/16, 4:01 PM CET BY Nicholas Vinocur Left-wingers hope that by backing Alain Juppé, they will see off two political enemies. 11/18/16, 3:15 PM CET BY Cynthia Kroet Jens Stoltenberg did not mention the total number or reasons for the requests. 11/18/16, 3:02 PM CET BY Florian Eder and Janosch Delcker Wird Martin Schulz die SPD in den Bundestagswahlkampf führen? Oder schafft er es, doch noch einmal EU-Parlamentspräsident zu werden? Er muss sich bald entscheiden. 11/18/16, 2:34 PM CET BY Anthony Skinner Syrian refugees are pawns in Turkish president’s pursuit of power. 11/18/16, 2:33 PM CET BY Charlie Cooper Shadow Brexit secretary ‘seriously pissed off’ at colleague’s comments. 11/18/16, 2:33 PM CET BY Cynthia Kroet German chancellor is ‘championing the interests of Europe,’ Witold Waszczykowski said. 11/18/16, 12:58 PM CET BY Cynthia Kroet Nikola Gruevski stepped down in January over a wire tapping scandal. 11/18/16, 12:48 PM CET BY Barbara Surk Jens Stoltenberg said he had a ‘good talk’ with the president-elect. 11/18/16, 12:35 PM CET BY Esther King Majority of those who failed to gain international asylum come from the Balkan states. 11/18/16, 11:48 AM CET BY Esther King Immigration is what keeps the country running, says pro-EU Lord. 11/18/16, 10:57 AM CET BY Esther King Conditions at offshore detention center for refugees are ‘cruel, inhuman and degrading,’ said François Crépeau. 11/18/16, 9:36 AM CET BY Esther King Foreign Minister Linas Linkevičius warned that Vladimir Putin could use transition period in Baltics, Syria. 11/18/16, 8:55 AM CET BY MADELINE CONWAY Former ambassador to the UN says there are ways of supporting the opposition that does not involve the use of American military force. 11/18/16, 8:39 AM CET BY Cristiano Lima Her presence is likely to raise fresh concerns about potential conflicts of interest. 11/18/16, 8:35 AM CET BY Bryan Bender The retired lieutenant general’s hardline views on Islam — as well as laudatory statements about Russia — have made him a lightning rod, as did his strident attacks on Hillary Clinton during the campaign. 11/18/16, 5:33 AM CET BY Nicholas Vinocur The center-right’s first ever presidential primary looked all over. Now it’s wide open. 11/18/16, 5:25 AM CET BY Tim King The Günther Oettinger controversies are tainting this European Commission by intimate association. 11/18/16, 12:17 AM CET BY Nahal Toosi Much of Europe is alarmed over what Trump’s presidency could augur. 11/17/16, 11:52 PM CET BY Shane Goldmacher and Andrew Restuccia ‘We feel way ahead of schedule and never in a rush to do the wrong thing,’ said campaign manager Kellyanne Conway. 11/17/16, 9:42 PM CET BY Jacopo Barigazzi Maltese interior minister not impressed with Bratislava’s migration plan. 11/17/16, 9:33 PM CET BY Edward-Isaac Dovere In Berlin, the president warned his successor that his divisive campaign style won’t wear well in the Oval Office. 11/17/16, 8:24 PM CET BY Janosch Delcker US President hopes Trump won’t ‘simply take a Realpolitik approach.’ 11/17/16, 8:21 PM CET BY Hortense Goulard European Parliament president will only accept foreign minister role if he is also the SPD candidate for the top job. 11/17/16, 8:18 PM CET BY Konstantin Richter Germans, of all people, are now called on to be bulwarks of democracy. 11/17/16, 8:06 PM CET BY Paul Dallison and Esther King Euroskeptic party stands accused of breaking rules on spending EU funds. 11/17/16, 7:16 PM CET BY Brent Griffiths  11/17/16, 6:31 PM CET BY Maïa de La Baume Brussels faults Ankara for ‘neglecting and undermining’ democracy and the rule of law. 11/17/16, 6:27 PM CET BY Louis Nelson  11/17/16, 5:47 PM CET BY Cynthia Kroet Jean-Marie Le Pen should receive €15,000 because he was prevented from carrying out his duties. 11/17/16, 4:57 PM CET BY Carter Stoddard Net debt has ballooned to £338 million, and currency fluctuations are partly to blame. 11/17/16, 4:34 PM CET BY Laurens Cerulus In finally passing her surveillance bill, Britain’s PM just made Brexit even more complicated. 11/17/16, 4:13 PM CET BY Hortense Goulard French prime minister called for more European integration amid rising nationalism. 11/17/16, 3:23 PM CET BY Cynthia Kroet Former European Council president joins forces with Flemish singer. 11/17/16, 2:53 PM CET BY Paul Dallison Corey Lewandowski said president-elect will work closely with Theresa May, with no need for UKIP leader as a go-between. 11/17/16, 2:37 PM CET BY Cynthia Kroet Freedom Party leader’s comments on Moroccans living in the Netherlands were ‘unnecessarily offensive.’ 11/17/16, 2:11 PM CET BY Esther King Nigel Farage’s party stands accused of breaking rules on spending EU funds. Cadets vote at a polling station. Vladimir Putin's United Russia party won a greater share of the vote than in 2011, with even less space in parliament for any real opposition party | Vasily Batanov/AFP via Getty Images By Oliver Carroll 9/19/16, 3:14 PM CET Updated 9/20/16, 6:08 AM CET MOSCOW — Two years of economic recession, Western sanctions and wars in Ukraine and Syria haven’t shaken Vladimir Putin’s grip on power. Instead, Sunday’s election to the Russian state Duma saw the president’s United Russia party win a greater share of the vote than in 2011, with even less space in parliament for any real opposition party. There was never any doubt about the outcome, and many Russians didn’t bother to turn out. Nationwide, only 48 percent voted compared to 60 percent in the previous elections for the lower house of parliament. The numbers were even worse in Moscow and St. Petersburg, bastions of the educated middle classes and traditionally more protest-oriented. This time, despite some reports of voter fraud, there were no signs of demonstrations. “They did everything [so] that people would ignore the elections, from holding them just after the summer break, to the most low-key election campaign I can remember,” said political expert Grigorii Golosov. On Monday, with 93 percent of the votes counted, United Russia had 54.2 percent of the vote, up from 49.3 percent five years ago. Russia’s new electoral system, a mix of party lists and single mandate districts, means that Putin’s party wins a huge constitutional majority of 343 seats in the 450-seat Duma — compared to 238 seats in 2011. With its super majority, United Russia will have free rein over parliament, dropping the need to bargain with friendly opposition parties. It can also change the constitution at will. In southern Russia a CCTV camera caught a polling official stuffing a ballot box. On the latest figures, the Communist Party will likely finish second, slightly ahead of the Liberal Democratic Party of Russia, with the center-left Just Russia fourth. They were all in the previous parliament, and traditionally support the government on many issues and refrain from attacking Putin. While there is some pressure for the Communists to be more independent— their leader Gennady Zyuganov at one point refused to recognize the results — all three can be expected to remain loyal. All in all, it was a terrible election for Russia’s liberal fringe, which now faces the prospect of obliteration. They’re down from one seat in the previous Duma to none. Their best hope, the liberal opposition Yabloko party, scored less than 2 percent of the vote, and will now lose out on government funding. The liberal-democratic PARNAS party failed to get 1 percent, and most of the candidates supported by exiled oligarch Mikhail Khodorkovsky were wiped out. Also On Politico Oliver Carroll Also On Politico Kristen East Also On Politico Vince Chadwick The centrist opposition also failed to break through in any of the single-mandate districts. The closest candidate, Yabloko’s Dmitry Gudkov, lost in the Moscow suburbs. As he faced defeat, Gudkov told POLITICO he had battled the full might of the government machine, but said that the result was ultimately down to the passivity of Russian democrats. “Voters didn’t turn up,” he said. “Russia’s middle class now is about to get what it deserves.” Only one independent and two right-wing populist candidates made it into the Duma, but they won’t give much support to the liberal opposition. One of the nationalist winners of the single-mandate run-offs was Vitaly Milonov, a former deputy of the St. Petersburg city government who has campaigned on an anti-gay rights platform. Although the outcome was never in doubt, the Kremlin made sure that the voting procedure was cleaned up from 2011, when voter fraud sparked anti-Putin protests. However, there were still questionable incidents, the most obvious being in Rostov in southern Russia where a CCTV camera caught a polling official stuffing a ballot box. In other places, voters were lured to the polls with free sausages and other goodies. Denis Korotkov, a correspondent for the St. Petersburg news portal Fontanka, managed to vote several times. He immediately wrote about the incident and brought it to the attention of the authorities. Law enforcement subsequently detained Korotkov — who is now threatened with prosecution for electoral violations. While the opposition faces being wiped out, the upshot for Putin is that his control of Russia is stronger than ever. He is likely to decide to run for a fourth term as president in 2018. As part of the preparations for yet another run, Putin recently reshuffled his closest advisers, weeding out those who might dare to challenge him and replacing them with lesser-known men completely dependent on his favor. The election also means there is likely to be little change in Russia’s policies on Ukraine and Syria, or in its economic program. “In practical terms, little will change with the new parliament,” wrote Capital Economics, an analysis firm, in a post-election note. “United Russia already held a majority in parliament, and didn’t face effective opposition. The strong showing for United Russia (and disappointing results for the opposition) suggests that the direction of policy will be largely unchanged.”  © 2016 POLITICO SPRL Log in to access content and manage your profile. If you do not have a login you can register here.
Washington (CNN)Charlotte Mayor Jennifer Roberts said Republican nominee Donald Trump's assumption that drugs are a factor in her city's protests is "presumptuous." "It's presumptuous for him to make conclusions like that without having thorough conversations with some of the folks who are here on the ground and are really aware of what's going on and what the reasoning is," she told CNN's Carol Costello on "Newsroom." Multiple police officers and citizens have been injured this week during protests after the fatal shooting of Keith Lamont Scott by a police officer. Charlotte police say Scott was armed at the time he was fatally shot, but his family said he was reading a book in his vehicle when police officers approached and shot him. Trump tied the eruption of violent protests to narcotics, telling a Pittsburgh crowd Wednesday that "drugs are a very, very big factor in what you're watching on television at night." The GOP nominee offered no evidence to back up that claim but Steven Cheung, a Trump campaign spokesman, later said it was "obvious" that Trump was "referring to the recent increase in drug related deaths and subsequent news reports, thus making it a hot button issue." But Roberts said she and Charlotte council members have been in conversations all week with protestors about their motivations. "We have a much better understanding than Mr. Trump," she told Costello. Roberts said frustration with racial inequality throughout Charlotte and the country as a whole over issues such as education, economic development and social justice are the impetus behind the protests. "We have a history of racial disparity and we are working very hard in our city to bridge that gap," she said. "We're working very hard to make sure opportunity is spread equally around our city." 
Former President George H.W. Bush said he will be voting for Hillary Clinton at a reception for the Points of Light Foundation in Kennebunkport, Maine, on Monday, a source told ABC News. Bush made the declaration in front of about 40 people in attendance at the reception, according to the source. Kathleen Hartington Kennedy Townsend, a former Maryland lieutenant governor and daughter of Robert F. Kennedy, first posted on Facebook Monday about the 41st president's apparent intentions to vote for Clinton, sharing a photo of herself and Bush, and writing, "The President told me he’s voting for Hillary!!" Townsend later told Politico she met with Bush, 92, in Maine on Monday, where he told her about his preference in this year’s ballot. "That's what he said," she told Politico.       Townsend is a member of the advisory board of the Points of Light Foundation. "The vote President Bush will cast as a private citizen in some 50 days will be just that: a private vote cast in some 50 days," a spokesman for Bush told ABC News. "He is not commenting on the presidential race in the interim."
Washington (CNN)During an interview with Fox News Channel's Bill O'Reilly Monday night, Donald Trump spoke about how American screeners need to profile people in order to spot potential terrorists. Here's a portion of that conversation: O'Reilly: Now, another thing you said that was very controversial is that you want to profile. You want to profile Arab or Muslim men. How would that work? Trump: Well, we have no choice. Look, Israel does it. And Israel does it very successfully. O'Reilly: They do it at the airports. They do it at the airports. Trump: Well, they do it. They do it. And when they see somebody that they would like to talk to, that they would like to look at, that they would maybe like to open up their satchel and take a look inside, they do it. And they don't like to do it. I don't like to do it. But we have to be -- you know, you have a woman who is 87-year-old in a wheelchair from Sweden and we have to look at her. We have to look at somebody else. It's ridiculous what's going on there. O'Reilly: So, what would you do though? Trump: If you want to be so politically correct -- O'Reilly: Do you have a vision of how that profiling would work? Trump: It works. And we see somebody that we think there could be a problem. At airports and other places. You talked to them and you see what's going on. O'Reilly: But I think they do that now. Trump: We don't do that. As Trump would say, excuse me, excuse me -- but we do. Screening at airports does not just entail putting everyone through a metal detector. The Transportation Security Administration has had protocols for years that tell agents what kinds of behaviors to check. But TSA insists it is behavioral, not racial, profiling. Last year, TSA began a pilot program to update these protocols. The agencies does not publicly lists the kinds of activities that can draw an agent's attention. But in March 2015, The Intercept website published what it said was a confidential memo that told TSA screeners at that time what to look for. Among the suspicious signs: - Exaggerated yawning. - Excessive complaints about the screening process. - Widely open staring eyes. - Wearing improper attire for location. - Whistling as the individual approaches the screening process. - Gazing down. - Exaggerated or repetitive grooming gestures. - Face pale from recent shaving of beard. - Rubbing or wringing of hands. - Excessive throat clearing So if TSA is already profiling people based on behavior, what further profiling would Trump like them to do? 
Donald Trump’s team has created a detailed analysis of Hillary Clinton’s debate style — including her body language and verbal tics — with the goal of helping the GOP nominee exploit weaknesses during Monday’s debate, according to three sources familiar with Trump’s preparations. The “psychological profile,” as the analysis is being called, is based on a statistical analysis of videos from 16 years' worth of Clinton’s debates, dating back to her 2000 campaign for Senate in New York, according to the operatives. They said it was assembled with assistance from a political data firm called Cambridge Analytica that specializes in “psychographic” modeling of voters and donors, and that Trump’s top advisers have been pleased with the results. Story Continued Below The advisers believe that the profile proves that Clinton has significant weaknesses and that they have identified her ‘tells’ — words, phrases or gestures she uses when she’s unsure of an answer, or is trying to deflect her way out of an uncomfortable question, according to the operatives familiar with the preparations. For example, according to one of the sources, an operative who works with the campaign, Trump’s debate prep team believes that the profile proves that when "she doesn't know the answer, she says this, etc.” The goal, said the operative, is to get Trump to recognize the tendencies, “so when he hears her say 'X' he knows what is going on, and can respond accordingly.” Another source, who has advised Trump’s aides on analytics, said that Trump’s debate team is using the profile to coach the candidate on the most fruitful moments and responses to aggressively challenge Clinton. “They think this psychological profile can predict how she’ll respond based on her body language and other stuff, and to tune Trump in to recognize and leverage that,” the analytics operative said, though he questioned the efficacy of the technique. “It’s really wacky pseudo-science.” Trump’s campaign did not respond to questions about Trump’s debate preparations, the analysis or Cambridge Analytica’s role therein. And it’s unclear the degree to which Trump is heeding advice offered by his team based on the analysis, though The New York Times reported Friday that Trump has been watching video of Clinton’s “best and worst debate moments, looking for her vulnerabilities.” But the creation and use of the analysis at least partially calls into question the widespread perception that Trump’s debate preparations are unsophisticated and unstructured — especially compared to Clinton’s rigorous studying and moot-court-style mock debates. Clinton’s study materials reportedly also include assessments of Trump’s psychology, his varying moods and recommendations for throwing him off his game. Clinton communications director Jennifer Palmieri suggested her campaign wasn’t much worried about the Trump team’s psychological analysis of Clinton. “Good luck,” she said Friday when she was asked about this story during a pre-debate media conference call. “We all have seen [Clinton] endure a lot of tough questioning over the years. We saw her endure 11 hours of tough questioning at the Benghazi hearing. And Donald Trump may think he’s the person who’s going to be able to really get under her skin, but I doubt it.” The Trump team’s psychological analysis of Clinton — and Cambridge Analytica’s involvement in it — also is testament to the growing clout in Trump’s orbit of the father-daughter duo of Bob and Bekah Mercer. The Mercer family, which has given $2 million to a pro-Trump super PAC that Bekah Mercer runs, largely owns Cambridge Analytica, and encouraged the Trump campaign to incorporate the company’s services into its operations. The company, which is the U.S. subsidiary of the British intelligence firm SCL Group, specializes in building “psychographic profiles” of voters. It has been retained by a number of campaigns and committees backed by the Mercers in recent years, including that of Trump’s rival in the GOP primary Ted Cruz. Cruz's campaign paid the firm $5.8 million for everything from polling to digital advertising to voter and donor modeling, according to Federal Election Commission filings, which show that the company was paid another $675,000 by a Mercer-funded super PAC supporting Cruz. Soon after Cruz dropped out of the race, however, the Mercers switched their support to Trump, and began encouraging the campaign to use Cambridge Analytica. FEC filings show that the Trump campaign in July and August paid the company $350,000 for data management. But campaign sources say the company is providing a broad array of services to the campaign, both out of the campaign’s roughly 60-person data, digital and technology operation in San Antonio and, to a lesser extent, in the campaign’s Manhattan headquarters. Additionally, sources familiar with the company said that its board includes Trump campaign chief executive Steve Bannon, whose addition to the campaign was encouraged by Bekah Mercer. Campaign sources say Bannon is participating in the debate preparation sessions, as is campaign manager Kellyanne Conway, another Mercer ally whose hiring Bekah Mercer encouraged. Bannon and Cambridge Analytica declined to comment for this story, while Conway and a Mercer family spokesman did not respond to requests for comment. But a Republican strategist who is close to the campaign said the Mercers are “attempting to bring order to the campaign and debate prep.”
Bloomberg TV will conduct on-screen fact checks of statements made by both Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton during Monday night’s debate, POLITICO has confirmed. The channel’s decision to conduct an on-screen fact-check sets Bloomberg apart from the other major TV networks, none of whom have committed to doing on-screen fact checks during the debate. Most will leave the fact-checking to segments in the post-debate analysis coverage. Clinton’s supporters have called for aggressive fact-checking during Monday’s debate, saying that members of the media have failed to adequately fact-check and correct falsehoods from her Republican rival. NBC’s Matt Lauer was recently criticized for not correcting several false statements from Trump during a presidential forum on the network. Spokespeople for the networks told POLITICO that on-screen fact checks would be hard to execute in real-time, which is why they were opting out. That leaves the real-time fact-checking up to NBC’s Lester Holt, the debate moderator, or the candidates themselves. Several other news organizations, including NPR, have said they will conduct fact-checks of the debate online and in their post-debate analyses. Hadas Gold contributed reporting to this post. This story has been updated to reflect that fact checking will be up Holt, or the candidates. The original text was due to an editing error.
(CNN)Even though Donald Trump has said he does not exercise, his supporters can still break a sweat in campaign style. The Republican presidential nominee's campaign is offering a "Make America Great Again" sweatband in exchange for a campaign donation. This comes just a week after Trump told Dr. Mehmet Oz he doesn't actually exercise, and ultimately wants to lose 15 pounds. The Trump campaign sent out an email Wednesday morning, encouraging supporters to "stay healthy with Trump" in light of last week's medical record release. "We need a president in good health, and the results of Donald Trump's latest physical show he is ready to lead," the email reads. A link allows supporters to "commit to be healthy too" by ordering their official sweatband, which starts at $12. Trump's also known for having fast food delivered to his plane after events, tweeting out a picture of him last month eating KFC on his plane (with silverware). But despite the lack of exercise and high consumption of fast food, Trump's doctor has said in the past that if elected, Trump would be "healthiest individual ever elected to the presidency." The Trump campaign declined to comment on whether the Republican nominee planned to wear the sweatband on the trail, just as he's done with his "Make America Great Again" hat. 
Boise, Idaho (CNN)Donald Trump Jr. said Thursday he was surprised by the reaction to his tweet comparing Syrian refugees to Skittles because he was "trying to point out things that have to be said." "People will today make what they want of anything and they see the worst in everything and they look for subtext that doesn't exist," Trump told reporters after a fundraiser here. "For me, I guess I'm a straightforward guy. I don't deal in microagression, where it takes a special kind of person to find whatever message they're looking for." The tweet -- which consisted of a photo of a bowl full of the candy that said: "If I had a bowl of skittles and I told you just three would kill you. Would you take a handful? That's our Syrian refugee problem." -- took center stage on the campaign trail earlier this week. A top aide to Hillary Clinton called it "disgusting" and Clinton supporters attacking the comparison as crass and inhumane. But Trump supporters -- and the Trump campaign itself -- have repeatedly defended Trump and the tweet. Mars, which produces Skittles, rejected the comparison in a statement, saying, "Skittles are candy. Refugees are people. We don't feel it's an appropriate analogy." Trump said he didn't "want to be a distraction" to the campaign, but that the negative response was being driven by partisan attacks. "I understand that running as conservative, there is a different standard," he said. "If a metaphor offends someone then maybe that's the world in which we live today, but I'm not comparing someone to candy," Trump said. "It's a statistical thing. We have to be careful about who we let into this country." But the statistics don't actually back up the contention made in the tweet. According to a recent Cato Institute report, the odds "that an American would be killed in a terrorist attack committed by a refugee was 1 in 3.64 billion a year." Still, Trump said Thursday that it was his broader point was what mattered and that it was part of a discussion that needed to be had and one that tracked closely with the key components of his father's campaign strategy. "He's created some good dialogue that needed to be had that wasn't being had because PC culture sort of forced real issues off of the table," Trump said of his father's campaign. "The way he's been able to approach that and do that has forced people to actually have a dialogue and that's what this country is about, having that dialogue." That dialogue -- about race, about refugees and about immigrants -- has been harshly criticized by Clinton and Trump detractors as racist, but Trump countered that it has been the driving force behind Trump's success. "We're not a country where everything has to be in a safe space," Trump said. "That's not what built this country, that's not what made this country great and that's why my father is resonating so well with working class, hard-working Americans. He's giving them a voice again." 
Steve Burke, the CEO of NBCUniversal, praised NBC Nightly News anchor Lester Holt for his performance moderating Monday night’s presidential debate between Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump. Speaking at the Royal Television Society Conference in London Tuesday, Burke said that Holt “ended up doing a very good job” moderating the debate, according to Deadline. “The environment is so tough right now for anybody moderating anything to try and make sure that it’s a fair debate,” Burke said, adding that he and other NBCU brass were “very worried and concerned for Lester” before the debate began. Burke also estimated that the contentious debate may have been watched by 100 million viewers in the U.S., according to Comcast set-top box data that showed about 35% if U.S. households tuning in. Holt received mixed reactions for moderating the debate between Clinton and Trump, during which he mostly let the candidates hash out the issues without his interference. Trump initially praised Holt for his performance, but by Tuesday morning, he and his surrogates said that Holt unfairly asked Trump “hostile questions” and was not critical enough of Clinton.
When it comes to the Trump campaign's allegations of "inaccuracies and omissions" against a Washington Post story, running mate Mike Pence struggled late Tuesday night to account for specific examples. Appearing on MSNBC's "The 11th Hour with Brian Williams" after an evening rally in Williamsburg, Virginia, the Indiana governor backed up the Trump campaign's statement against the Post's reporting earlier in the day that Donald Trump spent $258,000 from his charitable foundation to settle legal issues. Story Continued Below "Well, I think what we found is that there is a number of factual errors in that story as there were in previous stories about the Trump Foundation. I'm confident they'll be able to address those and demonstrate that they fully complied with the law," Pence told Brian Williams, adding that the "larger issue" is the Clinton Foundation. Williams tried to button up the issue, pressing Pence specifically for "what the factual errors are that the campaign is alleging" from the latest Post story. "Well, I think the foundation will be able to lay those out. There were errors in the previous Washington Post stories, and, you know, look, you know me a while, Brian. I strongly support a free and independent press. People are entitled to ask questions, and I'm sure the Trump Foundation and the Trump family will continue to be able to answer those questions." Pence's comments and the Trump campaign statement came hours after the latest article from the Post into the Republican nominee's charitable foundation.
(CNN)A six-year-old boy from New York has won the respect of US President Barack Obama and thousands of others after he offered to take in Omran Daqneesh, a little boy who was injured after his home in Aleppo, Syria, was bombed. The image of five-year-old Omran sat alone in an ambulance, covered in dust and blood, shocked the world and inspired six-year-old Alex, from Scarsdale, New York, to take action. In a handwritten letter sent to the White House, Alex asked Obama to go and collect Omran and bring him to his house where "we will be waiting for you guys with flags, flowers, and balloons." Alex said that Omran could be part of his family, and offered to be his brother. He said he would teach him how to speak English, to ride a bike and added that his sister Catherine would share her toys with him. Obama read Alex's words aloud in a speech he gave at the United Nations earlier this week, before posting a video of Alex reading the letter himself to Facebook. In his message, Obama asked people to read the letter to "understand why he had decided to share it with the world." "Those are the words of a six-year-old boy -- a young child who has not learned to be cynical, or suspicious, or fearful of other people because of where they come from, how they look, or how they pray," the President wrote. "We should all be more like Alex. Imagine what the world would look like if we were," he added. READ MORE: Omran, a vivid reminder of war's horror At the time of writing the post has collected more than 100,000 "likes" and been shared more than 60,000 times, with many Facebook users praising the compassion shown by Alex. One Facebook user wrote: "A six-year-old who has more humanity, love, and understanding than most adults. Kudos to his parents and I know the world will see more great things coming from Alex." Another added: "I heard this earlier today, as read by my president. Even with that pre-conditioning, made me cry while reading it just now. Neither of these sweet little boys, someone's sons, are Skittles." Donald Trump Jr., the son of the Republican presidential nominee, sparked controversy Monday when he compared Syrian refugees to a bowl of Skittles candies. 
There is a moment at every Donald Trump rally when Donald Trump marvels at the crazy spectacle he’s created. “Is there any place in America as fun as a Donald Trump rally?” he asks with a mischievous pursed-lip grin. The moment always comes after a protester tries to interrupt him, only to be drowned out by an arena full of rowdy white people screaming “TRUMP! TRUMP! TRUMP!” That’s the fun part, the joint release of pent-up fury by thousands of proudly politically incorrect Americans. When you experience it in person, you can feel their catharsis as they vent at the whiners and moochers and Mexicans and Muslims taking over their country, gleefully defying the scolds who call them racist and rude for respecting the police and saying Merry Christmas. “Donald Trump has singlehandedly untied our tongues,” a chain-saw artist named Chris Cox, the founder of Bikers 4 Trump, told me at a recent Pensacola rally. Story Continued Below When Trump fans are asked about his appeal, the first thing they usually say is that he isn’t a normal politician. And his rambling, fear-mongering, name-calling public speeches, no matter how hard his new handlers try to keep him on his new teleprompter, do not feel like normal political events. They feel like Wrestlemania with a different kind of hero and a different kind of performance art. They feel like revival meetings for the Donald J. Trump Church of Cultural Resentment, with ritual denunciations of Crooked Hillary Clinton, Barack Obama—“We call him President Obama, because we have to treat him with respect, right?”—and other enemies of the congregation. At a time when Americans say they’re tired of politics as usual, Trump offers politics as deeply, often disturbingly, always unapologetically, unusual. His opponent does not. Clinton’s events feel exactly like normal political events. She may be the world’s most famous and polarizing woman, but she’s running an almost generic Democratic campaign, politics as very usual. Tonight, Hillary Clinton will take on Donald Trump in perhaps the most anticipated presidential debate ever, a rhetorical clash of two candidates with diametrically opposed life histories, policy agendas, and bases of support. But their contrasting records and ideas haven’t been the defining divides of this strange political year. What 2016 is really about is conventional versus not. And no matter what happens tonight, when you spend time at their diametrically opposed events, you’re constantly reminded that what makes this year so abnormal is Trump. He is violating all the rules of the political game—rules that promote pandering and artifice as well as rules that promote transparency and decency—and when 2016 is over, it’s not clear whether those rules will still apply. Whatever you think of Clinton, she tends to observe polite-society political traditions, which is why her events would feel familiar to anyone who’s attended a modern campaign stop. The backdrops are decorated with red-white-and-blue bunting and talking-point slogans like “Love Trumps Hate” or “Stronger Together.” The small venues are selected to target niche groups—millennials last week at Temple University in Philadelphia, the disabled a few days later at a family outreach center in Orlando—and the crowds are carefully curated to avoid protests or other surprises. The speeches are standard campaign fare, dotted with wonky statistics and real-person anecdotes to buttress well-researched policy proposals. The candidate, as she has for nearly four decades in public life, sticks to her prepared text. Her audiences are supportive, though not particularly emotive. “I thought it was very substantial, very specific,” Glenn McCoy, an adult educator at a Catholic church who wore a “Hil Yes!” pin to Clinton’s speech about supporting disabled workers in Orlando. “The purpose wasn’t to whip the crowd into a frenzy. We’re not looking to choose a president based on emotion.” Clinton had better hope not. There’s electricity at Trump rallies that hers can’t match. It’s no coincidence that cable news often ignores her speeches to carry the Trump shows live. His crowds wait with giddy anticipation for him to name and shame enemies, like NASCAR fans waiting for wrecks, and they explode when he calls out the dishonest media, the job-stealing Chinese, the PC sensitivity snobs who think you’re prejudiced if you want to keep illegal immigrants and Islamic terrorists out of the country. It’s entertaining to watch him violate norms, declaring Clinton lacks the stamina to be president, suggesting her security detail ought to disarm, warning the election will probably be rigged. He flings out absurd claims about the skewing of the unemployment rate, the savagery of inner cities, even the temperature at his rallies. (“It’s 100 degrees in here. And that’s considered cool for an auditorium.”) He casually drops one outlandish bombshell—the Federal Reserve is corrupt, the FBI is covering up for Clinton, NAFTA was the worst deal in the history of the world—then moves onto another before the last fully explodes. Clinton doesn’t do that. Whatever one thinks about her email protocols or Benghazi or her penchant for secrecy, she campaigns like a typical candidate. She has the strengths and weaknesses of a typical public servant, and takes typical measures to try to frame them for the public. Her problem is that Trump’s unique combination of insult comedy and monster-truck rally, despite the flagrant abuse of facts and unsettling whiff of menace, is exposing the focus-grouped, stage-managed, paint-by-numbers nature of typical candidacies. Clinton isn’t getting a lot of credit for following the rules of a game that always seemed inauthentic. Nobody understands that better than the political savant named Donald J. Trump. He tells a lot of straight-faced falsehoods about Clinton’s campaign, like his accusations that it’s “policy-free,” when he used to mock it for churning otut too many policy proposals, and when Trump himself recently laid off much of his policy shop. But there’s something to his caricature of Clinton events as the lackluster politics of yesteryear. At a rally in Miami, he did a sly imitation of Clinton's speeches—he claimed with faux specificity that they're only 18 minutes, when they're usually twice that long—with a bored expression that suggested she just phones them in. “Bom. Bom. Bom. See ya!” Trump smirked. “See ya! I’m going home.” Many Americans really do seem sick of Bom-Bom-Bom-See-Ya politics. But the live experience of Trump’s say-anything middle-finger alternative can be a bracing advertisement for the mundane traditions he’s shredding every day. *** Before attending a recent Trump rally in Pensacola, I watched a video of his last rally there during the Republican primary in January. At the time, the news from the event had been his I’m-just-saying speculation that questions about Ted Cruz’s citizenship might be disqualifying. But starting with the Star Spangled Banner, performed by a kids group that later sued Trump for breach of contract, the entire rally seemed like a trip through the looking glass to an alternative political planet. Trump spent the first 10 minutes of his hourlong soliloquy bashing the “bad, dishonest, very bad people” in the media for failing to show the public the size of his crowds, a theme he revisited three more times. He criticized a U.S. soldier for using the word “sir” to address the Iranians who briefly captured him. He advised Americans to take their money out of the stock market, which he described as “a big fat bubble,” and predicted a collapse that would be “beautiful to watch.” He gleefully pointed out a black man in the stands: “I didn’t put him there! I’m not paying him!” He read a long poem about a deadly snake that was supposed to show the danger of Syrian refugees, called himself “more militaristic than anyone in this room,” complained that Common Core education bureaucrats make $400,000 a year—actually the president’s salary—and announced the American Dream was dead. Oh, he also unleashed a diatribe about incompetent contractors and staff after his microphone crackled. “Whoever the hell brought this mic system—don’t pay the son of a bitch!” he seethed. “Don’t pay em. Don’t pay em. You know, I believe in paying, but when somebody does a bad job, like this stupid mic, you shouldn’t pay the bastard. Terrible. You gotta be tough with your people, because they’ll pay, they don’t care. So we’re not going to pay. I guarantee, I’m not paying for this mic.” So I was ready for more theater of the bizarre when Trump returned eight months later to Pensacola’s 12,000-seat arena, which was once again packed to capacity. Vendors sold Trump That Bitch t-shirts and Trump 2016 Confederate flags. The pastor giving the invocation shouted: “Tyranny has raised its ugly head! Our constitution is under attack!” The crowd started chanting “LOCK HER UP!” before Trump even appeared. He then took the stage to a tremendous roar, and…well, to be honest, he seemed a lot less provocative than I had expected. “He’s freeing up our speech,” said one Trump supporter. “We can talk about the Muslim invasion. We can be against amnesty… Maybe we’ll be able to say Merry Christmas again.” Trump was now using a teleprompter, which he had derided as a tool of inauthenticity in January, and while he used it more as a guideline than a script, it was still jarring to hear him regurgitate staff-written clichés and Republican talking points about “encrusted insiders” and “turning the page.” He said the kind of things regular politicians say: “The history books are closing on the failed politicians of yesterday.” And: “Once again, we’ll have a government of, by, and for the people.” He even recited the monotonous details of a military investment plan a conservative think tank had prepared for him, name-checking new naval vessels in a town with a naval base. The crowd was noisier and angrier than a normal political crowd—during one Trump riff about lifting minorities out of poverty, a supporter in a red-white-and-blue trucker hat screamed: “What about white people?”—but the rally still felt at least quasi-normal. Trump did repeat a few of his radical proposals that remain astounding when you think about them, like a 35 percent tax on imports and his Mexico-financed wall—but really, who still thinks about them? Afterwards, though, I saw a breaking story about an offhand comment Trump had made warning that if Iranian sailors ever made rude gestures at Americans when he was president, as they apparently had during a minor incident a few weeks earlier, their ships would be blown out of the water. Trump had essentially threatened to launch World War 3, and I hadn’t noticed. Back at my hotel, I checked my notes and was reminded that he had also literally accused Clinton of causing “all the problems in the world,” including North Korean nuclear tests that began under George W. Bush. He had mused that “personally, I think she’s an unstable person,” and complained that she could walk into the arena and shoot someone “right smack in the middle of the heart—and she wouldn’t be prosecuted, OK?” He had denied cozying up to Russian dictator Vladimir Putin—and then he had cozied up again: “He’s been nice to me, and if he’s nice to me, that’s fine. If we got along with Russia, that wouldn’t be so bad, would it?” And at a time of low unemployment, cheap gas, and new data showing that wages grew and poverty shrunk in 2015 at the fastest rate in decades, Trump had flatly declared that “the country is collapsing.” Those all would have been jaw-dropping statements during any other campaign from any other candidate, but the Year of Trump has desensitized many of us to his rapid-fire transgressions. We’re normalizing the unprecedented. At a rally a few days later in Asheville, N.C., Trump called the U.S. military “incredibly weak,” defended a male spectator who roughed up a 68-year-old female protester, and said the black community—which endured slavery and Jim Crow—was “in the worst shape they’ve ever been. Ever! Ever! Ever!” Yet the main Trump story from the Associated Press focused on how he had refrained from attacking Clinton over her bout with pneumonia, under the headline “Restraint on Clinton Health Shows New Campaign Discipline.” Predictably, Trump mocked Clinton’s health problems later in the week, suggesting she needed more sleep, warning she didn’t have enough energy to handle the rigors of the White House, falsely claiming he was holding four rallies a day and then just as falsely claiming she couldn’t make it through one. That sort of behavior just hasn’t been seen on the presidential campaign trail. But it’s that defiant you-can’t-tell-me-what-I’m-supposed-to-say spirit that Trump loyalists love. “He’s not a politician. Nobody controls him. A lot of us are tired of worrying about people’s feelings, always watching our P’s and Q’s, so it’s cool to see him speak his mind,” said Alan Smith, a 43-year-old firefighter from nearby Gulf Breeze who recently retired on his municipal pension. Bill Turpin, a retired Army veteran from Brayton, Iowa, told me at a Trump rally outside Des Moines that while Clinton is a classic politician for whom lying is like breathing—he doesn’t even believe the official story about her health, because he fainted once, and he didn’t stumble around like she did on the video—Trump is a businessman with nothing to fear: “He’ll call a spade a spade, and if you don’t like it you can shove it.” Again and again, Trump supporters told me they appreciated the way he was fighting the forces of political correctness, standing up for their right to primal-scream what they believe about immigrants and terrorists and Black Lives Matter thugs. “He’s freeing up our speech,” said Norris Westfall, an auto detailer who wore an Infowars Liberty or Death t-shirt to a recent Trump rally in Asheville, N.C. “We can talk about the Muslim invasion. We can be against amnesty without everyone saying we’re offensive. Maybe we’ll be able to say Merry Christmas again.” It’s fashionable to attribute the Trump phenomenon to economic anxiety, but the Trump voters I interviewed at four separate rallies almost never mentioned it, unless complaints that the undocumented are getting jobs and welfare benefits counts as economic anxiety. They seemed less anxious about the state of the Obama economy than the rise of the multicultural Obama coalition, and they seemed less anxious than pissed off—at a president many of them still consider a foreign usurper, at thought leaders more worried about Islamophobia than Islamic terror, at racial guilt-trippers who demonize cops while ignoring black-on-black crime. In Asheville, I watched an Air Force veteran named Gary Latham explode at some anti-Trump protesters who were chanting that they didn’t want hate in their state: “Lazy motherfuckers! Get a fucking job!” He explained to me that America was under siege, with “thousands of Syrian refugees embedded in western Carolina,” and that he was proud to be one of the vigilant Americans Clinton considered “deplorable.” The Trump voters I interviewed seemed less anxious about the Obama economy than the rise of the multicultural Obama coalition—and they seemed less anxious than pissed off. One of the speakers before Trump took the stage in Asheville was a white-haired lady who owns a custom frame shop and serves in the state legislature. She used the opportunity to proclaim: “We want our state rights back!” “We’re sick of the same old racism crap getting shoveled down our throats,” says Kim Buckner, a nursing assistant who wore a Don’t Tread on Me pin to the Asheville rally. “Trump is saying what we’re all thinking: ‘Screw you! Call us deplorable all you want! Our rights don’t end where your feelings begin!’” Trump echoes those anti-anti-racism tropes, describing accusations of racism as “the oldest play in the Democratic playbook.” And he’s begun regaling his white audiences with increasingly lurid descriptions of inner-city life, arguing that it’s so hellish blacks might as well vote Trump: “I’ll say it openly, and some people don’t like it, I don’t really care: What do you have to lose?” His long riffs about how he’ll fix neighborhoods so awful that blacks can’t walk down the street without getting shot have been described as outreach to non-racist whites, but in person, they feel much more like creepy concern-trolling for the benefit of jeering Trump fans who want to believe that blacks live like animals. When Trump claims that black youths don’t get an education and have an unemployment rate of 58 percent—the real rate is about one third of that—he’s fueling the kind of ugly stereotypes found all over the white-supremacy sites he retweets every now and then. The Trump supporters I interviewed seemed much less interested in supporting inner-city blacks than criticizing their lifestyles, bemoaning their dependence on government, and blaming their president. Polls show that most Trump supporters still think Obama was born in Kenya—and many I spoke to believe he’s also a Muslim who supports ISIS. One notable exception was Richard Cohen, a Jewish contractor who attended the rally in Asheville. Cohen told me Trump is pandering to racism, anti-Semitism, and fear of Hispanics among his supporters; he said a white friend with two adopted black sons left an earlier Trump event after hearing spectators yell the N-word. But Cohen supports Trump anyway, because he likes the idea of shaking up the timid, finger-in-the-wind political establishment. “A lot of us who like him don’t like the stuff he says about race,” Cohen said. “Obviously, some do.” This really isn’t normal. And while Clinton is an unlikely poster child for normal—a First Lady whose husband was impeached after cheating on her with an intern, a Secretary of State who agreed to serve the younger man who foiled her own presidential dreams—she presents herself on the trail as a dedicated but ordinary public servant who happens to be the alternative to a bigoted freak. I remember watching her execute a similar strategy in 2000 when she ran for a Senate seat in New York even though she had never lived in the state or pursued public office, even though her husband was still in the White House after his tabloid scandal had transfixed the nation. She simply ignored the weirdness of it all, running as a standard-issue Democrat in a Democratic state, diligently discussing dairy policy and upstate development as if nothing else mattered. And against a basically normal Republican candidate, it worked. A majority of New Yorkers agreed with her agenda, and sent her to the Senate to pursue it. In 2016, though, Clinton has struggled to make a case for normal. She’s tried to push a standard-issue Democratic agenda, but in the Year of Trump, the race hasn’t been about standard anything. *** Nearly one of every five Americans lives with a disability, and just about everyone else wishes them the best. So Clinton’s Orlando speech about valuing their work made sense politically as well as morally, as an expression of her commitment to helping the vulnerable and creating an “Inclusive Economy,” to quote the clunky slogan behind her podium. In the I-4 corridor that constitutes the swingiest region of the swingiest state, Clinton spoke to 300 supporters—a much smaller crowd than Trump regularly attracts, but far more diverse—about her goal of an America that recognizes the humanity and supports the potential of all its citizens. She also laid out a four-part plan her policy team had devised to help more disabled Americans flourish in the economy. Just two months before Election Day, the speech was designed to illustrate Clinton’s concern about a worthy issue. It did that, more or less. Afterwards, her supporters praised her seriousness of purpose, her depth of knowledge, her willingness to listen. Nobody mentioned eloquence or flair, but her people understand that she never hosted a reality show. “I thought it was a nice speech,” Lewis Smith, a retired mechanic in Orlando, told me afterwards. “Not very exciting, but I believe she’ll do what she says.” The speech started slowly, as Clinton spent nearly the first half on shoutouts to key supporters, a few made-for-TV soundbites about the riots in Charlotte, and an abridged version of her broader stump speech about an economy that works for everyone. Her speechwriters clearly cut-and-pasted in some of her standard lines about her middle-class origins, her support for family-friendly policies like paid leave, and a plug for her new book of campaign proposals about everything from Alzheimer’s disease to campus sexual assault to small business incubators. The rest of the speech was dedicated to the proposition that Clinton is committed to promoting the talents and dreams of disabled Americans who have been undervalued by society for too long. It was a nice sentiment, expressed through the kind of political saccharine that sends viewers scurrying for the remote control: “Across the country, people with disabilities are running businesses, teaching students, caring for our loved ones. They’re holding public office, making breakthrough scientific discoveries, reporting the news, and creating art that inspires and challenges us.” Maybe some disabled Americans create uninspiring art, but not in Hillary Clinton speeches. “In the United States of America, the greatest country in the world, we believe that everyone is created equal,” Clinton said. This kind of boilerplate scores a lot higher in truth value than in news value. Clinton did talk about her own work with the disabled, from her push for their right to attend school as a young Children’s Defense Fund lawyer to her appointment of the State Department’s first-ever advisor for disability rights. She mentioned disabled people she’s known—including the “unbelievably good-looking” actor Christopher Reeve, who told her that “family values” should mean that every family has value—and her discussions with advocates who said they want paychecks rather than pity. She then detailed her plan, which, while infinitely more substantive than anything Trump has ever said about disabilities, was mostly placeholders about partnering with schools and businesses, plus an elimination of the “sub-minimum wage” that is currently paid to some disabled workers. The audience responded with warmth, if not exuberance. But I must confess that after watching Trump claim Obamacare deductibles were so high you need to die a “really slow, vicious death” to exhaust them, accuse the Federal Reserve and the Justice Department of corruption, and tell his supporters he doesn’t feel bad if they’re working harder than ever because he is too, Clinton’s scripted remarks seemed noticeably dull. She gave a laudable and sensible political speech on an overlooked topic, but it felt like a political speech, a combination of virtue signaling and interest-group outreach. Cable covered a Trump rally instead, and was rewarded when boxing promoter Don King dropped an N-bomb in his introduction. There was nothing controversial or unpredictable in Clinton’s remarks; they mostly proved that she and her team had done their homework, and that unlike Trump, who talks mostly about himself, she knows enough to portray herself as part of a team. She didn’t even mention Trump’s reprehensible imitation of a disabled reporter, because she wanted a more positive message that day. She was careful to say nothing impolitic, which is, basically, politics. Geannie Bastian, a student with cerebral palsy, said her political awakening came when Trump made fun of that reporter. “Believe me, I’ve seen that gesture a lot, but before it was always from children,” she said. “Trump is every playground bully every disabled kid ever knew.” In fairness to Clinton, there was a portion of the audience that seemed genuinely touched: The disabled and their families. Joe Kilsheimer, the mayor of a central Florida suburb, has a younger brother who was written off by doctors as a hopeless case when he was a baby, but went on to become the first Eagle Scout with Down’s Syndrome and lead a productive life. “What Hillary said about an inclusive economy really hit home,” Kilsheimer said. “I know a lot of people don’t trust her, because they see her filtered through politics and media, but she’s got heart.” Geannie Bastian, a University of Central Florida film student with cerebral palsy who gets around in a wheelchair, said she was moved by Clinton’s message that people like her matter and deserve to fulfill their potential. But she said her real political awakening came when Trump made fun of that reporter, whose hand looks quite similar to hers. “Believe me, I’ve seen that gesture a lot, but before it was always from children,” she said. “Trump is every playground bully every disabled kid ever knew.” Political scientists disagree about the importance of enthusiasm; voters only get to vote once, no matter how fired up they are, but they’re less likely to turn out to vote if they aren’t fired up. In any case, even at her own events, it’s a lot easier to find voters fired up to vote against the outrageousness of Trump than it is to find avid Clinton fans. Voters of color seem especially riled. I repeatedly heard from black Democrats offended by Trump’s crusade to deny that the first African-American president was American, and his stereotypes of their families as desperate charity cases with nothing to lose. “My daughter has a doctorate. Her husband is an orthodontist. We’ve got plenty to lose,” said Betty Edwards, a retired educator in the Orlando suburbs. “There’s never been a candidate who thought so little of us.” Many Hispanics are similarly energized by Trump’s calls for mass deportations and a wall, sensing not just honest disagreements over immigration policy but a broader push to make them feel like strangers in their own country. Andy Gutierrez, a singer and Puerto Rican voting activist who brought a Boricua Vota sign to the Orlando event, says Trump has been a one-man registration machine. “He thinks we’re all Mexicans, and we’re all bad,” Gutierrez said. “People aren’t super-excited about Hillary, but trust me, they’ll come out to stop Trump.” Clinton’s excitement problem is a real problem. At her university event in Philadelphia, millennials who had swooned over Bernie Sanders kept talking about her in the milquetoast terms they might use to describe a reasonably reliable accountant. “She’s OK, I guess,” said Thomas Davidenko, a freshman at Temple. “My main worry is Trump’s fingers on the nuclear code. But I’d say she knows what she’s doing.” In Orlando, I met more actual Clinton fans, especially older women who admired her as a feminist trailblazer, but even her staunch supporters said they’re struggling to persuade friends. Lou Smith, a union cell-tower technician for AT&T, said many of his Arab-hating white colleagues at work think she’s a typical lying politician, so they’re voting for Trump—and her Bernie-loving daughters think the same thing, so they’re staying home. “She’s been around so long, and Republicans have thrown so much mud on her,” he said. “She’s great on the issues, but it’s hard to get people to focus on that.” Clinton is a policy wonk, and one could imagine that a more normal campaign against a more normal Republican would have been closer to her wheelhouse. She could have focused on taxes and health insurance, climate change and diplomacy. She might have framed the election as the Democratic bottom-up approach that produced prosperity during her husband’s administration and recovery during Obama’s with the trickle-down philosophy that ended in economic collapse under Bush. “When Bill Clinton was in the chair, everybody was doing great, and then everything fell apart before Obama fixed it,” said Jeneka Lloyd, who owns a small painting business in Orlando. “Man, Hillary should talk about that.” But Trump is not a normal Republican, and 2016 hasn’t focused on his policies, because they’re so insubstantial and flexible, because he’s trashed Bush as well as Obama, because he has a gift for changing the subject with colorful Fox News interviews or incendiary tweets, and because his business record, charity scams and racial provocations provide such a target-rich environment beyond the issues. It’s a lot harder to persuade Americans of the magical thinking behind Trump’s plan to erase the national debt while expanding the military and slashing taxes than it is to attack him for denigrating a Gold Star family, looting his own charitable foundation, refusing to release his tax returns, and other unheard-of behavior. Meanwhile, the media have balanced the narrative with scandal coverage of her sketchy email situation and her own foundation. Her approval ratings have dropped lower than any modern major-party presidential nominee with the lone exception of Donald Trump. So Clinton has ended up in the proverbial mud-wrestling match with a pig. They’ve both gotten dirty. And neither she nor the public has liked it. *** Tonight on Long Island, Trump and Clinton will meet in a very conventional setting. And as usual, no one really has any idea how Trump will try to handle it, which is a big part of what makes him so compelling on television. His team is already warning moderator Lester Holt not to fact-check the candidates, which makes sense, given Trump’s distant relationship with facts. There will be rules governing the debate, but Trump’s political brand is all about breaking the rules. What is clear is that Trump will portray himself as the candidate of change, which is exactly what he is. He essentially wants to roll back the Obama era, repealing the president’s health care reforms, Wall Street reforms and climate rules, as well as the Obama approach to the economy and the war on terror. But Trump represents just as dramatic a change from the way politics has been practiced in the TV era, upending every assumption about what is a gaffe, what is disqualifying and what you just can’t say if you want to sit in the Oval Office and represent an entire nation. If he uses tonight’s debate to brag about his genitalia, or invite the Russians to hack his opponent, well, it won’t be normal, but it won’t be the first time, either. And yes, even though she’s unlikely to put it this way, Clinton represents the status quo—not just a continuation of Democratic policies, but a continuation of the conventional rules of politics. She’s playing the same classical music that previous candidates always played, and it wouldn’t feel so stilted if her opponent hadn’t started playing experimental honky-tonk. The question for 2016 is whether Americans are so disgusted with politics as usual that they’ll turn to the politics of Trump. That question will be decided not by the thousands of Americans who flock to Trump rallies or the hundreds who get invited to see Clinton, but by the millions who will tune in tonight even though they would never attend a political event. But the question beyond 2016 is what will happen to politics as usual. Americans never liked it, and Trump has helped expose how cautious, contrived, and anodyne it can be. But he has also helped remind those of us who have complained about it for a living that if caution, restraint, premeditated choreography, and other hallmarks of traditional campaigning aren’t the most authentic elements of successful political leadership, they’re part of it. And while politics as usual does have some bogus Kabuki theater qualities, it also reflects some baseline values—showing basic respect to political opponents and people who aren’t like you, staying at least close to the boundaries of plausible facts, recognizing that the things leaders say and do and tweet can have serious consequences—that have constrained politicians in a good way. It’s not clear whether it will be possible to put the norms Trump has shattered back together, and while we may not have liked them, we might miss them when they’re gone. Not many of us would be better at our jobs if we felt unrestrained from saying whatever popped into our head whenever we wanted. And Trump just may have untied the tongues of the politicians of the future.
Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell delayed a procedural vote on a must-pass government spending measure Monday as top lawmakers remained at odds over a handful of provisions in the bill, even with a months-long impasse over Zika funding largely resolved. The key vote is now scheduled for 2:15 p.m. Tuesday, McConnell said — giving negotiators more time to hammer out the fine print of the continuing resolution that will keep the federal government funded until Dec. 9. For now, however, sources said negotiators have settled on language that would provide money to battle the Zika virus while allowing Planned Parenthood’s partner clinic in Puerto Rico to access the federal grants — a provision that had been a major point of contention. Story Continued Below “Senate Republicans stand ready to move forward,” McConnell (R-Ky.) said Monday. “I would encourage our colleagues across the aisle to complete negotiations so we can advance this important matter.” McConnell spent about five minutes huddling with Senate Minority Leader Harry Reid (D-Nev.) on Monday afternoon as they sought to strike a deal that would allow the Senate to recess as soon as the end of the week. But the tentative resolution on Zika funding sets aside, for now, one of the toughest sticking points in the short-term spending measure. Senate Democrats had repeatedly filibustered a standalone Zika bill over restrictions that barred Planned Parenthood — particularly Profamilias, the health care provider’s partner in Puerto Rico — from the federal funds. But in the CR, the Puerto Rico clinic would have access to the money, which would come through a $95 million social services block grant in a broader $1.1 billion Zika package, multiple sources said. Language in the emerging deal does not specify which providers are eligible or ineligible for funding, skirting a political landmine that’s delayed Zika aid for months. Despite the breakthrough on emergency funding for the battle against the mosquito-borne disease, several wrinkles remain in the continuing negotiations. In a brief interview Monday morning, Reid said “no” when asked whether there would be a deal on government funding later in the day. “Close is relative,” Reid responded when asked whether an agreement was within reach. For instance, funding for the water crisis in Flint, Michigan, continues to be in the mix. Democrats on both ends of the Capitol have lobbied for Flint funds to be included in the government spending package, in particular the aid package included in a Senate water resources bill. But Republicans have similar demands: additional funding for flood-stricken Louisiana in the short-term spending measure. Both issues remained unresolved as of Monday evening, although senior Senate Democrats suggested they wouldn’t accept flood aid without also getting money for Flint. Congressional leaders are also still hashing out how to pay for the Zika funding package. “Louisiana is not resolved because [Republicans] want to do Louisiana, we want to do Flint,” Sen. Chuck Schumer (D-N.Y.) told reporters Monday evening. “They don’t want to do Flint.” Another issue that remains up in the air is a potential delay in the Obama administration’s proposal to hand over the U.S. government’s authority over the Internet domain system to an international body on Oct. 1 — a push that’s being led by Texas Sen. Ted Cruz and a host of other Republican lawmakers. If no deference is paid to Cruz and those lawmakers, the spending bill could turn into an internecine fight among Republicans — even with some pushback on the provision from Democrats. “This is the coordination of the domain names. It’s not who has control of the Internet,” Florida Sen. Bill Nelson, the top Democrat on the committee with jurisdiction over the issue, said Monday. “And every institution, nationally and internationally, have all said that this is the appropriate thing to do.” Meanwhile, Democrats want to include language restoring the ability of the Export-Import Bank to finance projects greater than $10 million — which it hasn’t been able to do because three of the five seats on the bank’s board are vacant. The Ex-Im issue is similarly toxic among Republicans, making it a difficult matter to take up ahead of an election. There are other items that could fill up the Senate’s legislative calendar this week before lawmakers return home until the November elections. Sens. Chris Murphy (D-Conn.) and Rand Paul (R-Ky.) plan to force a Senate vote to block a $1.15 billion arms sale to Saudi Arabia that the Obama administration announced last month. Senate Majority Whip John Cornyn (R-Texas) said the exact timing of that vote was unclear, particularly because he would like to have the government funding measure resolved before moving on to other issues. Cornyn would also like to pair the arms sale vote with a roll call to formally override an expected veto by President Barack Obama of legislation that would allow family members of victims of the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorism attacks to sue the government of Saudi Arabia. Though Obama has not yet vetoed the measure, he has until Friday to do so. Republicans — who are eager to return home to campaign for reelection, particularly with control of the Senate in the balance — privately believe Democrats will try to drag out the negotiations as long as possible before the Sept. 30 deadline to pass government funding. Heather Caygle contributed to this report.
Outgoing Rep. Tim Huelskamp is angry that he lost his primary — and he wants everyone in the House of Representatives to know it. The ultra-conservative Kansas Republican took to the floor late Tuesday afternoon to force roll call votes on a series of what leadership thought were noncontroversial bills being offered up by voice vote. He objected to 17 of the bills, blocking them from being passed by a simple voice vote Tuesday evening. Story Continued Below Since his objections meant the House would be required to hold roll calls on all of them, a tedious process which could take two or three hours, leaders were forced to postpone all but three of the measures into Wednesday. Huelskamp's latest move comes just a few days after he threatened to force a vote on the impeachment of the IRS commissioner, despite the fact that Chairman Jim Jordan (R-Ohio) struck a deal with Judiciary Chairman Bob Goodlatte (R-Va.) to postpone the vote until after the election. Republicans, including some of his own friends, have noted that he’s become something of a loose canon since returning to Washington after being defeated in his primary in August. “So much for all of Mr. Huelskamp’s rhetoric about the need for lame duck members to go quietly into the night,” said one GOP official. To be fair, however, a number of House Freedom Caucus members and the Heritage Foundation also had objections to several proposals. His office also noted that "a quick review appears to indicate that this is the largest number of suspensions in one day for the entire 2015-2016 Congressional calendar." "Americans deserve better than for Congressional leaders to decide late on a Friday to suddenly place 49 bills on the calendar," his office wrote POLITICO in an email. "With no clear, public criteria for selection of these bills from among thousands of others, Americans at least deserve the transparency of knowing how their Member of Congress votes on these bills." Establishment-aligned outside groups including the U.S. Chamber of Commerce and Joe Rickett’s “Ending Spending” group poured more than a million into Huelskamp’s race to defeat him. They said he was ineffective because he voted against everything, and argued his poor relationships in Washington got him kicked off the Agriculture Committee, a prized spot for his district. Huelskamp blames House GOP leadership for not coming to his rescue. In recent days he’s openly criticized Speaker Paul Ryan (R-Wis.). Some members groused privately that Huelskamp looked all too happy to scuttle the floor schedule Tuesday evening. He sat in the back row of the House chamber, avoiding the C-SPAN cameras but asking for roll calls on bills. Usually lawmakers go down to the desk — in full view of the cameras — to request the yeas and nays. Meanwhile, around the capitol, one of the biggest questions driving Tuesday chatter was whether he would force the IRS impeachment issue later this week.
Washington (CNN)Eric Trump on Friday defended his father's self-made real estate mogul narrative, saying the Republican presidential nominee was the epitome of the American dream for having "gone from just about nothing" to become a successful real estate mogul in New York. The younger Trump's comments follow extensive reporting of how the GOP presidential candidate got his start in property development in part thanks to a $1 million loan from his father, Fred Trump, in the late 1960s or early 1970s. "Well, I think he's a guy who has been an entrepreneurial guy," Eric Trump told Fox News on Friday after being asked about his father's outreach to millennial voters. "He's built an amazing company. He's become the epitome of the American dream." Trump begun to say that millennials could relate to his father because "he's gone from just about nothing," but was interrupted by "Outnumbered" panelist Julie Roginsky. "Nothing? He got a million bucks? I mean, come on," Roginsky interjected. "Listen, he's built an unbelievable empire," Trump responded. "He's epitomized what America is all about: opportunity and working hard and being able to achieve your dreams and what you want to succeed, right?" Trump continued, "It's no different from a (Mark) Zuckerberg, right, who went out with a great idea like Facebook and developed this idea and built it and grew it and grew it and grew it. That's achieving something, right? And I think it is very different than a person who has been career politician." In 2015, Donald Trump described the $1 million loan from his father as "small." "My whole life really has been a 'no' and I fought through it," Trump said at an NBC-sponsored town hall in October. "It has not been easy for me, it has not been easy for me. And you know I started off in Brooklyn, my father gave me a small loan of a million dollars." The 32-year-old Eric Trump on Friday also said that he thought millennials did not relate to policy well because "they haven't lived their lives long enough to understand ... the broad stroke of issues." "They obviously understand a lot of issues as it pertains to them, student debt, and this and that," Trump said. "But I think maybe taxes and things might be a little less significant than other issues. And so I just think there is a disconnect between somebody who is constantly talking about policy and this and that, than a man who's built a great company." Donald Trump's children have become prominent surrogates for his unconventional presidential campaign, but at times have cause minor controversies of their own. Eric Trump's comments come after his older brother, Donald Jr., caused controversy earlier this week when he likened Syrian refugees to Skittles. 
Hillary Clinton on Monday urged Americans not to get “diverted and distracted” by Donald Trump's inflammatory words as the United States combats the threat posed by the Islamic State. “Let’s not get diverted and distracted by the kind of campaign rhetoric we hear coming from the other side. This is a serious challenge,” Clinton told reporters after delivering a statement from White Plains, New York. “We are well equipped to meet it. And we can do so in keeping with smart law enforcement, good intelligence and in concert with our values.” Story Continued Below Clinton addressed the recent string of attacks in New York, New Jersey and Minnesota on Monday, remarking that the terrorist threat of the Islamic State is real while also casting herself as the only candidate with the experience necessary to handle such threats. “This threat is real but so is our resolve. Americans will not cower. We will prevail. We will defend our country and defeat the evil, twisted ideology of the terrorists," said Clinton, who implicitly contrasted her role as head of the State Department and Trump’s inexperience in politics and government as she declared, "I’m the only candidate in this race who has been part of the hard decisions to take terrorists off the battlefield.” Clinton also presented herself as a longtime advocate of “tough vetting” and called for an improved visa system. Her response Monday contradicted Trump’s message. While the Republican presidential nominee seemingly encouraged racial profiling to help law enforcement stop future attacks during a phone interview with “Fox and Friends,” Clinton talked up her bona fides. “I was part of the national security team that worked with President Obama, developed strategies to fight the terrorists — sometimes that involved direct kinetic action, sometimes that involved working with allies and partners, sometimes that involved capture,” she said. “I won’t get into classified information, but I have sat at that table in the Situation Room, I have analyzed the threats, I have contributed to actions that have neutralized our enemies. I know how to do this and I understand how we don’t want this to get even bigger than it already is.” As for Trump’s contributions to the terrorism conversation, Clinton cited his rhetoric as ammunition for the other side. “We know that Donald Trump’s comments have been used online for recruitment of terrorists,” she said. “We’ve heard that from former CIA Director Michael Hayden, who made it a very clear point when he said Donald Trump is being used as a recruiting sergeant in and for the terrorists. We know from the former head of the Counterterrorism Center, Mike Olsen, that the language that Mr. Trump has used is giving aid and comfort to our adversaries.” Trump on Monday again criticized President Barack Obama and Clinton for refusing to go after “radical Islamic terrorism.” But Clinton brushed off the real estate mogul’s criticism of her record. “Well, it’s like so much else he says: It’s not grounded in fact. It’s meant to, you know, make some kind of demagogic point,” Clinton said. “And the facts are pretty clear that, you know, we still have challenges. That’s what I have been talking about throughout this campaign. I am prepared to, ready to actually take on those challenges, not engage in a lot of, you know, irresponsible, reckless rhetoric, but to do the hard work as I’ve done before, to put into place the strategies for local and state law enforcement for an intelligence surge, for the kind of preventive actions we need to take here at home and to intensify our efforts to defeat ISIS.” Clinton suggested Americans won’t hear her opponent’s plan, and not because it's secret. “He keeps saying he has a secret plan. Well, the secret is he has no plan,” she said. “So let’s focus on what we really can do, and what I've laid out is a path forward that will keep us safer, protect our country and go after the terrorists to finally destroy them.”
Washington (CNN)The National Rifle Association is returning to the defense of Donald Trump in the closing weeks of the presidential campaign, a reminder of how fervently the gun-rights group has backed the Republican nominee on television. The NRA is launching a $5 million TV ad campaign Tuesday, the group says, meant to turn out pro-Second Amendment voters at a time when Trump is being attacked for his language about firearms. The gun lobby has aired $7.7 million in television time on Trump's behalf, support that makes it the second-most active pro-Trump advertiser in the general election. But it had not been on the airwaves since late last month. The NRA's Political Victory Fund is tasked with spending half the money on five swing states -- Ohio, Nevada, Virginia, North Carolina and Pennsylvania -- while its Institute for Legislative Action, its lobbying arm, is spending the second-half on national cable. All of the money is going to a harrowing ad that shows what the NRA says would happen if Hillary Clinton appoints her chosen justices to the Supreme Court. "She'll call 9-1-1. Average response time? 11 minutes," says the narrator as a sleeping woman is startled by nighttime footsteps. The woman runs to a nearby safe to grab her weapon, but it's empty. "Don't let Hillary leave you protected with nothing but a phone." The advertisements targets rural voters in battleground states who might be Democrats or disillusioned Republicans, according to Jennifer Baker, an NRA spokeswoman. "It is designed to run up the score with those Trump voters," she said. The NRA's chief political adviser Chris Cox said the ad "underscores" how Clinton's position on guns creates "one set of rules for her, and a different set of rules for the rest of us." Trump has emerged as a proud spokesman for gun rights, though he has at times invited controversy. On multiple occasions, Trump has been attacked for encouraging gun-owners to incite violence against Clinton, though Trump's campaign has said he is being misinterpreted. "I think her bodyguards should drop all weapons. Disarm immediately," Trump said in Miami last week. "Take their guns away, let's see what happens to her." 
Donald Trump and his team are slamming presidential debate moderator Lester Holt for not asking Hillary Clinton questions Monday night about her email controversy and possible conflicts of interest concerning the Clinton Foundation, among other things. “He didn’t ask her about the emails at all,” Trump told “Fox &Friends” this morning. “He didn’t ask her about her scandals. He didn’t ask her about the Benghazi [Libya] deal that she destroyed. He didn’t ask her about a lot of things that she should have been asked about. There’s no question about it.” Trump also said Holt, the anchor of NBC’s “Nightly News,” leaned “more than a little” to the left. “Lester should have brought up the emails,” Trump said when asked why he thought Holt didn’t stress the private server controversy. “That should have been a question.” Trump gave Holt a “C” or “C plus” when asked to grade his performance. “I thought he was OK,” Trump said. “I thought he was fine. Nothing outstanding. I thought he gave me very unfair questions at the end, the last three, four questions. But I’m not complaining about that. I thought he was OK.” Vice presidential candidate Mike Pence also criticized Holt’s questioning during the debate. “I was disappointed that Lester did not get into some of the issues that have been so much in the forefront of Hillary Clinton’s candidacy,” Pence said on ABC News’ “Good Morning America” today. “The FBI investigation, Clinton Foundation, pay to play, the whole disastrous events that took place in Benghazi and Libya — that never came up.” But top Clinton aide John Podesta said the Trump camp should stop criticizing the questions. “Look, we have a kind of rule in our campaign: When you are complaining about the moderator, you are losing,” he said on Fox this morning. “I think that the Trump side shouldn’t do it either,” he added. “I think on, balance, it was fair.” Top Trump supporter Rudy Giuliani also hit Holt this morning for saying Monday night that the stop-and-frisk policing tactic was unconstitutional. “I watched Lester Holt do Candy Crowley at least twice,” said Giuliani, a former mayor of New York, referring to her controversial fact-check of Mitt Romney during a 2012 presidential debate. “The moderator didn’t do his homework, and the moderator is wrong about [stop and frisk],” Giuliani said today on “Fox & Friends.” “A hundred million people last night were misled by Lester Holt.” In fact, a federal judge ruled stop and frisk unconstitutional in 2013, and the city later dropped its appeal of the ruling. Giuliani said Monday night that if he were Trump, he would consider skipping the remaining two debates because of what he called unfair moderating.
One day after explosive devices were discovered in the Manhattan neighborhood of Chelsea and in Seaside Park and Elizabeth in New Jersey, Republican nominee Donald Trump repeated his calls to implement police profiling to stop more attacks in the United States. "Our local police, they know who a lot of these people are. They are afraid to do anything about it because they don't want to be accused of profiling and they don't want to be accused of all sorts of things," Trump said on "Fox and Friends" when asked what policies he would implement as president to "get tough" on terrorism. He argued that the country had no other choice but to follow the lead of Israel. "Israel has done an unbelievable job, and they will profile. They profile. They see somebody that's suspicious," he said, "they will profile. They will take that person in and check out. Do we have a choice? Look what's going on. Do we really have a choice? We're trying to be so politically correct in our country, and this is only going to get worse." Trump previously made similar comments. After the Orlando nightclub shooting in June, he said in an interview on "Face the Nation" that it was something the U.S. needed to seriously consider.
Washington (CNN)Presidential elections are a state-by-state battle. But in two instances this November, it could be district by district. Maine and Nebraska are the only two states in the nation that don't have a winner-take-all system for their Electoral College votes. That means that even if a candidate doesn't win the statewide popular vote in those states, they could pick up one or two Electoral College votes if they win in congressional districts. And with an increasingly close election, both Republicans and Democrats see an opportunity to add purple to the map. Brief civics lesson: You're not technically voting for president on Nov. 8; you're voting for electors. It's those people -- 538 of them -- who technically pick the president. There's a math equation used to calculate how many electors each state gets: three Electoral College votes based on the total number of US senators and US representatives it has (and three extras for the District of Columbia). While individual electors may technically cast those votes for whomever they choose, it is virtually unheard of for a candidate who wins the popular vote in a state to not get all the electoral votes, and many states have laws enforcing that electors must respect the statewide vote. Except, that is, in Maine and Nebraska, where things can get complicated. In those states, the votes are tallied by congressional district. The road to 270 In Maine, which has two senators, two congressmen and so four electoral votes, the statewide winner automatically gets two votes. And then the winner of each of the two congressional districts gets one electoral vote, respectively. In Nebraska, there are three congressional districts, meaning two votes go to a statewide winner and the three districts each award one electoral vote. So even if a candidate wins the majority of either state, Maine could have a 3-1 split and Nebraska could have a 4-1 or 3-2 split. This has almost never mattered -- but this year it might. If things get really close. They're not that close right now. Hillary Clinton has a strong advantage in the Electoral College. But CNN rates one congressional district each in normally red Nebraska and normally blue Maine as a "battleground." Maine has had the proportional system in place since 1972 and Nebraska since 1991, and only once have the votes ever split. Barack Obama in 2008 got one electoral vote from deep red Nebraska from the Omaha area. The President reflected on the unprecedented feat from 2008 while visiting Omaha in January. "That year, in the primary, I won the Nebraska caucus, and there some people, I saw the signs calling the city 'Obamaha,' and then in November of 2008, Joe Biden and I won the electoral vote," Obama said during a trip to Nebraska. "And then four years later I got whooped, all across this state." Republicans in Nebraska have tried to change the law but failed by one vote this April to switch back to a winner-take-all. Both sides have their eyes on those single, accessible electoral votes. Trump has paid attention to and campaigned in Maine, a traditionally blue state in presidential years. He has reserved $47,000 in campaign ad time there from later this month through Election Day. Clinton, on the other hand, has paid attention to Nebraska, a traditionally red state in presidential years. She held an event with billionaire investor Warren Buffett in Omaha in early August, and has spent more than $500,000 on ads in the Omaha market. She has more than $120,000 reserved there through Election Day. Polls have tightened since early August, when Clinton had an advantage in many swing states that could have made for a landslide victory. Since then, races in many states have been toss-ups, making every electoral vote important. CNN's Gregory Wallace and Marshall Cohen contributed to this report.
Almost 20 percent of Americans surveyed said they could change their mind about the presidential election based on tonight’s face-off between Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton, according to the latest ABC News/Washington poll. In fact, 6 percent of Americans said there’s a “good chance” that tonight could swing their vote one way or another — more than the margin between the two candidates in most national polls over the last month. Here are the groups to watch for during tonight’s debate: 1. Young voters. Almost 3 in 10 young voters (28 percent) polled said they could switch their vote based on tonight’s face-off between Clinton and Trump. A broad 60 percent of these voters went for President Barack Obama in 2012, but many are threatening to vote for third-party candidates Gary Johnson or Jill Stein this year. 2. People who don’t like either candidate. A good number of Americans surveyed who said they don’t like either major party candidate said they could change their minds tonight. Twenty-seven percent of Americans who have an unfavorable view of both Clinton and Trump said they could change their minds, versus only 13 percent of those who like at least one of them. 3. Bernie Sanders supporters. A quarter of Americans polled who backed the Vermont senator during the Democratic primaries (26 percent) said they might flip candidates based on tonight’s debate. Only 74 percent of them said they’re voting for Clinton, with 9 percent going for Trump and 12 percent split between Johnson and Stein. 4. Independents. A quarter of Americans (24 percent) surveyed who are not affiliated with either political party said their votes could be up in the air during tonight’s debate. Trump has a statistically insignificant advantage among this group, 43 percent to Clinton’s 38 percent, with 10 percent going for Johnson and 2 percent for Stein. 5. People who are on the fence about voting. People who might not show up to the polls are also more likely to consider switching their votes. Only 11 percent of Americans polled who have followed the race “very closely” and 14 percent of those who were “absolutely certain” they will vote said they could change their minds. That’s compared with 24 percent and 25 percent of those who have followed the race less closely and were less certain to vote, respectively. 6. Unenthusiastic voters. Respondents who were “very enthusiastic” about voting for Clinton and Trump were largely set in stone: Only 9 percent of “very enthusiastic” Clinton backers and 3 percent of “very enthusiastic” Trump supporters said they could change their minds. That’s compared with 22 percent of less enthusiastic Clinton backers and 18 percent of less enthusiastic Trump supporters. 7. Weaker partisans and ideologues. Very strong partisans were less likely to be open to changing their votes tonight: Just 10 percent of strong conservatives, 12 percent of liberal Democrats and 6 percent of conservative Republicans said the debates could change their votes. White men without a college degree (13 percent) and people who make $100,000 per year or more (11 percent) were also less likely to be open to a flip tonight. Poll results come from an ABC News/Washington Post poll released on Sept. 25. The survey was conducted by landline and cellular telephones Sept. 19 to 22, 2016, in English and Spanish, among a random national sample of 1,001 adults, including 651 likely voters. Results have a margin of sampling error of 3.5 points, including the design effect, for the full sample and 4.5 points for likely voters.
Washington (CNN)President Barack Obama will watch his potential successors square off during their first debate Monday night, though even the blockbuster political event isn't likely to pull him from his after-hours work. "I anticipate that this fall Monday evening will be similar to other fall Monday evenings in the White House residence, which is that the President will be working tonight with the television on in the background," White House press secretary Josh Earnest said during Monday's briefing. "The one difference is that instead of Monday Night Football there will be more politics discussed in the context of the debate." Who's on the debate guest list Obama debated Hillary Clinton two dozen times during their Democratic primary battle in 2007 and 2008, and he's used that contest as an example of her grit. Last week, the President offered his debate advice to the Democratic nominee, who has spent the last several days preparing for her face-off with Donald Trump. "Be yourself and explain what motivates you. Because I will tell you, I've gotten to know Hillary and seen her work and seen her in tough times and in good times. She's in this for the right reasons," Obama told ABC News. "I think there's a reason why we haven't had a woman president before, and so she's having to break down some barriers. There's a level of mistrust and a caricature of her that just doesn't jibe with who I know." Earnest said Monday he was confident the debate's moderator, NBC anchor Lester Holt, would "perform well, even under the intense spotlight of a presidential debate." 
Republican nominee Donald J. Trump complained in the spin room that his debate mic wasn't working right, according to a video posted by a CBS journalist. "They gave me a defective mic!" he told reporters. "[I] wonder, was that on purpose?" Story Continued Below It wasn't the first time Trump suggested he was given a faulty microphone. At a January rally in Pensacola, Florida, he abruptly stopped mid-speech and said, "And by the way, I don't like this mic." He went on to call whoever installed it a "son of a b-----", and said, "George, don't pay him! I believe in paying, but when someone does a bad job, like this stupid mic, you shouldn't pay the bill." In the debate, Clinton accused Trump of not paying several workers for their services. Trump did not dispute that, saying, "Maybe he didn't do a good job and I was unsatisfied with his work." Trump has also said if he loses the election it's because the system is "rigged" against him.
Democrats are confident the rising salience of terrorism and police shootings of African-Americans this week will benefit Hillary Clinton. Republicans, meanwhile, believe overwhelmingly that Donald Trump will win the terrorism argument but are less confident that he'll react in a measured way to the recent protests in North Carolina. That’s according to The POLITICO Caucus — a panel of activists, strategists and operatives in 11 key battleground states. More than three-in-four Democratic insiders believe Clinton will benefit from the increasing prominence of both issues. And while majorities of Republicans, on the other hand, think both issues will help Trump, there’s less confidence that he can strike the right balance between law enforcement and the aggrieved African-American community. Story Continued Below On terrorism and national security, the results were fell along party lines: 76 percent of Democrats said Clinton stands to benefit from the issue, compared to 81 percent of Republicans who said it would help Trump. That mirrors public polling that shows voters divided on which candidate they trust more on the issue — with a slight edge for Clinton, particularly on temperament and ability to be commander-in-chief. “Polls show that folks do not trust Trump to have his finger on the button,” said one Wisconsin Democrat — who, like all respondents, completed the survey anonymously. “That to me says it all.” A Pennsylvania Democrat added that Trump’s criticism of military leadership for their prosecution of the overseas battle against the Islamic State has alienated key voters in their state. “Trump's open disrespect of the military doesn't play well among the same base he's supposed to be courting — the disaffected Western [Pennsylvania] voters,” the Democrat said. But some Democrats are concerned that rising anxieties about terrorism — if they were to persist for the next six-and-a-half weeks — could benefit Trump. “We have an older electorate, plus still some conservative white Democrats,” said a Florida Democrat. “In a close race, fear can win out.” Republicans, meanwhile, said Trump can effectively tie Clinton to President Barack Obama — who, despite rising approval ratings overall, rates poorly on his handling of national security. “People who are angry and afraid feel that way because of the Obama-Clinton policies that created [ISIL] and allowed the wave of domestic terror to occur largely unchecked,” said an Ohio Republican. “She's counting on ‘experience’ and ‘being there in the situation room,’” said a Michigan Republican. “I think that works against her and solidifies that she's part of the problem.” On the other burgeoning issue this week — the police-involved shootings in Tulsa, Okla., and Charlotte, N.C. — majorities of Democrats again defaulted to their partisan leanings. But Republicans were less certain the issue would help Trump — only 61 percent said it would — compared to the larger majority that said it would benefit Clinton, 77 percent. (Reponses were filed between 5 p.m. Eastern Time on Wednesday, prior to the beginning of a second night of rioting in Charlotte, and 2 p.m. Thursday.) Democrats mostly said the issue allowed Clinton to strengthen her appeal to minority voters — and, potentially, for Trump to repel nonwhite voters further. “The voters who are young, who are people of color, and who are most sympathetic to the injustice of police shootings are more liberal, but inconsistent voters,” said a Michigan Democrat. “This increased attention, if it has any impact, will boost their participation, and they are more likely to vote for Clinton.” Added a Florida Democrat: “If Clinton can get black turnout as a share of electorate to Obama levels, in addition to her Hispanic advantages, she can lose a bit of white support and win.” But some Democrats worried about a backlash among white voters to the at-times-violent protests. “Pictures of black youth burning things in the middle of Interstate 85 in Charlotte last night did nothing but help Trump,” said a North Carolina Democrat. “With more demonstrations planned for tonight, this issue could even surpass the HB2 fiasco as the defining issue in the campaign for North Carolina voters.” Most Republicans see the issue as an opportunity for Trump to burnish his law-and-order credentials. “People believe Obama has created an anti-police attitude in this country, and many will punish Hillary Clinton for that,” a Florida Republican said. And the demographic reality of the battleground states — many of them, like Colorado, Iowa and New Hampshire have smaller African-American populations — means a backlash among white voters in those states could tilt toward Trump. A Colorado Democrat said the African-American vote there was “small and already locked in.” “Iowa is 93 percent white, and [Black Lives Matter] protests are more galvanizing for downscale white voters than urban liberals,” said a Republican there. “And those rural white voters outnumber urban liberals by a lot, many of them former working class Democrats who are attracted to nationalist, anti-PC rhetoric.” “There are way more ‘Blue Lives’ than ‘Black Lives’ Matter folks in Iowa,” added another Republican there. “Trump will clean up.” But some Republicans in more diverse states said the issue could motivate some members of the Obama coalition who haven’t been enthusiastic about Clinton. “[T]o the extent it may generate increased interest in public policy and the election in her base, that would be a good thing for her,” said a Virginia Republican. “Hillary's base is there, but they aren't motivated or excited.” Added an Ohio Republican: “Hillary has to ignite the black community. I expect the Obamas to camp out in the cities. This unrest could become a focal point for her.” And for other Republicans, they questioned Trump's ability to address these issues in a measured way. "Trump is antagonistic and demeaning, and his ideology on racial issues/police shootings is embarrassing," said a Colorado Republican. A New Hampshire Republican put it even more sharply: "No matter how hard he tries, Trump is incapable of hiding his racism." But with the demographic push-and-pull between groups concerned in equal measure about the police shootings and the subsequent protests, others saw the issue as a wash between the two candidates. “I think it helps them both equally,” said a Michigan Republican. “Hillary needs minority turnout to go up, and this certainly helps there. Trump needs disaffected, law-and-order, white voters to turn out — this helps him with that.” These are the members of The POLITICO Caucus, not all of whom participated in this special survey: Colorado: Ryan Call, Laura Carno, Matt Chandler, Will Coyne, Adam Eichberg, Mark Ferrandino, Cole Finegan, Michael Fortney, Andrew Freedman, Ted Harvey, Craig Hughes, Owen Loftus, Pete Maysmith, Frank McNulty, Karen Middleton, Christopher Murray, BJ Nikkel, Josh Penry, Rick Ridder, Alan Salazar, Janice Sinden, Pat Steadman, Pat Waak, Steve Welchert, Taylor West, Roxane White, Rob Witwer Florida: Fernand Amandi, Scott Arceneaux, JP Austin, Tim Baker, Dennis K. Baxley, Slater Bayliss, Dave Beattie, Wayne Bertsch, Ron Book, Pamela Burch Fort, Jose Calderon, Kevin Cate, Kelly Cohen, Gus Corbella, Brian Crowley, Elizabeth Cuevas-Neunder, Justin Day, Judith Diaz, Nelson Diaz, John Dowless, Ryan Duffy, Jessica Ehrlich, Joe Falk, Alia Faraj-Johnson, Mark Ferrulo, Damien Filer, Marty Fiorentino, Rich Heffley, Nick Iarossi, David Johnson, Eric Johnson, Marian Johnson, Eric Jotkoff, Chris Korge, Jackie Lee, Susan MacManus, Beth Matuga, Fred Menachem, Jon Mills, Joe Mobley, Ben Pollara, Andrea Reilly, Steve Schale, April Schiff, Max Steele, Roger Stone, Richard Swann, Kevin Sweeny, Christian Ulvert, Steve Vancore, Ashley Walker, Andrew Weinstein, Andrew Wiggins, Ryan Wiggins, Rick Wilson Iowa: Tim Albrecht, Brad Anderson, Rob Barron, Jeff Boeyink, Bonnie Campbell, Dave Caris, Sam Clovis, Jerry Crawford, Sara Craig, John Davis, Steve Deace, John Deeth, Derek Eadon, Ed Failor Jr., Karen Fesler, David Fischer, Ben Foecke, Doug Gross, Steve Grubbs, Tim Hagle, Bob Haus, Joe Henry, Drew Ivers, Jill June, Lori Jungling, Jeff Kaufmann, Brian Kennedy, Jake Ketzner, David Kochel, Chris Larimer, Chuck Larson, Jill Latham, Jeff Link, Dave Loebsack, Mark Lucas, Liz Mathis, Jan Michelson, Chad Olsen, David Oman, Matt Paul, Marlys Popma, Troy Price, Christopher Rants, Kim Reem, Craig Robinson, Sam Roecker, David Roederer, Nick Ryan, Tamara Scott, Joni Scotter, Karen Slifka, John Smith, AJ Spiker, Norm Sterzenbach, John Stineman, Matt Strawn, Charlie Szold, Phil Valenziano, Jessica Vanden Berg, Nate Willems, Eric Woolson, Grant Young Michigan: Jill Alper, Saul Anuzis, Andrea Bitely, Lori Carpentier, Howard Edelson, Jordan Gehrke, Steve Hood, Darwin Jiles Jr., Joe Lehman, Dennis Lennox, Katie Packer, Ronna Romney McDaniel, John Truscott, Stephanie White, John Yob Nevada: Mac Abrams, Greg Bailor, Barbara Buckley, Yvanna Cancela, Bob Cavazos, Linda Cavazos, Jim DeGraffenreid, Andrew Diss, Peter Ernaut, Ryan Erwin, Chip Evans, Jay Gerstema, Oscar Goodman, Ryan Hamilton, Dan Hart, Pat Hickey, Zach Hudson, Jeremy Hughes, Megan Jones, Lindsey Jydstrup, Adam Khan, Peter Koltak, Roberta Lange, Sam Liberman, Laura Martin, Michael McDonald, Chuck Muth, Erven Nelson, Kristen Orthman, Neal Patel, Nick Phillips, Jon Ralston, Andres Ramires, Emmy Ruiz, Scott Scheid, Mike Slanker, James Smack, Paul Smith, Jack St. Martin, Mari St. Martin, Daniel Stewart, Brendan Summers, Riley Sutton, Robert Uithoven, Michelle White, Ed Williams, Heidi Wixom New Hampshire: Charlie Arlinghaus, Arnie Arnesen, Patrick Arnold, Rich Ashooh, Dean Barker, Juliana Bergeron, D.J. Bettencourt, Michael Biundo, Ray Buckley, Peter Burling, Jamie Burnett, Debby Butler, Dave Carney, Jackie Cilley, Catherine Corkery, Corriveau, Fergus Cullen, Lou D’Allesandro, James Demers, Mike Dennehy, Sean Downey, Steve Duprey, JoAnn Fenton, Jennifer Frizzell, Martha Fuller Clark, Amanda Grady Sexton, Jack Heath, Gary Hirshberg, Jennifer Horn, Peter Kavanaugh, Joe Keefe, Rich Killion, Harrell Kirstein, Sylvia Larsen, Joel Maiola, Kate Malloy Corriveau, Maureen Manning, Steve Marchand, Tory Mazzola, Jim Merrill, Jayne Millerick, Claira Monier, Greg Moore, Matt Mowers, Terie Norelli, Chris Pappas, Liz Purdy, Tom Rath, Colin Reed, Jim Rubens, Andy Sanborn, Dante Scala, William Shaheen, Stefany Shaheen, Carol Shea-Porter, Terry Shumaker, Andy Smith, Craig Stevens, Kathy Sullivan, Chris Sununu, James Sununu, Jay Surdukowski, Donna Sytek, Kari Thurman, Colin Van Ostern, Deb Vanderbeek, Mike Vlacich, Ryan Williams North Carolina: Don Davis, Francis X. De Luca, Anita Earls, Jonathan Felts, Tami L. Fitzgerald, Dylan Frick, Taylor Griffin, Robin Hayes, Morgan Jackson, Patsy Keever, Theresa Kostrzewa, Michael Luethy, Ray Martin, Thomas Mills, Melissa L. Reed, Chris Sgro, Paul Shumaker, Dee Stewart, Brad Thompson, Bruce Thompson, Charlie Wallin, Doug Wilson Ohio: Jerry Austin, Greg Beswick, Matt Borges, Erica Bruton, Tim Burke, Janet Carson, Jai Chabria, Martha Clark, Bob Clegg, Damareo Cooper, Jo Ann Davidson, Michael Dawson, Bill DeMora, Cindy Demse, Kathy Dicristofaro, Katie Eagan, Michael Gonidakis, Wes Goodman, Joe Hallett, Ian James, Melissa Klide Hedden, David Leland, Nick Martin, Rhine McLin, David Pepper, Molly Shack, Mark R. Weaver Pennsylvania: Chris Borick, Larry Ceisler, Valentino DiGiorgio, Jason Ercole, Dan Fee, Charlie Gerow, Marcel Groen, Leslie Gromis Baker, Mark Harris, Nan McLaughlin, Aubrey Montgomery, Christopher Nicholas, Nachama Soloveichik, David Sosar, Todd Stephens, Doc Sweitzer, David Thornburgh, Ray Zaborney Virginia: Ray Allen, Sandra Brandt, Marc K. Broklawski, Patsy Brown, Janet Carver, John Cosgrove, Brian Coy, Doris Crouse-Mays, Tom Davis, Julie Dime, Abbi Easter, Mike Farris, John Findlay, Joe Fitzgerald, Sean Harrison, Margo Horner, Robert Hurt, Gaylene Kanoyton, Chris LaCivita, Sue Langley, Frank Leone, Robert G. Marshall, Tucker Martin, Ed Matricardi, Susan J. Rowland, Peter Snyder, Susan Swecker, Jo Thoburn Wisconsin: Meg Andrietsch, Mary Arnold, Kevin Barthel, Mike Basford, Rebecca Bonesteel, Barry Burden, Terri Burl, Jim Camery, Patrick Guarasci, Robert Hansen, Gary Hawley, Marian Krumberger, Emily Nehring, Jason Rae, Brandon Scholz, John Zapfel Kristen Hayford contributed to this report.
Washington (CNN)House Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy told reporters the House will vote this week on a resolution holding Bryan Pagliano, the former Hillary Clinton aide who helped set up her private email server, in contempt of Congress. House Oversight Committee Chairman Jason Chaffetz tweeted that he filed a resolution Tuesday. The Oversight Committee approved the GOP-led contempt resolution last week along a straight party line. The floor vote is expected to come Thursday or Friday, according to a senior House GOP leadership aide. Chaffetz, a Utah Republican, has argued that previous testimony from another one of Clinton's IT workers, Justin Cooper, made it imperative for Pagliano to testify. "I explained Mr. Pagliano was uniquely qualified to provide testimony to help the committee better understand Secretary Clinton's use of a private email server. This is indisputable," Chaffetz said. "I also made clear the committee would consider all options regarding Mr. Pagliano's failure to appear, including consideration of recommending he be held in contempt." Pagliano was first called before the oversight committee last week but did not appear. Pagliano pleaded the Fifth Amendment in a closed-door hearing last year of the House panel investigating the Benghazi attacks. Pagliano's lawyers last week accused Chaffetz of launching a witch hunt. "A subpoena issued by a congressional committee is required by law to serve a valid legislative purpose -- and there is none here. Your demand under the present circumstances, that Mr. Pagliano again assert his constitutional rights in front of video cameras six weeks before the presidential election, betrays a naked political agenda and furthers no valid legislative aim," Pagliano's lawyers wrote in a letter to the committee. The Clinton campaign said Thursday it had not told Pagliano whether or not to testify, and blasted the oversight hearings into her private email server. "He made his own decision, but we certainly have not prevailed upon anyone to cooperate with this sham of an inquiry," Clinton spokesman Brian Fallon said. "The career officials at the FBI and the Justice Department already thoroughly investigated this matter, and closed the case with no further action, and Jason Chaffetz is abusing his office with this blatantly partisan attempt to hurt Hillary Clinton's presidential campaign." 
In a rational world, we would interpret the inept crimes of accused pipe bomber Ahmad Khan Rahami as evidence that 15 years after the big one, the terrorist threat in America is akin to a brush fire—the kind of thing that inevitably flares up and causes some damage before the experts put it out. Instead, thanks to the cable news channels and some in the Web and print space, we’ve turned it into a mighty conflagration. Donald Trump, ever the opportunist, sounded this alarm Saturday shortly after the bomb went off in Manhattan’s Chelsea district. “Nobody knows exactly what’s going on. But boy, we are living in a time—we better get very tough, folks,” Trump said, when the shrapnel was still sizzling. The cable news channels jumped on the story in a galvanic fashion for a number of reasons. First, the story happened in their New York backyard. It is an unwritten rule of assaults, murders, natural disasters and other injurious acts that their news potential is inversely proportional to the distance from the news organization’s headquarters. For example, if a pipe bomb went off in Kansas City, the news response of the New York-based networks would be middling. But if a New York City cop broke his toe kicking a suspect in the butt, we’d be just a few chyrons away from a breaking news alert. Story Continued Below Second, the detonation of one bomb is an indicator that additional bombs might exist until proved otherwise. In this case, they did, in alarming numbers. The multiplicity of devices—one bomb exploded in New Jersey on Saturday morning, a second bomb was found (undetonated) in Manhattan, and then early Monday in New Jersey a third bomb went off in the face of a police robot—gave the story additional velocity like booster stages on a rocket. Third, the date 9/11 has made us all a little anxious about a repeat attack in September, and this anxiety helps to stoke coverage of any such incident—especially in New York. Even if the networks were based in Chicago, the story would have become big news: Terrorism is to New York as hurricanes are to Miami. Even the near-misses are big stories. So, measured by the usual yardsticks, nobody can deny that the New York bombing story and the capture of the accused were big stories. I’d be the last person to say the press “over-covered” an incident in which 29 people were injured. But neither am I carrying a load of dread that the next pipe bomb will ignite in my world—the Washington, D.C., metro area, another bull's-eye for terrorists. Living, as I do, in a rational world, I interpret the clumsy bombing and misfire, and the speedy apprehension of the suspect, as evidence that the genuine threat from terrorists is low. Very low. I feel safe unless I start watching TV, after which, if I let my reptilian brain take over, I feel a bit panicked. You probably feel the same way. After all, there’s no cost to overreacting to the minor threat of terrorism. The payoff for overreacting could be the preservation of your life. President Barack Obama has tried to convey this gist of the low threat a number of times, but whenever he tries to assure the country, it comes out sounding like he’s counseling us to put our heads in the sand. Then, opportunists like Trump do us no favor by inflating the event into something it isn’t. “Once again someone we were told is OK turns out to be a terrorist who wants to destroy our country & its people—how did he get thru system?” Trump tweeted Monday afternoon. The fact that the 28-year-old Rahami, born in Afghanistan, is the naturalized son of an immigrant seems not to have penetrated Trump's coiffure. If Rahami “got through the system,” he did so as a youth. The current spate of violence doesn’t even come close to the volume of bombings recorded by FBI statisticians in an 18-month period spanning 1971 and 1972, Bryan Burrough reports in his book Days of Rage. Despite more than 2,500 domestic bombings in that period, the nation did not lose its marbles; no demagogue campaigned on the peril they posed. Because fear is not rational, wonks never get too far with the public by explaining that backyard swimming pools, quick drives to the supermarket for bread and milk, obesity or falling furniture are more likely to put your in death’s cross hairs than an act of terrorism. In the current atmosphere, every terror-motivated crime has come to feel like a dire assault on the homeland, exploding in the news with much more success than the actual bombs involved. Though the fear is understandable, the result has a huge distorting effect on our national psyche and politics. The culture appears to be too scarred by the 9/11 attacks to place pressure-cooker bombs of the type that Rahami is alleged to have built in their proper perspective. Maybe the next generation, one with no direct memory of the attack, can guide us out of our paranoia. The fact is, everywhere you look in modern life, we’re safer. Airline flight is safer, cars are ridiculously safe, violent crime has fallen through the floor, the food supply has never been safer, and consumer devices come with so many safety doodads attached that it takes an act of determined negligence to cut off a finger or put out an eye. Helmeted to avoid concussions, GPS'ed up the wing-wang to make it impossible to get lost in the forest, protected by surveillance cameras around the clock, we now live in a fully airbagged world, where accidental death is blocked by technology at almost every juncture. The paradox of all this safety is that it ends up making a lot of us feel all the more unsafe when we’re reminded that random tragedies do happen—and to clamor for an even bigger airbag when they do, even though the rational mind tells us we’ve reached a diminishing point of returns on that investment. I’m not counseling anybody to “get over” 9/11 and slough off new attacks as if they’re pinpricks. But neither am I encouraging everybody to throw themselves into a full 9/11 wallow every time a bomb explodes, even if it blows up right in Manhattan. The low, low risk that a terrorist attack might injure you may not deserve the round-the-clock coverage the current incident is getting. It deserves some, and the press should feel free to pick on the 9/11 scab as much as it likes—but it’s not too much to ask the press to toss a little ointment and a bandage on the wound every now and then. ******* My autobiography will be titled A Little Ointment and a Bandage. Send your titles via email to Shafer.Politico@gmail.com. My email alerts self-detonate. My Twitter feed has a short fuse. My RSS feed burns like a grease fire.
(CNN)Hillary Clinton holds a solid 6-point lead over Donald Trump heading into the first presidential debate next Monday, according to a new national poll released Friday. The McClatchy-Marist poll found Clinton leading Trump 45% to 39% among likely voters in a four-way race. Libertarian Gary Johnson garnered 10% support, and Green Party candidate Jill Stein polled at 4%. A Wall Street Journal/NBC poll this week found Clinton leading by a similar margin, 43% to 37%. Clinton maintains a massive lead among black voters in the new poll, pacing Trump 93% to 3% despite high-profile efforts by the Trump campaign to improve its outreach to minority voters. Clinton also has a large advantage over Trump among Latinos, 74% to 16%, but her support shrinks to 60% when third-party options are included. Both candidates continue to struggle with low favorability numbers -- 40% of likely voters say they have a favorable opinion of Clinton, and 37% say the same about Trump. Trump has a slight edge on the question of who is "honest and trustworthy," as 44% of likely voters think he is, while 36% think that Clinton is. The two run about even when voters pick who "shares their values" and who "cares about people like them." And Clinton beats Trump handily on "know how to do the job" and temperament. With the candidates' health on the minds of voters following Clinton's pneumonia diagnosis earlier this month, respondents were asked who has more stamina to be president -- 53% said that Trump does, while just 39% said the same of Clinton. Voters gave Clinton the edge over Trump on a series of key issues. On terrorism (52% to 41%), immigration (54% to 41%), creating good jobs (49% to 43%) and trade (52% to 42%), Clinton is viewed as the better candidate. The McClatchy-Marist poll was conducted through September 15 to 20, and surveyed 758 likely voters. It has a margin of error of +/- 3.6 points. 
Washington (CNN)Kix Brooks, one half of the country music duo Brooks and Dunn, is not buying the gloom and doom expressed on the campaign trail about America's declining greatness -- often espoused by Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump's campaign slogan, "Make America Great Again." Dierks Bentley on Donald Trump and the country music vote "We've always been great, as far as I'm concerned," the country music artist, whose classic 2001 hit "Only America" with Ronnie Dunn became an anthem for patriotism following the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, told CNN. "There's a lot of stuff that we can do better and there's a lot of stuff that we do better than anybody in the world, but that's life. That's our project as Americans -- we always work to be better," he continued. But Brooks, who considers himself to be "fairly conservative," is not optimistic that the next commander-in-chief will be able to make good on his or her promises to solve some of the country's most divisive issues if Washington remains gridlocked and the US continues to be as "polarized" as it is today. Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton has promised to work with Congress to implement comprehensive immigration reform and pledged to take on the gun lobby to institute "common sense" gun-control measures. Meanwhile, Trump has promised to build a wall on the southern border between the US and Mexico. CHECK OUT: #GetPolitical — A CNN Politics original series "I think all the issues that are on the table, from gun control to immigration, are so complicated, there is no easy answer," Brooks told CNN. "None of these problems are going to be solved overnight or probably in the next four years no matter what either candidate says." On gun culture Lamenting the hostility that has often plagued the gun-control debate on both sides, the "Boot Scootin' Boogie" artist said that the right to bear arms is an American principle that "should be respected." "We do have a Second Amendment and it's something that should be respected and discussed in a civilized way," Brooks said. "My only concerns are that Second Amendment rights are discussed with so much ferocity that sometimes we don't hear what each other is saying." Brooks, who is an avid hunter, grew up in Shreveport, Louisiana, along the Red River, and as he toured the country to play music over the last two decades, he witnessed a stark cultural divide between rural and urban America when it comes to guns. While Americans in rural America "never considered what a gang was," Brooks said, those in urban America also don't understand that "having a shotgun in the back of your pick up truck was also just a way of life" for Americans like him. Brooks is a strong supporter of states' rights and said that gun-control solutions to address gang violence and gun violence in American cities are not necessarily needed or effective in rural America. "I don't feel like what's good for California is good for Tennessee, is good for Louisiana, is good for New York City," Brooks said," adding, that local "leaders in our own communities know much better what our problems are and how we should deal with them than Washington, D.C., does." And as for election 2016, Brooks did not say who he is voting for but said if he hears a candidate speaking along those lines, he tends "to listen more closely." On 'Only in America' Many artists have protested when politicians with views they oppose use their songs during campaign events. However, when then-Democratic presidential nominee Barack Obama played Brooks and Dunn's "Only in America" at the 2008 Democratic National Convention, that was not the case. "Seems ironic that the same song Bush used at the Republican Convention last election would be used by Obama and the Democrats now," Brooks said at the time. "Very flattering to know our song crossed parties and potentially inspires all Americans." Brooks, who was a supporter of President George W. Bush, said that he co-wrote "Only in America" with his friend and music producer Don Cook -- a Democrat -- after they spent day in the woods, riding four-wheelers near Brooks' farm and talking about how grateful they are to be Americans. "The song was never meant to be political in any way. It still isn't," Brooks said. "The song is patriotic ... Call it corny or flag-waving or whatever you want to, but I'm really sincere about it. It means a lot to me -- our country does and everything it stands for." 
Gunfire and racially charged rioting have broken out again, this time in Charlotte, offering Donald Trump another chance to unabashedly sell himself as the “law and order” candidate, to side with police over African-American protesters and to rally his overwhelmingly white base. But Trump hasn’t quite done that. Story Continued Below Instead, the Republican presidential nominee delivered a more muted response as he called into Fox News Thursday morning, saying “there's a lack of spirit between the white and the black.” A day earlier, while campaigning in a black neighborhood in Cleveland, Trump defended an unarmed black man who was shot recently — and questioned the actions of the police officer who shot him. After more than a year of running one of the most racially and ethnically divisive campaigns in decades, Trump has begun to zig and zag on issues of race in the election’s final stretch. Appearing with black supporters and in black neighborhoods multiple times this month, Trump has sought to wash away the charges of racism that white nationalists have cheered. Hillary Clinton, meanwhile, has made casting Trump as outside-the-mainstream — she hammered Trump on The Steve Harvey Show for “bullying and bigotry” this week — one of the cornerstones of her campaign. Trump’s advisers and the candidate himself insist his concerted black outreach is a genuine effort to chip away at Democrats’ overwhelmingly margin among black voters, a group with whom he is polling in the low single digits. But Democrats, and even some skeptical Republicans, see his new tone more as an effort to make himself palatable to uneasy white voters who might otherwise be turned off by his past rhetoric. “When he asks black voters, ‘What have you got to lose, it can’t get any worse,’ he’s really just cynically talking to white voters,” said Rob Stutzman, a veteran Republican strategist and Trump critic. NAACP President Cornell William Brooks said, “I can't discern the intentions of Mr. Trump on this issue, but here's what we can say: Policy without particulars on the eve of the election insults the intelligence and sensitivities of any group.” Trump spoke most at length about the unfolding violence in Charlotte on Thursday at an energy conference in Pittsburgh, describing a “very wounded country” and national leadership vacuum that he would fill. “There is no right to engage in violent disruption,” Trump said, as Charlotte residents have taken to the streets in violent protest of the fatal shooting of a black man there. Police have fired back tear gas in intense clashes. He pitched his “law and order” approach as beneficial to black communities. “The people who will suffer most are law abiding African-American residents,” Trump said. That line was in his prepared remarks distributed by his campaign. But moments later, he ad-libbed a white stereotype of black communities. “And if you’re not aware,” Trump said, deviating from his teleprompter. “Drugs are a very, very big factor in what you're watching on television at night.” These days, Trump regularly tells mostly white audiences about the travesty of black neighborhoods, comparing them to war-torn places like Afghanistan. In rural North Carolina on Tuesday, Trump said that African-American communities are “absolutely in the worst shape that they’ve ever been in before, ever, ever, ever.” On Wednesday, not long after his appearance with a Cleveland church where Trump questioned the police officer in Oklahoma who shot an unarmed black man, Terence Crutcher, Trump embraced a broad expansion “stop-and-frisk,” a controversial policing policy. By Thursday, Trump said he wasn’t backing a national policy — saying he was only referring to Chicago, despite making his comment in Cleveland. "We've seen an expression of empathy for the loss of Mr. Crutcher's life, followed by a call for the nationalization and expansion of stop-and-frisk, preceded by a call for law and order without specifying what that means,” Brooks said. “His platform suffers from a multiple personality disorder. It's not consistent.” Still, Trump has clearly made some efforts. In Pittsburgh, Trump preached empathy. “We all have to walk a mile in someone else’s shoes,” he said. It was an echo of none other than Clinton’s remarks after the shooting of police officers in Dallas in July. “I will call for white people like myself to put ourselves in the shoes of those African-American families,” Clinton said on CNN then. With all his stop-and-start black outreach, Trump appears to be honing the greatest of political skills: letting different audiences hear the same words and imbue them with different meaning. “It just seems that there's a lack of spirit between the white and the black. I mean, it's a terrible thing that we're witnessing. You're seeing it, I'm seeing it. And you look at what went on last night in Charlotte, a great place, and you just see it,” as he said Fox News on Thursday. “There's a — there's somewhat — and I see it even going out. There's such a lack of — there's a lack of spirit. There's a lack of something. Something's going on that's bad. And what's going on between police and others is getting worse.” The “racist” charge has deeply irked Trump’s friends and allies. Bruce LeVell, the executive director of the National Diversity Coalition for Trump who traveled with him in Ohio this week, expressed frustration with the negative labels affixed to Trump. “It’s just unfair, unfortunately, what he’s had to endure,” LeVell said. “I don’t believe he’s changed his tone and tenor. Donald Trump has been clear since day one he’s for all Americans.” Trump has drawn historically low support levels in polling among African-American voters, including some swing-state surveys over the summer in Ohio and Pennsylvania that showed him with 0 percent. He has climbed from such lows, claiming his numbers are trending upward “like a rocket ship” but he remains mired in single digits in most surveys. His approval among Latinos is not much better. In a new Wall Street Journal/NBC News, showed Trump with 17 percent support among likely Hispanic voters — 10 points below what Mitt Romney received four years ago. Nearly 80 percent had negative feelings about Trump. Whit Ayres, a GOP pollster who has said Republicans must do better among minority groups to compete in national elections, said he couldn’t be sure who Trump’s spate of black outreach was truly targeting. “Your question assumes a level of calculation that I am not sure is warranted,” Ayres said. Madeline Conway contributed to this report.
Politico POLITICO's must-read briefing on what's driving the day in Washington GOVERNMENT SHUTDOWN FIGHT: WHAT YOU NEED TO KNOW -- If Congress doesn’t get its act together, the government shuts down next Friday night. And, perhaps predictably, trouble has sprouted up. The Senate is in the middle of a standoff, of sorts, over a bill to fund the government through December. AP’s Andy Taylor says Democrats are going to block the bill’s passage because it doesn’t include “$220 million to help Flint and other cities with lead emergencies replace pipes and take other steps to clean their water.” http://apne.ws/2cHPI2y Here is how a top Senate Republican and and a top Senate Democratic aide describe the standoff. --THE REPUBLICAN: “Senators wanted a clean CR [continuing resolution] with no poison pills. Senators on both sides of the aisle said that Zika was a crisis that couldn’t wait another day, that Zika was more important than any partisan riders. They wanted a bill that funded these Zika efforts, funded our veterans, addressed the opioid crisis and flood relief for places like Maryland, West Virginia, Texas and Louisiana, and stayed within the budget caps. This 10-week clean CR does all of that -- it’s a fair proposal that contains exactly zero partisan poison-pill riders from either party. And it’s completed in time to finish our work before funding runs out at the end of the month -- as long as Democrats don’t filibuster. Again. Story Continued Below “Every rider that Democrats offered as an excuse for opposing the bill is gone. To now bring us to the brink of a government shutdown over a provision that’s not even in the bill, and that was funded elsewhere, would take obstruction to an obscene new level. Democrats will now have several days to hear from their constituents. And then they’ll have a chance on Tuesday to move forward on this bipartisan funding bill. We certainly hope they put our veterans, our troops, Zika victims and families torn apart by opioid abuse above petty politics.” --THE DEMOCRAT: “Senator McConnell made a huge miscalculation pulling out of negotiations and putting this partisan bill on the floor, and Republican Senators are going to have a tough time explaining why they want to give help to anywhere but Flint. This is quickly turning into the nightmare scenario that Republicans wanted to avoid -- they’re going to be four days away from a government shutdown over their insistence on providing aid everywhere but Flint, just six short weeks before the election.” --WHAT WE THINK: You think this is bad? Come on! It’s not really in anyone’s interest to shut down the government less than two months before Election Day. Nobody is predicting that this is going to lead to a shutdown. They have a week -- the government doesn’t shut down until next Friday -- and Congress rarely does anything until it absolutely has to. **SUBSCRIBE to Playbook: http://politi.co/1M75UbX Happy Friday! We’re 46 days (http://bit.ly/2cqau5Q) away from Election Day, and things are mostly quiet. Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump have both had relatively slow weeks, and everyone is ramping up for their showdown at Long Island’s Hofstra University Monday night. Jake and Anna will be there, so PLEASE reach out with any fun spotteds and gossip. Today is the LAST day of the Playbook food truck. Thank you to those who have come out, talked with us and grabbed a free cup of coffee and breakfast. We had a great time Thursday morning Snapchatting with GOP Sens. Steve Daines (Mont.), Mike Rounds (S.D.) and James Lankford (Okla.). This morning we are near Farragut Square at 1700 K Street, NW and will be there until 10 a.m. Here’s a Facebook Live we did from the truck Thursday: http://bit.ly/2dmcL4o POLLS! -- SUFFOLK: FLORIDA -- Donald Trump 45, Hillary Clinton 44, Gary Johnson 3, Jill Stein 1 http://bit.ly/2cWwxni … QUINNIPIAC: IOWA -- Donald Trump 44, Hillary Clinton 37 http://bit.ly/2cHSOUy … QUINNIPIAC: COLORADO Hillary Clinton 44, Donald Trump 42, Gary Johnson 10, Jill Stein 2 http://bit.ly/2cHSOUy … QUINNIPIAC: VIRGINIA: Hillary Clinton 45, Donald Trump 39 http://bit.ly/2cHSOUy … ROCKY MOUNTAIN PBS: COLORADO -- Hillary Clinton 41, Donald Trump 34 http://bit.ly/2dmaGp1 … NYT/SIENA: NORTH CAROLINA -- Donald Trump 41, Hillary Clinton 41 http://nyti.ms/2dewLoQ. --JUST POSTED: MCCLATCHY/MARIST: NATIONAL: Hillary Clinton 48, Donald Trump 41. http://bit.ly/2d9n27m INSIDE THE CAMPAIGNS -- NOTHING TO SEE HERE -- Over the last few weeks, Hillary Clinton’s top surrogates have worked to tamp down Democratic unease on Capitol Hill and K Street after the former secretary of state fell ill, and polls tightened. Senior communications adviser Mandy Grunwald, director of strategic communications and surrogates Adrienne Elrod and political director Amanda Renteria have all met with Democratic consultants, lobbyists and lawmakers in recent weeks with a message: remain calm. A Clinton campaign aide said the D.C. briefings have been going on since June 2015. **** A message from BP: Over the past 10 years, no energy company has invested more in the U.S. than BP – $90 billion in total. Take 90 seconds to see what else we’re doing to help keep America moving forward. ****** THE LATEST IN CHARLOTTE -- “Family, police see different tale in same video,” by the Charlotte Observer’s Mark Washburn, Jim Morrill and Adam Bell: “Two narratives of the police videos showing the fatal shooting of a Charlotte man emerged Thursday – one from police saying the shots appeared justified, another from the family of Keith Lamont Scott saying he was killed while walking backward, hands at his side. ‘After watching the videos,’ said Justin Bamberg, an attorney for Scott’s relatives, ‘the family again has more questions than answers.’ … Scott’s demeanor was calm and nonaggressive, said Bamberg, who called upon CMPD to release the videos publicly in the name of transparency. “‘While police did give him several commands,’ the attorney said, ‘he did not aggressively approach them or raise his hands at members of law enforcement at any time.’...‘It was incredibly difficult for members of the Scott family to view these videos, but as a matter of the greater good and transparency,’ Bamberg said, ‘the Scott family asks that the Charlotte-Mecklenburg Police Department publicly immediately release both of the videos they watched today.’ Charlotte-Mecklenburg police Chief Kerr Putney said he reviewed the videos and they do not ‘give me absolute, definitive visual evidence that will confirm a person was pointing a gun. I did not see that in the video.’ But Putney said the ‘totality’ of the evidence supports the police conclusion that officers confronting Scott faced an imminent, deadly threat. Putney said the videos would not be released because, among other reasons, it might infringe upon a parallel state investigation into the shooting.” http://bit.ly/2cWATui … Charlotte Observer A1 http://politi.co/2cLXfPU -- NYT’s Richard Fausset and Alan Blinder in Charlotte on A1: “Fatal Shooting by Police Shakes Charlotte’s Self-Image”: “This has always been a place that has prided itself on order, consensus and a can-do corporate mentality that turned a locale with no real geographic reason to exist into one of the hemisphere’s financial dynamos. It has also gained a reputation for racial amity, from its nationally recognized commitment to busing and integrated schools in the 1970s and ’80s, to the election of Harvey Gantt in 1983 as one of the South’s first prominent black mayors. But the fatal police shooting on Tuesday of a black resident, Keith Lamont Scott, and the protests that have followed are among numerous bumps and jolts that have shaken Charlotte’s sense of itself recently as it emerged from a successful small city to a more complicated larger one.” http://nyti.ms/2d5pusP OBAMA on the violent protests in Charlotte: “The way we change the system requires to be able to reach out and engage the broader American community and that requires being peaceful, that requires being thoughtful about what are the specific reforms you’re looking for,” in an interview with ABC “Good Morning America” co-anchor Robin Roberts. “[The] overwhelming majority of people who have been concerned about police-community relations [are] doing it the right way … Every once in a while you see folks doing it the wrong way … I think it's important to separate out the pervasive sense of frustration among a lot of African Americans about shootings of people and the sense that justice is not always color blind.” http://abcn.ws/2cKSdDC DEPT OF DARK ARTS -- “Key lawmakers accuse Russia of campaign to disrupt U.S. election,” by WaPo’s Greg Miller: “Two senior Democratic lawmakers with access to classified intelligence on Thursday accused Russia of ‘making a serious and concerted effort to influence the U.S. election,’ a charge that appeared aimed at putting pressure on the Obama administration to confront Moscow. The jointly issued statement from Sen. Dianne Feinstein and Rep. Adam B. Schiff — Californians who are the ranking Democrats on the Senate and House intelligence committees, respectively — described recent cyber penetrations of the [DNC] and other U.S. political entities as intrusions that were likely directed by Russian President Vladi­mir Putin. ‘At the least, this effort is intended to sow doubt about the security of our election and may well be intended to influence the outcomes,’ the statement said. ‘We believe that orders for the Russian intelligence agencies to conduct such actions could come only from very senior levels of the Russian government.’” http://wapo.st/2cHYygI --“White House Contractor’s Leaked Email Reveals Secret Service Plans, Michelle Obama Passport” – NBC News: http://nbcnews.to/2deDSxT SILICON VALLEY WATCH -- “Yahoo Says Information on at Least 500 Million User Accounts Was Stolen,” by WSJ’s Robert McMillan: “Yahoo Inc. is blaming ‘state-sponsored’ hackers for what may be the largest-ever theft of personal user data. The internet company, which has agreed to sell its core business to Verizon Communications Inc., said Thursday that hackers penetrated its network in late 2014 and stole personal data on more than 500 million users. The stolen data included names, email addresses, dates of birth, telephone numbers and encrypted passwords, Yahoo said. Yahoo said it believes that the hackers are no longer in its corporate network. The company said it didn’t believe that unprotected passwords, payment-card data or bank-account information had been affected.” http://on.wsj.com/2cwQnqg HAPPENING TODAY -- Hillary Clinton has no events scheduled. Tim Kaine is campaigning in Houston. Donald Trump and Mike Pence have no events scheduled. CLICKER – “Between Two Ferns With Zach Galifianakis: Hillary Clinton” – 6-min. video http://bit.ly/2dfCxLn NEW CLINTON AD -- “Mirrors” -- Ad opens with a series of young girls looking in the mirror. SCRIPT: Donald Trump speaking: “I’d look her right in that fat ugly face of hers...She’s a slob … She ate like a pig … A person who’s flat-chested is very hard to be a 10...Does she have a good body? No. Does she have a fat [expletive]? Absolutely.” Interviewer asking Trump, “Do you treat women with respect?” Trump: “I can’t say that either.” Text at the end of the ad on screen reads, “Is this the president we want for our daughters?” http://bit.ly/2d2qyeM “Donald Trump’s English-only campaign,” by Shane Goldmacher: “With 46 days until the November elections, and as early voting begins in a handful of states, Trump is on the precipice of becoming the only major-party presidential candidate this century not to reach out to millions of American voters whose dominant, first or just preferred language is Spanish. Trump has not only failed to buy any Spanish-language television or radio ads, he so far has avoided even offering a translation of his website into Spanish, breaking with two decades of bipartisan tradition.” http://politi.co/2d9ksOC -- “On Campaign Call, Clinton Latino Supporters Air Concerns On Youth Support And Ads,” by BuzzFeed’s Adrian Carrasquillo: “A Clinton campaign call with Latino supporters took on new seriousness Thursday regarding the support of young voters and state of Spanish-language advertising, reflecting concerns with tightening poll numbers in the campaign’s final weeks. ‘I’ve had concerns for a while,’ said one participant on the call who speaks with donors. ‘It feels like it’s a little late to be coming now with this stuff but hopefully they’ve course corrected.’ What’s coming is a new Spanish-language ad push announced on the call. That announcement follows skittish Democrats chastising the campaign in a Washington Post report for starting a concerted advertising campaign later than President Obama did in his 2012 race. ‘We will have more to say soon, but the campaign will continue to advertise on Spanish TV and radio, as well as targeting Latino households through TV in English until election day,’ a Clinton aide told BuzzFeed News.” http://bzfd.it/2cW326C WHAT BROOKLYN IS READING -- “Inside Hillary Clinton's debate prep,” by Annie Karni and Glenn Thrush: “No secret on the Clinton campaign has been more closely guarded than the identity of the person who is impersonating Trump in the closed-door sessions staged at Clinton's Manhattan office and at her home in Chappaqua. Clinton’s advisers, in conversations over the last month, have repeatedly emphasized that the mock debate session, while important, is less vital than the informal law school sessions where Clinton hashes out her reactions and attacks ... “Several Democrats who have spoken to the participants tell POLITICO that the main person playing the role of interlocutor -- up until this weekend anyway, where there will be a real Trump stand-in -- was campaign chairman John Podesta, a sharp-tongued veteran operator known less for bluster than behind-the-curtain scheme-spinning. The wiry Podesta is quick on his feet, and is famous for a lashing tongue when angry. The buttoned-down, courtly [Ron] Klain has also stood in parrying questions with Clinton, according to people close to the situation - but both men have been less concerned with imitating Trump than preparing Clinton for the substance of the attacks, two keen attorneys framing Clinton’s reactions in the precise, disciplined language their lawyerly candidate thrives on.” http://politi.co/2cqb57L -- “Clinton Seeks Big Jump in Estate Tax: Plan would levy 65% tax on largest estates—up from today’s 40% — and make it harder for wealthy people to pass assets on to heirs tax-free,” by WSJ tax master Rich Rubin: “The proposals mark an expansion of the tax increases Mrs. Clinton would impose on the uppermost sliver of America’s affluent. The increase in estate and gift taxes and other new items Mrs. Clinton detailed Thursday follow two ideas central to her campaign. First, she pairs proposed spending increases and tax cuts with tax increases to prevent projected budget deficits from growing. And she targets tax increases at the top of the income and wealth scale. “The latest proposals would generate $260 billion over the next decade, enough to pay for her plans to simplify small-business taxes and expand the child tax credit, according to the nonpartisan Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget, which advocates fiscal restraint. In all, Mrs. Clinton would raise taxes by about $1.5 trillion over the next decade to pay for expanded education assistance, paid family leave and other programs. She would increase federal revenue by about 4%, though the added burden would be concentrated on relatively few households.” http://on.wsj.com/2csHcsb --FRANK LUNTZ on Time.com, “How Hillary Clinton Can Defeat Donald Trump in the First Debate”: “Your mission is to demonstrate that every time he talks on the global stage, his words could defile the office, embarrass the country and, yes, even provoke a war. Our polling couldn’t be clearer: If the election is a referendum on Trump, you win. ... Put him on trial. Rattle him. When he is challenged, he hits back. He loses control. He says dumb stuff. So push his buttons and compel him to reveal to the world that he is not qualified for the job.” http://ti.me/2cy83Sa ... Luntz’s advice for Trump http://ti.me/2dfugra MICHAEL ISIKOFF on Yahoo, “The birth of a candidacy: Did the president’s mockery propel Trump into the race?”: “It was a painful moment for Donald Trump. As he sat in his tuxedo at the 2011 White House Correspondents’ Dinner, President Obama mercilessly mocked him as a loony conspiracy theorist. ... But it may also have been a transformative moment, according to a new ‘Frontline’ documentary on the presidential race, called ‘The Choice 2016,’ which airs next Tuesday night on PBS. ‘I think that is the night that he resolves to run for president,’ Roger Stone, a longtime Trump adviser and confidant, says in the film. ‘I think that he is kind of motivated by it. “Maybe I’ll just run. Maybe I’ll show them all.”’ ... “Omarosa Manigault, the former ‘Apprentice’ star who now serves as director of African-American outreach for the Trump campaign, notes [that] ... as the president ‘kept going and going and he just kept hammering him,’ Trump’s mood changed, she says. His face became ‘incredibly serious. He just put on a poker face.’ And by the time the skewering was over, she suggests, Trump wanted payback. ... ‘It’s everyone who’s ever doubted Donald, whoever disagreed, whoever challenged him. It is the ultimate revenge to become the most powerful man in the universe.’” http://yhoo.it/2cq5RZy ... Preview clip http://to.pbs.org/2cq6zWF **** A message from BP: We’ve donated $147 million to U.S. community programs over the past five years. Check out the programs we support in your community. ****** 2016 PLAYERS -- “Sources: Top GOP budget aide working on Trump transition team,” by Tony Romm, Andrew Restuccia and Nancy Cook: “Eric Ueland, a veteran Republican Capitol Hill aide and top staffer on the Senate Budget Committee, is advising Donald Trump’s presidential transition team ... Ueland is the Republican staff director on the Budget Committee, a position he has held since 2013.” http://politi.co/2cHPCbk KATIE COURIC interviewed TIM KAINE in Reno, Nev. -- Kaine on whether expectations for Clinton in the Presidential debate are too high – “I’ve worried about it. I think maybe we’re coming into a place where both candidates ought to really be challenged the same way, but Donald’s been able to get away with some things that Hillary couldn’t — frankly, nobody could. Nobody, nobody could get away with not releasing their tax returns in a Presidential race. I don’t know why Donald has been allowed to get away with that.” Full interview http://yhoo.it/2cR1wFk BATTLE FOR CONGRESS -- “Ayotte creates distance from GOP in tight re-election bid,” by AP’s Kathleen Ronayne in Manchester: “Watching Sen. Kelly Ayotte campaign for re-election in New Hampshire, you wouldn’t always know she’s a Republican. She highlights her support for a plan by President Barack Obama’s administration to cut carbon emissions that Republicans loathe, and she talks up bipartisanship, at times not even mentioning her own party. Although she’s in line with the GOP in cutting federal funds for Planned Parenthood, Ayotte focuses her women’s health message on increasing access to over-the-counter birth control and mammograms. Running in 5Ks and helping take out trash at a town dump, Ayotte tries to project an image of an average mom rather than the ideologue that Democratic challenger Gov. Maggie Hassan paints her as. ‘I don’t assume one party has all the answers,’ Ayotte declares in a television ad that aired last month.” http://apne.ws/2d55wA6 FOR YOUR RADAR -- MSNBC “Morning Joe” exclusive interview with Turkish President Recep Erdoğan debuting this morning. From Ayman Mohyeldin’s interview: “No political figure has the luxury of embracing a negative attitude towards the followers of a certain faith. And it should not be exercised for the sake of political advantage or political competitiveness. I’ve been the prime minister of all beliefs and all faiths and ethnicities in my country.” On the Syrian cease-fire: “Well unfortunately, it is a stillborn baby.” ... On the aid convoy attack: “The killer responsible for that attack is Assad’s regime itself. And this bombing was performed by Assad’s regime at the end of which we have, once again, clearly seen the character, the identity of Assad’s regime in Syria.” STATE OF THE ART -- “Now you can register to vote in Snapchat,” by Mashable’s Kerry Flynn: “The mobile storytelling app is running a public service campaign in partnership with nonprofit Democracy Works’ TurboVote that encourages voter registration and allows users to check their eligibility and register all within Snapchat. Any Snapchat user in the U.S. who is 18 and older and therefore eligible to vote can see the video ads between Snapchat Stories and Discover that direct to a voter registration mobile webpage within the app that’s powered by TurboVote. The campaign began on Sept. 15 and lasts until Oct. 7.” http://on.mash.to/2d27HRd PER SNAPCHAT – The PSA campaign is featuring “celebrity partners like Jared Leto and Jimmy Fallon. ... On any given day, Snapchat reaches more than 40 percent of all 18-34 year olds in the US, making it a particularly important platform for both candidates.” -- “Facebook is using its News Feed to steer people on its platform to register for the November election. Today, the tech company launched posts which run through Monday to remind people across the country to register through vote.usa.gov. After completing their registration, people can let their friends on Facebook know that they are registered and encourage them to register too. Facebook’s registration reminders add to its suite of voter features, which has included Election Day reminders since 2008. The reminders will go out to those on the social network who are 18 and up, which with its broad popularity could mean significant spikes in registration nationwide.” JOSH EARNEST on a special edition of GQ’s “The Closer with Keith Olbermann”: “The success that our country has enjoyed over the last seven-and-a-half years didn’t happen by accident. Our economic recovery was led by the success of the private sector, there’s no argument about that. But those successes would not have been possible without smart government policies ... I don’t want to downplay the stakes in the election. The President has spoken to this quite directly himself. Democracy is on the ballot. Hope is on the ballot. The kinds of values that we cherish, the kinds of values that make our country great, are on the ballot.” http://bit.ly/2cVSa8E MEDIAWATCH -- “Legendary News Anchor Dan Rather Launches New Show on SiriusXM”: “The veteran journalist will debut his weekly program Dan Rather’s America on Tuesday, September 27 at 10:00 a.m. ET. The one-hour show will broadcast from SiriusXM’s New York headquarters in Rockefeller Center.” http://politi.co/2cq7irc --DYLAN BYERS, “Lester Holt takes the spotlight as moderator of first debate”: “On Monday, the NBC Nightly News anchor will preside over what may be the most highly anticipated presidential debate in American history ... It is an immense responsibility, and opportunity, for a man who once seemed destined to spend his career as NBC’s quiet journeyman, working in the shadow of Brian Williams with no guarantee of his own time in the spotlight. But it is a responsibility Holt deserves and is extremely well-equipped to handle, several of his current and former colleagues said. To hear them tell it, Holt is one of the most focused, hardworking and modest personalities in television news -- the ideal candidate to moderate a presidential debate.” http://cnnmon.ie/2dfF1JG --VANITY FAIR’S Sarah Ellison tick tocks Roger Ailes’ final days: http://bit.ly/2deIUdD --Traffic magazine, a new publication about data, media, and money, has launched, with its first print issue and a website. Patrick Appel, formerly of Politico Magazine and Andrew Sullivan’s Dish blog, is editor in chief. www.trafficmagazine.com ... Request a copy of the first issue http://bit.ly/2cynE4l FROM THE INAUGURAL ISSUE -- “Mo Pageviews, Mo Problems,” by Ryan Chittum: “The internet helped the media build bigger audiences than ever. Why aren’t those readers worth anything?” http://bit.ly/2csFRBQ --“Who’s LOLing Now?” by Noah Davis: “How the most innovative media companies make bank from your mailbox.” http://bit.ly/2d2oNyn THE PLAYBOOK INTERVIEW: Steve Hilton Steve Hilton, who was once director of strategy for former U.K. Prime Minister David Cameron, now spends his time trying to disrupt American politics. The co-founder and CEO of Crowdpac, a nonpartisan political crowdfunding startup that aims help citizens engage in politics through data and online tools, is trying to shake up the cottage industry of ballot measures. The group is releasing a new tool that allows users to contribute money to specific ballot measures on issues like gun control, raising the minimum wage, charter schools and legalizing marijuana in multiple states. http://bit.ly/2cQJD9I “We’re taking something that is a really big feature of politics and the way issues are handled at the state level and right across the country, which is ballot measures, which is often the way important changes on issues that people care about actually happen, and we’re trying to demystify that process and make it easier for people to understand what’s going on and participate directly,” Hilton said. Change in politics happens by working within the system: “There has been this slightly naïve and perhaps arrogant view that technology can completely reinvent the political system and the way that government and politics works, which is ridiculous … The challenge is to get people involved in the system we have.” Ballot measures are more reliable than candidates: “A lot of people are driven by an interest by one particular issue or a small number of specific issues rather than a candidate or a party or something broader … The fact is on certain issues it is through ballot measures that they are advanced, or not advanced depending on whether the ballot measure is passed.” Trump, Sanders are just the beginning: “[There’s] a real sense of a grassroots desire to run for office and to do it without the party machines. We’re getting a lot of incoming requests actually aiming for the next cycle — whether that’s local council or state legislature… I definitely feel you could see in the next cycle a really big increase in the number of challengers to the establishment candidates running in primaries at all levels, particularly state and local.” SPOTTED: Dave Grohl last night at Le Diplomate. FIRST IN PLAYBOOK -- Steve Tilton is returning to PhRMA as vice president in the drug lobby’s massive operation. The move is part of a major overhaul of the trade group’s nearly $20 million lobbying presence. Tilton, who most recently lobbied at Crossroads Strategies, was a House Energy and Commerce Committee staffer. TIM BARNICLE (Mike’s son) and Harry Hill have a new podcast, called “How I Got Here” (HIGH). The first episode features Tom Brokaw. http://bit.ly/2d9fGAQ OUT AND ABOUT – Last night the Hudson Institute hosted its 2016 Herman Kahn Award dinner, presented to PM Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel at Plaza Hotel, NYC. SPOTTED: Henry and Nancy Kissinger, former Sen. Joe Lieberman and Hadassah Lieberman, Hudson’s CEO Ken Weinstein, COO John Walters (Bush 43 Drug Czar), Elaine Chao, Scooter Libby, Walter Russell Mead, US Amb. to Israel Dan Shapiro, Israeli Amb. to USA Ron Dermer, WSJ’s Melanie Kirkpatrick and Daniel Henninger, Fox’s Kimberly Guilfoyle, Charlie and Lisa Spies, 76ers Owner Josh Harris and wife Marjorie Harris, Former Rep. Nan Hayworth of New York, Fmr Pakistani Ambassador to USA Husain Haqqani, Roger Hertog. --Journos and politicos at Hawthorne on U Street toasted HuffPost Hill’s Eliot Nelson last night at a book party for “The Beltway Bible: A Totally Serious A-Z Guide to Our No-Good, Corrupt, Incompetent, Terrible, Depressing, and Sometimes Hilarious Government.” The shindig was held just above a fundraiser for Francis Rooney, a Republican running in a safe GOP seat in Florida. $13.49 on Amazon http://amzn.to/2d4X2sR SPOTTED: Sam Stein, Jim Manley, Byron Tau, Anu Rangappa, Ryan Grim, Sahil Kapur, Sabrina Siddiqui, Carolyn Fiddler, Amanda Terkel, Greg Sargent, David Segal, Murshed Zaheed, Tim Miller, Doug Andres, Adam Green, Hannah Muldavin, Alex De Luca, Craig Gordon, Sarah Wheaton, Eli Yokley, Cate Martel, Danny Vinik, Asawin Suebsaeng, Ben Freed, Elaina Plott, Katie Glueck, Amy Nathan. --Rep. Debbie Wasserman Schultz had a 50th birthday party last night at Whaley’s in Navy Yard. In true South Florida fashion, guests mingled and munched on Surf & Turf in between two evening vote series. SPOTTED: Sens. Kirsten Gillibrand and Bill Nelson, Reps. Dina Titus, Chellie Pingree, Julia Brownley, Kathleen Rice, Nita Lowey, Annie Kuster, Grace Meng, Carolyn Maloney, Sean Patrick Maloney, Susan Davis, Joe Crowley, Barbara Lee, Joyce Beatty, Derek Kilmer, Brenda Lawrence, Jared Polis, Ed Perlmutter, Terri Sewell, Frederica Wilson, Katherine Clark, Lois Frankel, Sheila Jackson Lee, Stacey Plaskett, Bonnie Watson Coleman, Mark Pocan, Jerry McNerney, and Hakeem Jeffries, former Rep. Jim Davis and Philly Mayor Michael Nutter. --“Professor Charles Ogletree of Harvard Law, a professor and mentor of President and Mrs. Obama, was on the Hill for a reception hosted by the Alzheimer’s Association to honor him. He was recently diagnosed with Alzheimer’s Disease and he came to speak about his diagnosis and why he is becoming an advocate with the association.” SPOTTED: Sheila Jackson Lee, Maxine Waters, John Garamendi, Walter Jones, Steve Cohen, Eddie Bernice Johnson, Barbara Lee, John Conyers, Wm. Lacy Clay, Terri Sewell, Paul Tonko, Frederica Wilson, Bobby Scott, Brendan Boyle, Mike Thompson, Brian Higgins. SUNDAY SO FAR: --CBS’ “Face the Nation”: Speaker Paul Ryan, Gov. Mike Pence, and Sen. Bernie Sanders. --ABC’s “This Week”: Kellyanne Conway, British Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson ... panel: Alex Castellanos, Matthew Dowd, Maggie Haberman, Jamal Simmons, Katrina vanden Heuvel. --NBC’s “Meet the Press” – panel: Doris Kearns Goodwin, Hugh Hewitt, Gwen Ifill, Mike Murphy --CNN’s “Inside Politics” (hosted by John King) which starting Monday will be on Monday- Friday from 12-1 p.m. until Election Day: Jonathan Martin, Molly Ball, Manu Raju, Jeff Zeleny. -- “Fox News Sunday”: Mike Pence. Power player: Dr. Carla Hayden, Librarian of Congress. Panel: Jerry Seib, Julie Pace, Rachel Campos-Duffy, Juan Williams. BIRTHWEEK (was yesterday): Mary Kalbach Horan, director of publications at the Washington Institute for Near East Policy (h/t Ian Byrne) BIRTHDAYS: Todd Ricketts ... Daisy Schuurman is 41 ... Maria Karl … Sean Spicer, RNC’s chief strategist and comms director and the pride of Barrington, R.I. ... Elise Jordan (h/t Ben Chang) ... Nick Everhart of Content Creative Media and alum of Strategy Group for Media (h/ts Mitch Marczewski and Dan Bayens) ... Kimberly Fritts, CEO of Podesta Group ... Mike Schmidt, NYT’s justice and homeland security reporter ... Amanda Cox, an NYT graphics editor responsible for some of The Times’s most compelling visual journalism – 2013 article on “winning the Internet” http://bit.ly/1FevU3Q ... Advance/events star and #CampThirty founder Abbey Watson is 31 ... SoRelle Wyckoff, Sen. Cornyn’s deputy press secretary, is 26 (Roll Tide!) (h/t Ben Voelkel) ... Ralph Hellmann is 55 ... Bruce “The Boss” Springsteen is 67 ... Sharon Yang, former Obama/Clinton fundraiser and Instagram obsessive, now doing gov’t and politics outreach at Facebook ... Reuters justice correspondent Julia Edwards … Ana Marie Cox, the pride of Lincoln, Neb. ... Politico’s Bernie Becker and Meredith Kirsch ... Todd Metcalf, principal at PwC’s Tax Policy Services and Senate Finance alum, is 46 ... Jonathan Peled, Israeli ambassador to Mexico ... NARAL’s Kelly Sackley (h/t James Owens) ... Naomi Seligman, comms dir for LA Mayor Garcetti (h/t Tim Burger) ... Tom Martin, president and CEO at American Forest Foundation (h/t Jon Haber) ... … Brooke Brogan, senior PR manager at BrandLinkDC ... Close Up Foundation’s Maura O’Brien ... William Ricci of Rhode Island ... former U.N. High Commissioner for Human Rights Navi Pillay ... Amb. Kristen Silverberg, now managing director and general counsel at the Institute of International Finance … Ken Rynne ... Chamber alum Blair Fowler ... Texan Dustee Tucker … Matt McAlvanah, assistant USTR for public and media affairs and a Patty Murray alum ... Corey Tellaz, LD for Sen. Dick Durbin ... Loretta Solon Greene ... Matt “Butters” Hirsch, a McCain War Room alum ... Katrina Mendiola ... Stan Davis ... Dale Leibach, spending his day dancing at his favorite pizza bar in Sarasota (h/ts Teresa Vilmain) ... speechwriter and ghostwriter Dan Conley is 51 ... Neil Schoolnik is 45 ... Tom Daley ... Julio Iglesias is 72. SUBSCRIBE to the Playbook family: POLITICO Playbook http://politi.co/1M75UbX ... New York Playbook http://politi.co/1ON8bqW … Florida Playbook http://politi.co/1OypFe9 ... New Jersey Playbook http://politi.co/1HLKltF ... Massachusetts Playbook http://politi.co/1Nhtq5v ... Illinois Playbook http://politi.co/1N7u5sb ... California Playbookhttp://politi.co/2bLvcPl ... Brussels Playbook http://politi.co/1FZeLcw ... All our political and policy tipsheets http://politi.co/1M75UbX
North Carolina GOP Rep. Robert Pittenger said protesters in Charlotte are motivated by racism rather than anger over the fatal police shooting of Keith Scott, an African-American man. "The grievance in their mind is the animus, the anger," Pittenger said during an interview with the BBC. "They hate white people because white people are successful and they're not." Story Continued Below Pittenger -- who is under investigation by the FBI and IRS over his ties to his former real-estate firm -- insisted that the "welfare state" has turned American citizens into slaves. "We have spent trillions of dollars on welfare, where we put people in bondage so they can't be all that they're capable of being," Pittenger added. "America is a country of opportunity, of freedom, of liberty. It didn't become that way because of a great government that provided everything for everyone." When asked later about the comments, Pittenger's office sent a statement apologizing for the incident. “What is taking place in my hometown right now breaks my heart," Pittenger said in a statement. "My anguish led me to respond to a reporter’s question in a way that I regret. The answer doesn’t reflect who I am. I was quoting statements made by angry protestors last night on national TV. My intent was to discuss the lack of economic mobility for African-Americans because of failed policies. I apologize to those I offended and hope we can bring peace and calm to Charlotte.” Scott's death has triggered several days of rioting in Charlotte. Republican Gov. Pat McCrory has declared a state of emergency and the National Guard has been called in to assist local police. Charlotte police officials have refused to release a videotape of Scott's shooting, calling it not "definitive." After running unsuccessfully for lieutenant governor in 2008, Pittenger was elected to Congress in 2012. Pittenger, 68, serves on the Financial Services Committee. -- Cristiano Lima contributed to this report.
Washington (CNN)When Bernie Sanders stood before the Democratic National Convention in Philadelphia, he promised "to do everything I can" to elect Hillary Clinton president. But for much of the summer, Sanders was consumed with authoring a book he plans to release in November, while raising money for progressive candidates down the ticket. He has done just a handful of campaign events for Clinton, and hasn't yet activated his grassroots army that powered him to win more than 12 million votes during the Democratic primary. That's about to change. In recent days, Sanders has privately informed his old rival that he plans a surge of campaign events in key battleground states, including ones the Vermont independent won during the Democratic primary campaign and others with pockets of younger voters turned off by Clinton, according to two sources familiar with the conversations between the two camps. That means more stops in states like Michigan and New Hampshire, and possible trips to Nevada, Pennsylvania, Colorado and Wisconsin. The Clinton camp even plans to deploy Sanders to Minnesota, a state likely to go Democratic in the fall but one the Clinton camp is quietly trying to shore up as Donald Trump gains ground across the country, sources said. On Wednesday, Sanders will appear with Clinton in Durham, New Hampshire, an effort aimed directly at millennials by promoting college affordability. And it comes at a crucial time: Clinton is seeing her support stall among millennial voters, who are turning to Libertarian nominee Gary Johnson instead. In a Tuesday interview with CNN, Sanders promised that he would make the case directly to millennials about Clinton's proposal to ease tuition payments to families earning less than $125,000 annually, calling it a "big deal." And he said that he would draw a direct contrast between Trump and Clinton on the issue of humans causing global warming, which the GOP nominee has questioned in the past. "To the degree that we get those points out, I think she will do a whole lot better among younger people," Sanders said. Asked if he should do more for Clinton after keeping a relatively low profile after the convention, Sanders said: "We will be working very aggressively." But he would not answer directly when asked if he would activate his small donor network to pour money into Clinton's coffers. "I'm going to be campaigning as hard as I can," Sanders said. A source close to Sanders said it's unlikely he would use his vast email list to help Clinton raise money, instead reserving that for down-ticket candidates. Instead, the source said, Sanders will become a visible presence along the campaign trail in an attempt to turn his core supporters to the Clinton camp -- namely younger voters. Indeed, millennial voters are becoming a significant problem for Clinton, dogged by her email controversy, questions about her honesty and being a long-time fixture of the Democratic establishment. In a Bloomberg poll released this week, Clinton leads Trump 50%-40% among voters under 35 in a two-way race, down from her 29-point lead in August. But when the poll added the Green Party and Libertarian candidates on the ballot, Clinton's lead shrinks to 40%-36% -- with Johnson getting 11% of the millennial vote. To reverse the slide, the Clinton campaign plans to lean on Sanders and other progressive firebrands, like Sen. Elizabeth Warren, to fire up the base. But top Democrats say that surrogates can only do so much. "Bernie is going to be out there some more; he's just finishing his book," House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi said Tuesday. "He has been out there for Hillary. He'll be out there more, but she is going to have to make her own case as well because you can only transfer so much." After a tense primary where Sanders surprised Clinton and the political world by racking up big victories, the two sides developed trust during the July convention when the Vermont independent's team helped squash an uprising by Sanders' backers eager to disrupt the proceedings. On Labor Day, he barnstormed New Hampshire for Clinton -- with two events in the state -- and later did a three-city swing through Ohio. A source close to Sanders said the senator plans to hit the road for House and Senate candidates starting next week, including in states like Washington not considered a presidential battleground. But with Sanders' ability to connect with younger progressives at a time when Clinton is struggling with those voters, many are eager to see the self-described Democratic socialist follow through on his vow to do more to help their presidential nominee. "We all know the last 30 days is really when you motivate people, and say, 'Hey. You can't sit home, you can't stay out.' And I think (Sanders) knows that's the crucial point," said Sen. Claire McCaskill, D-Missouri, a top Clinton surrogate. Asked if she were worried about millennial voters flocking to Johnson, McCaskill added: "It doesn't seem thoughtful to me. It does feel like he could be a spoiler in some regard. But I still feel pretty positive and optimistic about millennials coming around -- especially with Bernie and Elizabeth Warren, and everybody's help." CNN's Elizabeth Landers and Deirdre Walsh contributed to this report.
Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton clashed over how much help Trump received with his business dealings, moments after the first presidential debate of the general election began. “You know, Donald was very fortunate in his life and that's all to his benefit,” Clinton said, soon after the debate kicked off at Hofstra University in Hempstead, N.Y. “He started his business with $14 million, borrowed from his father, and he really believes that the more you help wealthy people, the better off we'll be and that everything will work out from there. I don't buy that. I have a different experience.” Story Continued Below She went on to describe her Midwestern upbringing, which she portrayed as middle class, needling Trump in the process over how much he received assistance in getting his real estate career underway. But in the candidates’ first clash of the evening, Trump insisted that he was given a much smaller advantage as he began his business dealings. “Well, for one thing, and before we start on that, my father gave me a very small loan in 1975 and I built it into a company that's worth many, many billions of dollars with some of the greatest assets in the world and I say that because that's the kind of thinking our country needs.”
(CNN)Sen. Tim Scott said Thursday that instituting stop-and-frisk policing -- like the kind Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump has called for -- could be a potential impingement on Constitutional rights, adding that the policy would be ineffective at easing police-community relations. "The reality of it is that you don't need to violate the Constitution to keep communities safe," the Republican South Carolinian told CNN's Jake Tapper on "The Lead." "We're seeing an increase, an improvement, in public life, in quality of life in South Carolina because we learned how to work together." RELATED: Reality Check: Was 'stop-and-frisk' effective? Communities that are at a higher risk of crime would benefit from collaborating directly with law enforcement officials, said Scott, who is the US Senate's sole black Republican. "We still have issues, we still have challenges, but we're working the right direction," Scott said. Trump recently touted the policing practice and has brought up the topic during recent public appearances, adding that stop-and-frisk policies have worked in some cities to lower crime. "We did it in New York, it worked incredibly well and you have to be proactive and, you know, you really help people sort of change their mind automatically," Trump said in response to an audience member's question during a pre-taped Fox News town hall. He said the following morning that his comments were in regards to how to stop gun violence in Chicago. In light of recent police shootings in Tulsa, Oklahoma and Charlotte, North Carolina, Scott said while relations between law enforcement and community members are increasingly fraught, those who want to see change must partner with police to delineate a clear path for the future. "Part of the pain and the suffering that happens without clarity is that people jump to conclusions and sometimes it's the wrong conclusion," he said. "The faster the information jumps to the surface, the more information that provides clarity, hopefully the greater the calm will be." Scott cited how publicizing video footage of police shootings -- as in the case in Oklahoma, as well as following a 2015 fatal police shooting in Scott's home town of North Charleston -- gives communities more clarity about the incidents. "I'm simply here to suggest that there are some solutions that will provide greater clarity and provide a more panoramic view of the situation," he said. "Body cameras (are) a part of that." With protests surrounding recent police shootings cropping up around the country -- with some turning violent -- Scott said the most appropriate response would be to forge a path allowing the community to come together with law enforcement to draft key policies. "There is never a reason for violence in response to the situation," Scott told Tapper. "Violence for violence only begets more violence. This is the wrong direction in the wrong path." 
Washington (CNN)A series of high-profile breaches and warnings from national intelligence leaders has elections directors in critical battleground states seeking federal help against possible cyberattacks. Officials in Pennsylvania and Ohio tell CNN they are working closely with the Department of Homeland Security to protect their elections systems from cyberattacks and breaches. Ohio is going one step further. "We even asked the National Guard to attempt to penetrate our databases," said Joshua Eck, a spokesman for Ohio Secretary of State Jon Husted. "We've had a number of really positive tests. It has gone well and we've been able to find vulnerabilities and fix them." A pair of cyberattacks on Illinois' and Arizona's voter registration databases over the summer spurred the Obama administration to ring the alarm bells for states as they prepare for what has already been a chaotic campaign. And top Democrats on the House and Senate intelligence committees publicly accused the Russian government of seeking to alter the election. "Based on briefings we have received, we have concluded that the Russian intelligence agencies are making a serious and concerted effort to influence the U.S. election," Sen. Dianne Feinstein and Rep. Adam Schiff, of California, said Thursday. Russian intelligence agencies behind US election hacks, lawmakers say Cybersecurity experts say the prospect of "rigging" the election, and changing the outcome, is practically impossible. Elections are decentralized: 50 states, plus the District of Columbia, run their own operations, not to mention the thousands of counties across the country that play a major role at the local level. Different jurisdictions use different voting machines, It isn't plausible for hackers to breach them all in one fell swoop -- penetrating one election system in North Carolina has no impact on Colorado. Furthermore, most voting machines aren't connected to the Internet, which inoculates them from outside intrusions. But hackers could still cause plenty of havoc in November, with attacks on registration systems or government websites reporting the results on election night. Many news organizations pull their results from those sites. "Think about the chaos you could cause if you get one TV network calling the election for one candidate, and another network calling the election for the other," said Professor Herbert Lin, a cybersecurity expert at Stanford University. "If your intent is to sow doubt and uncertainty, at least in the short term, affecting the media reporting could be really problematic." DHS running 'Cyber hygiene scans' Homeland Security Secretary Jeh Johnson is the Obama administration's point man on election security, holding meetings with elections officials from across the country, and offering help to states that are interested. DHS is offering "cyber hygiene scans" that will remotely search for vulnerabilities in election systems like online voter registration systems and election night reporting infrastructure. It is also offering to send cybersecurity experts to states so they can conduct more aggressive in-person testing the final weeks of the campaign. Johnson recently laid out other federal resources for states in a memo last week, including a 24/7 center to respond to cyberattacks, and a list of "best practices" on how to secure voter registration databases. Pennsylvania has accepted the DHS help, both the remote scans and the in-person testing, said Pennsylvania Department of State spokeswoman Wanda Murren. Election authorities in Ohio are also accepting federal help. But not every state is happy to have the administration involved. Georgia's secretary of state publicly scoffed at these efforts and accused the federal government of trying to "subvert the Constitution." Georgia Secretary of State Brian Kemp, a Republican, rebuffed the idea, telling Nextgov that the feds might want to "subvert the Constitution to achieve the goal of federalizing elections under the guise of security." However, his office later walked back the comment, saying they were not flatly refusing the assistance. A call for comment from Kemp was not immediately returned Thursday. Florida officials, whose recount debacle in 2000 led to the federal law which ultimately created voter registration databases, declined to say whether they were accepting help from DHS, citing security concerns. What are the threats? Perhaps the most serious vulnerability is the integrity of voter registration systems. Hackers can break in and delete or alter individual voter registration records, creating confusion on Election Day when voters show up to their polling place and their names are mysteriously missing from the rolls, or their address is changed. This summer, hackers broke into a stash of information for about 90,000 voters in Illinois, breaching a database with voters' names, addresses, sex and birthdays. And officials in Arizona took their voter registration system offline after they learned that a Russian hacker had breached their systems. Once hackers penetrate a voter registration system, "the scope could be whatever they want," said Cathie Brown, who served as Virginia's deputy chief information security officer and is a cybersecurity expert with Impact Makers. "Deleting an entire precinct of voters -- that's absolutely possible. The grander the scope, the more likely they'll get caught. But they might not get caught until after they've done the damage." But at least one expert said that state elections directors have been dealing with technological threats for a long time. "The state and local election officials, this whole notion of security is not new to them this is something they deal with all the time," said Tim Mattice, executive director of the Elections Center, which trains state and local elections officials on administering elections. Mattice's organization works with the professional group representing election officials, the National Association of State Election Directors. Mattice said that when DHS offered up help, most people understood them when they said they were making it voluntary and did not want to be viewed as coming in and taking over state-run elections. Ironically, Mattice noted that the focus on technological security got serious after Congress passed the national Help America Vote Act in the wake of the 2000 elections, which mandated that states develop integrated voter registration systems -- effectively placing all the voter data in systems that could be hacked. Asked how hackers got through in Illinois and Arizona despite the layers of security that elections officials already have in place, Mattice said it's the same problem any organization or business faces. "You could ask Target how they got hacked -- these hackers are getting sophisticated," Mattice said. 
Former President George H.W. Bush is bucking his party's presidential nominee and plans to vote for Hillary Clinton in November, according to a member of another famous political family, the Kennedys. Bush, 92, had intended to stay silent on the White House race between Clinton and Donald Trump, a sign in and of itself of his distaste for the GOP nominee. But his preference for the wife of his own successor, President Bill Clinton, nonetheless became known to a wider audience thanks to Kathleen Hartington Kennedy Townsend, the former Maryland lieutenant governor and daughter of the late Robert F. Kennedy. Story Continued Below On Monday, Townsend posted a picture on her Facebook page shaking hands next to the former president and this caption: "The President told me he’s voting for Hillary!!” In a telephone interview, Townsend said she met with the former president in Maine earlier today, where she said he made his preference known that he was voting for a Democrat. “That’s what he said,” she told POLITICO. Asked about Townsend’s post, George H.W. Bush spokesman Jim McGrath in an email replied, "The vote President Bush will cast as a private citizen in some 50 days will be just that: a private vote cast in some 50 days. He is not commenting on the presidential race in the interim." George H.W. Bush and former First Lady Barbara Bush have stayed out of the political debate since campaigning earlier this year for their son Jeb's unsuccessful bid for president. Neither George H.W. Bush nor his son, former President George W. Bush, attended this summer's Republican National Convention in Cleveland where Trump accepted the nomination. Many former GOP officials from both Bush administrations have also announced their support for Clinton over Trump, including national security adviser Brent Scowcroft and former Commerce Secretary Carlos Gutierrez. One Bush official who has taken Trump's side is former Vice President Dan Quayle, who told POLITICO in an interview this summer he was still holding out hope both Bushes would back Trump. "Clearly in their heart of hearts I should hope they would want a Republican president, but they can speak for themselves," Quayle said in an interview in July.
While Donald Trump will top expectations, Hillary Clinton’s challenge in Monday night’s debate is to become human, former Trump campaign manager Corey Lewandowski said Monday. “What Hillary Clinton has to do here is she has to become human, and I mean that in a good way,” Lewandowski, a paid CNN contributor who is still getting severance from the Trump campaign, said Monday morning during a panel discussion. “She has to connect with people because I think what happens is people see her as — look, she knows the issues. There’s no question about that, but what she doesn’t have is that compassion that people see, and I think if she’s gonna be successful tonight, she has to relate to people on a different level, and the expectation of Donald Trump as not preparing, I think he’ll exceed that expectation.” Story Continued Below Lewandowski pushed back on the notion that Trump won’t be prepared for his prime-time faceoff with Clinton at Hofstra University in New York, noting that a similar narrative of an ill-prepared Trump played out during the Republican primary debates, yet the real estate mogul was actually “very prepared” and “dominated” his rivals. “Look, I think it’s the same preparation that he’s using now,” Lewandowski said of Trump’s primary debate prep, “which is conversation, talking with experts in their respective fields, understanding the issues, making sure he’s got briefing documents on issues that he wants to know more about, but he’s also prepared for the last 40 years of his life, and, you know, getting ready for a day like this is a big day for anybody. You got 100 million people, potentially, who are gonna tune in, and one of the next two people who’s gonna be president of the United States is gonna be standing on that stage tonight. I think it’s a big day for everybody.”
Washington (CNN)The biggest story of the 2016 election is undoubtedly the rise of Donald Trump, and behind the Republican nominee is a group in its last throes as the biggest force in politics: The white working class. A new survey from CNN and the Kaiser Family Foundation delves deeply into this pivotal group, to understand their experience in an America whose changing demographics and economy have arguably impacted this group more than almost any other. Contrary to many assumptions about this group, the poll finds working class whites generally happy with their lives, and mostly satisfied with their personal financial situation. Just 18% say they are angry about the way things are going in their own lives, and 44% think America's best days lie ahead. They are just as likely as their black and Hispanic working class counterparts to feel optimistic about their lives, 7 in 10 or more say so in each group. But the white working class harbors deep concerns about the country's economy, the amount the government is doing to help the working class and their own ability to influence politics. A majority, 53%, say they are very dissatisfied with the country's economic situation and 84% say their views are not well represented by the government in Washington, well above the share of white college graduates or black or Hispanic working class to say the same. About 6 in 10 white working class people say it's gotten harder for people like them to get ahead financially and two-thirds say it's harder to find good jobs. Many are concerned about what the next generation will face: 50% say they expect their children to have a lower standard of living than they currently have, compared with 35% among whites who have college degrees, 43% among the black working class and 31% among the Hispanic working class. More than other groups, whites without college degrees blame the government for the economic problems that beset the working class, with 62% saying the federal government deserves all or most of the blame for those problems compared with less than half among whites with degrees and the black and Hispanic working class, and 66% saying it doesn't do enough to help the working class. Amid these concerns, Trump holds broad appeal among white working class voters. Sixty percent say they would consider Trump this fall, about double the 29% who say they'd consider Hillary Clinton. Among other groups, far fewer even say they would consider Trump. Among whites with college degrees, 39% say they'd consider him -- that's cut in half among Hispanic working class voters, 18% of whom say they'd consider Trump, and just 3% of black working class voters say they'll give Trump a look. White working class voters are more Republican than Democratic, 56% in the CNN/KFF poll are Republicans or independents who lean that way, compared with 33% who consider themselves Democrats or are independents who lean that way, but the poll reveals that their views on what the government does to help people like them and the changing demographics of the country -- two issues that have been a central focus of Trump's campaign -- are driven by both education and partisanship. The undeniable trend For nearly all of American history, whites without college degrees -- the group identified as white working class for the purposes of this survey and in many assessments of the American electorate -- made up a majority of the public and a majority of voters. That has changed, and rapidly, at the same time the nation's economy has shifted to favor those who hold college degrees. Ronald Reagan was elected in 1980 by an electorate in which 63% of voters were whites who had not completed a four-year college education, according to exit polls. That had dropped 10 points by 1992, when Bill Clinton won the presidency. That election marked the last time exit polls would find whites without college degrees to be a majority of voters. By the time Barack Obama won the presidency in 2008, just 39% of those who cast ballots were whites without degrees. Census figures for voting and registration suggest that the white working class make up a larger share of the electorate than do the exit polls, roughly 44% in 2012 in that estimate. Both data sources have different and unquantifiable sources of error, and there has been some dispute over their true share of the electorate. Regardless of the data source, however, the trend is the same and undeniable -- the white working class is shrinking, and at the same time, their ability to influence American politics has declined. Enter Trump. Working class white voters have been critical to Trump's success. Throughout the Republican primaries, Trump's victories were bolstered by support from whites without degrees. Across 28 states with exit or entrance polls this spring, Trump averaged 50% support among white non-college GOP primary voters or caucus participants, compared with 37% among whites with college degrees. And across five CNN/ORC polls conducted since the primaries ended in June, Trump's lead among white non-college voters averages 29 points, while white college voters have broken in Clinton's direction by an average of 8 points. Restated in terms similar to the oft-cited gender gap, that adds up to a 37-point education gap among whites. According to exit polls back to 1980, it has never been larger than 14 points. The white working class shifts Republican Democrats used to be the party of the white working class, and Republicans, the party of the college educated. Those roles have flipped. Ron Brownstein, a CNN senior political analyst and editorial director for strategic partnerships at Atlantic Media who has reported extensively on this group, calls it class inversion. "In the 50s, 60s, and 70s, Democrats ran better among non-college than college whites," he said. "Starting in the 80s, the two lines converged, and in 2000, (Al) Gore ran better among college than non-college whites, (John) Kerry ran 6 points better, Obama 7 points." Some of that is due to the shifting economy. Working class whites were largely synonymous with union members, who are traditionally staunchly Democratic. As the service economy has grown and manufacturing declined, the profile of union members has changed. In 1980, 70% of all voters who came from union households were whites without college degrees; in 2012, the white working class made up just were 39% of voters from union households. Non-whites and white college graduates were each about 30% of the union vote in 2012, almost double their share of the 1980 vote, and those two groups are increasingly Democratic. But some of it is their differing views on government and change in American society. Within the white working class, those who consider themselves Democrats and those who say they are Republican tend to agree in their assessment of how the working class is doing. About 7 in 10 working class white voters in each party say it's gotten harder for people like them to find good jobs, and narrow majorities of both say the government isn't doing enough to help "people like you." And while they don't see exactly eye-to-eye on immigration or the increasing diversity of the United States, both sets of partisans are more apt than their college-educated counterparts to see a negative side to the country's shifting demographics. Both working class white Democrats and Republicans are more likely than white college educated partisans to feel that the country's increasing racial and ethnic diversity is harmful because it leaves some people feeling left behind. The same pattern emerges in perceptions of immigrants, with white non-college partisans more apt than white partisans with degrees to say immigrants today are a burden on the United States and that the government should attempt to deport all immigrants currently living in the US illegally. And in a party whose second-place finisher for this year's presidential nomination considers himself a socialist, working-class white Democrats are less apt than their college-educated counterparts to consider themselves liberal or to be non-religious, two factors that could be driving them away from the Obama-era Democratic Party. Among white working class Democrats who are registered to vote, 22% say they would consider voting for Trump, vs. just 2% among white Democrats with college degrees, and nearly a quarter, 23%, say they will definitely not vote for Clinton, a figure that stands at 3% among white Democrats with college degrees. The effects of this shift are showing in recent swing-state polling. Trump's best chance to win the presidency comes by flipping rust-belt states where Democrats have had natural advantages in recent presidential elections and which have larger than average blocs of white non-college voters -- Pennsylvania, Michigan and Wisconsin among them. In each, Trump has cut into Clinton's advantage with broad support from the white working class. In the pure battlegrounds, Ohio and Iowa also appear to be shifting Trump's way on the strength of his support among white non-college voters. "Democrats have run slightly better among blue-collar whites in Midwestern swing states, and that has been a key to them holding those states," said Brownstein. Will they vote? Majorities of voters across partisan, education, and racial lines say they are dissatisfied with the influence that people like them have on the political process. But there are broader differences when asked about the likelihood of actually turning out to impact that process. In the CNN/KFF Poll, 71% of white non-college voters said they always vote in presidential elections, and 79% rated the chances that they would vote a 10 out of 10. But both figures were smaller than among whites who do have college degrees, about 9 in 10 in that group said they always vote and would be very likely to this time around. But a CNN/ORC poll in early September found almost no difference between whites with degrees and those without in terms of enthusiasm about voting this year. Forty-two percent of white college graduates were extremely or very enthusiastic, as were 43% of white non-college registered voters. Should turnout levels among whites without degrees, whites with degrees and non-whites continue along their current trajectory, the white working class would likely emerge from 2016 still the largest voting bloc in the country in terms of race and educational attainment, for what may be the last time. The CNN/KFF Poll was conducted by telephone August 9 through September 5 among a nationally representative sample of 1,614 adults, including 701 people who were identified as working class whites -- white non-Hispanic adults who do not currently hold a four-year degree and, if under age 25, not currently enrolled in school. Results for the full sample have a margin of sampling error of plus or minus 3 percentage points, it is 5 points for results among members of the white working class, 6 points for whites with degrees, 10 points for black working class respondents and 9 points for the Hispanic working class. Full methodological details are available here. 
Donald Trump interrupted Hillary Clinton 25 times in the first 26 minutes. He claimed she lacked the “stamina” to serve as commander-in-chief. And when the question of his attitude towards women became an explicit topic of debate, he seemed to allude to resisting the urge to use her husband’s marital infidelity against her. Trump has been aggressive and crude with male debate opponents, too, and he addressed the former Cabinet secretary by her proper title throughout the sparring. But, going up against the first woman to take to a debate stage as a major party nominee in American history, did Trump come across as sexist? Story Continued Below According to Vox, he interrupted her nearly once a minute for the first 26 minutes of the debate. By 538’s count, Trump seized the floor from Clinton three times and lodged 24 interjections as she spoke, a total of 27 interruptions. Clinton didn’t seize the floor from Trump once, and lodged only 5 interjections. The pro-Clinton American Bridge counted a total of 73 interruptions by Trump. The appearance of chauvinistic bullying can be deadly for a male politician debating a female opponent. Just ask Rick Lazio, who sunk his 2000 Senate bid against Clinton when he left his podium mid-debate in an attempt to force her to sign a campaign finance pledge. Trump has thrived by indulging his natural inclination towards aggression, but has also been tripped up on his attitude towards women and issues that matter to them – like when Carly Fiorina confronted him for deriding the appearance of her face and when he was forced to walk back a statement that women should be punished for getting illegal abortions. And the risks for Trump are magnified. His opponents have consistently accused him of misogyny and his hopes in states like Ohio and Pennsylvania rest on suburban Republican women who are uneasy with the choice. After the debate, the Clinton campaign wasn’t touching the sexism question. “He has so much wrong with his performance tonight that something like that didn't even enter my mind,” said press secretary Brian Fallon. But others saw unmistakable chauvinism in Trump’s approach. “First of all the interruptions, he talked over her numerous times, the way he rolled his eyes…that to me was indicative of the gender issue,” said former North Carolina Sen. Kay Hagan, a Democrat. Trump himself seemed to sense a potential trap when moderator Lester Holt asked him to explain his prior comment that Clinton doesn’t have a presidential “look.” He quickly pivoted away from her physical appearance. “She doesn't have the look,” Trump responded. “She doesn't have the stamina. I said she doesn't have the stamina, and I don't believe she does have the stamina. To be president of this country, you need tremendous stamina.” Clinton shot back by citing her diplomatic forays to hundreds of countries and the 11 hours she spent before the House committee investigating the Benghazi killings. Then she knocked Trump for his treatment of former Miss Universe Alicia Machado, saying, “He called this woman Ms. Piggy. Then he called her Ms. Housekeeping, because she was Latina. Donald, she has a name.” Trump responded by saying, “I was going to say something extremely rough to Hillary, to her family, and I said to myself, ‘I can't do it. I just can't do it. It's inappropriate. It's not nice.’” After the debate, Trump confidant Rudy Giuliani said Trump was restraining himself from calling Clinton “phony as a feminist.” “This is the thing about Donald Trump is he has a big heart. He saw Chelsea in the audience, and he didn’t say what he was ready to say,” said Giuliani. According to the former New York mayor, Trump was preparing to say, “You take money from countries that stone women. You take money from countries that imprison women. You take money from countries where women can’t drive. You take money – not money, millions and hundreds of millions of dollars – from countries that treat women as cattle. You attack Monica Lewinsky, saying that she was basically insane, when it turned out your husband basically violated an intern in Oval Office of the White House, disgraced the United States of America, and you were one of the primary attackers, and after your years with Bill Clinton, if you don’t know that Monica Lewinsky was telling the truth then you’re not smart enough to be president.” Giuliani’s counterpunch aside, it was Trump who faced more post-debate scrutiny on gender issues. Republican women are crucial to Trump’s chances, and those watching the debate fell into two camps: Those who sensed sexism and those who felt gender dynamics were the least of Trump’s problems on Monday night. Liz Mair, a Republican strategist who opposed Trump in the primary, said he came across as “the kind of guy ever woman out there has rolled her eyes at and turned down flat at least a couples times in her life.” Katie Packer Gage, another Republican strategist who opposed Trump in the primary said that the unscripted environment brought out the impulses that caused Trump so much trouble before his recent streak of relative message discipline. “He has such a long record of demeaning and disparaging and bullying women that this is just a reminder of so many things that have been kind of forgotten in the last week because he’s sort of learned how to behave in proper company when he’s scripted,” she said. But other Republican women saw it as a red herring. “I thought it was many things but not sexist,” said conservative commentator Dana Loesch, a frequent Trump critic, of the businessman’s performance. “I think a discussion of stamina with respect to any sex is fair game when the context is commander-in-chief.” “For Trump standards, he was fairly subdued. At least he didn’t call her fat and ugly and tell her her voice game him a headache,” zinged Republican commentator Ana Navarro, who has sparred with Trump this campaign season. To Sarah Isgur Flores, Fiorina’s deputy campaign manager, Trump treated Clinton the way he’s treated his male opponents. “Hillary’s team would e making a mistake crying foul over Trump being Trump,” she said. “It can only take away from her performance at this point.” Clinton’s performance aside, her face remained an object of analysis. While Trump resisted the invitation to weigh in again on her physical appearance, Fox News’ Brit Hume filled that gap for him. “The Trump expression was one we’re all familiar with from the earlier debates – he looked annoyed, put out, uncomfortable,” Hume said after the debate. “And she looked, I think for the most part, she looked composed — smug sometimes — not necessarily attractive.” Gabriel Debenedetti contributed to this report.
Donald Trump's surrogates and leading supporters on Sunday were pushing a narrative that the Republican candidate started two days earlier when he declared that Hillary Clinton's 2008 campaign "started the birther controversy," meaning the false notion that President Obama was born outside the United States. On CBS News’ Face the Nation on Sunday, Trump campaign manager Kellyanne Conway pushed the claim that so-called "birtherism" began with the Clinton 2008 campaign by invoking the words of former Clinton campaign manager Patti Sollis Doyle. “Even Patti Solis Doyle, who was Hillary Clinton's campaign manager in 2008 ... until she was fired by Hillary Clinton, admitted on Friday ... that she said, yes, these are her words: There was a volunteer in Iowa who was pushing this,” Conway said. Sollis Doyle, in an interview on CNN, said a volunteer coordinator had forwarded an email promoting the birther conspiracy. But she said that person was immediately fired and that the birther conspiracy theory was never promoted by Clinton herself.     Conway also mentioned a memo circulated by Mark Penn when he was chief strategist for Clinton’s 2008 campaign that talked about Obama’s lack of American roots. Penn wrote a memo in 2007 saying that Obama’s foreign background could present a weakness for him and that Clinton should emphasize her middle-class Midwestern upbringing. "His roots to American values and culture are at best limited," the memo says. "I cannot imagine America electing a president during a time of war who is not at his center fundamentally American in his thinking and values." But it does not say that Obama was foreign-born. New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie, a prominent Trump supporter, also invoked Sollis Doyle’s comments and then downplayed Trump's role in promoting the idea that Obama wasn't born in the U.S. "It's not true that he kept it up for five years,” Christie said on CNN’s “State of the Union.” “It wasn't like he was talking about it on a regular basis." Similarly, Republican National Committee Chairman Reince Priebus in an interview on "Face the Nation" said he thinks the "birther" movement "was something that got started in the 2008 presidential campaign ... By the preponderance of evidence before us, Hillary Clinton, or her campaign, were definitely involved in this issue." Trump himself gave a short statement on Friday morning, at an event under the glittering chandeliers of his newest hotel, in an attempt to reverse his long-held assertion that there is uncertainty surrounding the location of President Obama's birth. “Hillary Clinton and her campaign of 2008 started the birther controversy. I finished it. I finished it. You know what I mean. President Barack Obama was born in the United States, period,” the Republican presidential nominee said. Trump's statement Friday came just a day after he refused to acknowledge to the Washington Post that Obama was born in the U.S. And for years, Trump had helped perpetuate conspiracy theories about whether the first black president is wholly American and in fact born in Hawaii -- as his public birth certificate says, an attack many, including Clinton, have said is racially charged. In an August 2013 interview with ABC News' Jon Karl, for example, Trump stood behind his push to reveal Obama's "true birth status." Karl asked, "You don't acknowledge that you went overboard on this whole birther stuff?" Trump replied, "Actually, I think it made me very popular, if you want to know the truth, OK? So I do think I know what I'm doing."
Washington (CNN)The top Democrats on Congress' intelligence committees boldly blamed Russian intelligence agencies for a series of hacks designed to influence the US presidential election. California Sen. Dianne Feinstein and California Rep. Adam Schiff, the ranking members on the Senate and House Intelligence Committees, respectively, released a joint statement on Thursday calling out Russian President Vladimir Putin and his government. "Based on briefings we have received, we have concluded that the Russian intelligence agencies are making a serious and concerted effort to influence the US election," the Democrats said. "At the least, this effort is intended to sow doubt about the security of our election and may well be intended to influence the outcomes of the election -- we can see no other rationale for the behavior of the Russians." Unlike past hedged comments from US lawmakers and officials, the statement was definitive and more forceful than any previous assertions about Russian hacking from top-level government sources. And in tying the hacking directly to Putin and/or senior levels of Russian government, the Democrats were more forceful than the administration or Congress has been in the past. "We believe that orders for the Russian intelligence agencies to conduct such actions could come only from very senior levels of the Russian government," Schiff and Feinstein said. "We call on President Putin to immediately order a halt to this activity. Americans will not stand for any foreign government trying to influence our election. We hope all Americans will stand together and reject the Russian effort." Kerry delivers blistering attack on Russia at UN Experts have pinpointed Russian government-affiliated hackers as the source of cyberattacks on a number of Democratic political groups, including the Democratic National Committee and Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee. Communications and documents stolen in those hacks have been selectively leaked online since, by a hacker claiming to be unaffiliated with the Russians going by "Guccifer 2.0." But analysis by private-sector cybersecurity firms have concluded that the character is most likely a front for the Russians to cast doubt on their culpability. Two other hacks -- both of state election boards -- have also been loosely tied to potential Russian hackers. In Illinois, thousands of voter role records were accessed, and Arizona was also targeted. Though nothing was done to influence elections in those states, experts believe Russian hacking is designed to cast doubt in the security and validity of the election. Schiff and Feinstein did not explain what in their briefings led to their conclusion. Intelligence Committee members receive classified briefings they can't speak about in public. They also broke with the administration in their condemnation of Russia. The White House has referred to the beliefs of experts on the hacks, but have not discussed any conclusions drawn by US government investigators. The administration has also been navigating a tense relationship with Russia over the conflict in Syria, with both sides pointing fingers over a fraught ceasefire agreement." No Republicans joined their statement. The hacks have been perceived as a benefit to GOP nominee Donald Trump over Democrat Hillary Clinton. Trump has spoken favorably of Putin in the past, and Democrats have tried to paint him as friendly to the authoritarian leader. The hacks have been damaging to the Democratic Party, leading to the resignation of then-Chairwoman Debbie Wasserman-Schultz on the eve of the Democratic convention in July. In return, Democrats have asked Republicans to not use material from the hacks due to the suspect Russian involvement. CNN's Nicole Gaouette contributed to this report.
Cleveland Heights, Ohio (CNN)Donald Trump said Wednesday he was "very troubled" by the fatal police shooting late last week in Oklahoma of an unarmed black man and suggested the officer in question "got scared" or was "choking." Trump offered his first public reaction to the shooting during an event at the church of Pastor Darrell Scott, a black supporter who asked Trump for his reaction to the police shootings of black men in Tulsa, Oklahoma, and Charlotte, North Carolina. Trump began his response by praising police and noting he has been endorsed by several law enforcement groups, but added that "you always have problems." "You have somebody in there that always makes a mistake, that's bad or that chokes," Trump said, using a term he often uses to describe somebody who falters under pressure. RELATED: Tulsa police shooting investigated by Justice Department Trump did not address Tuesday's shooting in Charlotte of Keith Lamont Scott, who police say was armed at the time he was fatally shot, but the Republican nominee did describe the video of the shooting of Terence Crutcher in Tulsa. Crutcher was unarmed when he was shot by a police officer. "I must tell you, I watched the shooting in particular in Tulsa and that man was hands up, that man went to the car -- hands up -- put his hand on the car. To me, it looked like he did everything you're supposed to do," Trump said. "And he looked like a really good man -- and maybe I'm a little clouded because I saw his family talking about him after the fact ... but he looked like somebody who was doing what they were asking him to do." "This young officer, I don't know what she was thinking. I don't know what she was thinking, but I'm very, very troubled by that and we have to be very careful," Trump said, referring to the officer who fatally shot Crutcher. The officer, Betty Shelby, is 42 years old. Trump questioned whether Shelby got "scared" or if she was "choking." "Did she get scared? Was she choking? What happened? But people that choke, maybe they can't be doing what they're doing," he said. Trump's remarks on the shooting came as he delivered a speech to a group of pastors focused on his plans to help minority communities as president and one day after he argued that African-American communities are "in the absolutely worst shape that they've ever been in before. Ever. Ever. Ever." RELATED: Obama: Would be 'personal insult' to legacy if black voters don't back Clinton Trump did not address the Tulsa shooting during the two rallies he hosted on Tuesday, after the Department of Justice announced it would investigate the shooting for possible civil rights violations. Moments before taking the stage Wednesday, Trump tweeted about the latest shootings: "The situations in Tulsa and Charlotte are tragic. We must come together to make America safe again." 
Washington (CNN)The Senate Wednesday rejected a bipartisan proposal to block a pending $1.15 billion United States arms sale to Saudi Arabia. Critics of the military deal, which was approved by the Obama administration last month, complained it could drag the US into the Saudi-led war in Yemen and contribute to the worsening humanitarian crisis there. The measure to disapprove the sale failed on a 26-71 vote. The outcome, which was a victory for Saudi Arabia, came as the US-Saudi relationship is being carefully examined and managed by restive lawmakers. Congress will vote in the coming days in favor of another highly sensitive matter the Saudis strongly oppose. Lawmakers are expected to override President Barack Obama's veto of a bill that would allow victims and families of the 9/11 terrorist strikes to sue Saudi Arabia for its alleged role in them. Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell , R-Kentucky, aware of the potentially conflicting signals Congress is sending the Saudis, cited the importance of strong US-Saudi ties in explaining why he voted against the blocking the sale. "I oppose that motion because I believe it would harm our nation's long term strategic interests in the Persian Gulf and the broader Middle East," he said. "It would further damage our alliance and partnership with the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia at a time when our moderate Sunni Arab allies are questioning whether our nation is able to meet our traditional commitment to the region. The resolution would also ignore the shared interests we have with Saudi Arabia in combatting al Qaeda and ISIL." A coalition of liberal and conservative senators pushed the resolution to scrap the sale. Sen. Rand Paul, R-Kentucky, argued that by selling tanks and other military equipment to Saudi Arabia the US is essentially joining the war in Yemen without congressional authorization. "We are complicit and actively involved with war in Yemen. There's been no debate in Congress, really no debate in the public sphere, over whether or not we should be at war in Yemen," Paul said. "We are currently doing inflight refueling of bombers, Saudi Arabian bombers that are bombing in Yemen. We are helping to select sites and we actually have had Special Forces involved in these decisions in the theatre as well." Sen. Chris Murphy, D-Connecticut, warned America would be blamed for humanitarian disaster in Yemen and could lead to a backlash against the US. "There have already been thousands and thousands of civilians killed," said Murphy. "If you talk to Yemenis, they will tell you that this is perceived inside Yemen as not a Saudi-led bombing campaign, which it's broadly advertised in the newspapers, but as a US bombing campaign or at best a US-Saudi bombing campaign. There is a US imprint on every civilian death inside Yemen, which is radicalizing the people this country against the United States." Senior GOP senators active in foreign policy matters -- such as Senate Foreign Relations Committee Chairman Bob Corker of Tennessee, Sen. John McCain of Arizona and Sen. Lindsey Graham of South Carolina, opposed blocking the sale. They argued that a strong Saudi Arabia provides a critical counterweight to the aspirations of Iran in the Middle East. "The Middle East is a very complicated place," Graham said. "But here's what's not complicated: Saudi Arabia shared intelligence with us that's made Americans safe. They have allowed us to use their air bases in time of conflict. They are all-in against ISIS and they are a great ally against the ambitions of the Iranians. To those who wish to sever the this relationship, be careful what you wish for." 
Washington (CNN)Senate Minority Leader Harry Reid offered an explanation Tuesday for why Donald Trump won't disclose his tax returns: the Republican presidential nominee is "faking his net worth." The Nevada Democrat -- and frequent Trump foe -- levied the charge on Twitter, evoking a similar claim he made against the GOP's 2012 nominee, Mitt Romney. "Trump is faking his net worth. He's not as rich as he would have us believe + a bad businessman. That's why we can't see his tax returns," Reid tweeted. Reid, citing an unnamed source, memorably accused Romney during the 2012 race of going 10 years without paying federal income taxes. Romney released a 20-year summary of his tax liabilities from 1990 through 2009, and his tax returns from 2010 and 2011. But he did not release additional returns. The Trump campaign did not return CNN's request for comment. Reid on Tuesday then went to the Senate floor to rip into Trump. "The last thing the American people want or need is a president who will run another financial scam on each of them," the Nevada Democrat said. "If elected, Donald Trump would be the scammer in chief. Trump is a fraud." "He's always looking for a mark, some victim for one of his schemes," Reid added. "And now our country is Trump's next target. He wants this to be his biggest payoff ever." Reid's speech focused what he sees as lies about Trump's money and said the real estate mogul is only wealthy because he was born with "a silver spoon." Trump's father was a wealthy real estate magnate who loaned his son money to jumpstart his career. "Litigation is nothing new to Donald Trump. Over the last decade and a half, Trump and his companies and have been sued in federal court 72 times. That doesn't take into consideration the many times he's been sued in state courts," Reid said. "But Trump being the flim-flammer he is just moves on to another scam." Reid, who is supporting Hillary Clinton, has repeatedly attacked Trump this campaign. Following Clinton's pneumonia diagnosis earlier this month, Reid attacked Trump's health. "Take a look at this character that's running for president. He complains about her health. What does he do? He's 70 years old. He's not slim and trim. He brags about eating fast food every day. Look at his health a little bit," Reid said last week. And on Thursday, Reid tore into Trump on the Senate floor, calling the Republican presidential nominee a "spoiled brat," "a con artist" and a "human leech who will bleed the country." 
Jill Stein is a Harvard-trained internist, a doctor who diagnosed thousands of patients for a quarter-century in Boston and Chicago before making the late-career switch to Green Party presidential candidate and could-be Hillary Clinton spoiler. So, as we settled in for our “Off Message” podcast interview last week in a drab hotel conference room in Baltimore (she had a rally there last Friday), I asked Stein — as a clinician used to making snap assessments — whether she agreed that Donald Trump “will be the healthiest individual ever elected to the presidency,” as declared by the GOP nominee’s Bruce Vilanch-esque personal physician Harold Bornstein. Story Continued Below “You know, I don’t pretend to be able to do TV diagnosis, but I think the guy has a problem,” said the 66-year-old candidate, who is averaging somewhere between 2 percent and 5 percent in most national and state polls, enough (Clinton people say) to put a scare into the Democrat in too-close-to-call states. “The guy has a lot of problems — physical, mental, emotional, cognitive,” Stein said of Trump. As proof of his (alleged) pathology, she pointed to his position-hopping on a range of issues, which she cast as erratic rather than calculating — from his fuzzy Iraq positions over the years, to his brief “softening” on immigration last month, to his decision (on the day we spoke) to suddenly renounce birtherism after five years of banging a drumbeat of lies. “It’s hard to, you know, to think too hard about anything Donald Trump says because he will change his mind in the next hour, if not the next day, or whatever,” she added. “Today, suddenly, after five years, he became convinced that it’s not an issue. Yesterday it was an issue. It will probably become an issue again for him. You know, the guy may have a memory problem. Who knows what it is? But he’s incapable of having a consistent thought or policy.” Stein also thinks Trump’s getting a free pass because he spent his career in private business, and she wants him to release his tax returns. (She wants everybody else to do the same.) “At least with Clinton, you know, there was some degree of transparency,” she said. “But what’s going on with Trump, you can’t even get at, and what he said was that even to clarify 15 out of these 500 deals, these are just like the most frightening mafiosos around the world. He’s like — he’s a magnet for crime and extortion.” A veteran protester who has had brushes with the law, Stein has a bit of Carrie Nation ferocity about her, but she also has a soothing, therapeutic mien — precisely the person you’d go to if you developed an unexplained rash after chaining yourself to a fracking facility. Stein got 460,000 votes as an outsider candidate in 2012 for a left-of-left, anti-war party steeped in environmental issues, but adamantly denies any role as a spoiler. She won’t say whether she can better Ralph Nader’s 2.7 million total for the party in 2000 and generally avoids the whole Al Gore-Florida-handing-W-the-White House thing. And she claims that she’s drawing disaffected Bernie-or-Bust voters who never, ever would have voted for Clinton anyway — many of whom might have actually voted for Trump. (I told her I don’t buy that.) As much as Stein despises Trump — and she really, really does — she describes the choice between him and Hillary Clinton as an abominable binary offering “death by gunshot or death by strangulation.” But her contempt has a more cutting quality when she talks about Clinton. She mocks Trump as braying menace; Stein thinks he’s, at heart, a bumbler who would be neutered by his own party after being elected. But it’s Clinton who poses the greater threat, in Stein’s estimation, because she knows how to move the levers of Washington. “Donald Trump, I think, will have a lot of trouble moving things through Congress,” Stein explains. “Hillary Clinton, on the other hand, won’t. … Hillary has the potential to do a whole lot more damage, get us into more wars faster, to pass her fracking disastrous climate program, much more easily than Donald Trump could do his.” This is a boutique opinion among mainstream liberals, to put it politely. And a lot of people, Democrats and pollsters among them, see in Stein and her more popular Libertarian counterpart Gary Johnson (whose support flirts with double digits) as potent threats to Clinton because they draw disproportionately from her potential supporters, especially among younger voters. The TBS host and satirist Samantha Bee, who makes no secret about wanting to see the first female president elected, is so infuriated with Stein she refuses to even show her picture on TV — and encouraged Stein backers to mail their complaints to her vagina, though she used a different word. Stein is used to this kind of thing and believes she is taking one for the lefty team. Earlier this year, she hinted about dropping out if Sanders stayed in and still pines a bit for the Hillary-backing Vermont socialist. “I’ve tried to talk with Bernie, but, you know, Bernie is — he is a team player,” she said, lamenting his refusal to even chat with her. “I think he’s on the wrong team, perhaps because he’s been in Washington, D.C., too long, because he used to really understand independent politics and why we cannot have a viable political system unless we have independent political parties. … Maybe it’s a generational thing.” Sanders, stumping for Clinton over the weekend, dismissed Stein and Johnson as a self-defeating “protest vote” but there’s more than a little truth to her argument that third-party candidates will lure voters away from the Democratic nominee, with some polls showing a quarter to a third of under-30 voters opting for Stein, Johnson or none of the above. “The millennial problem is real,” a senior Clinton aide recently told me. “It shouldn’t be overstated, but we have work to do.” Like Sanders, Stein has an affection for Russia and a soft spot for Botox strongman Vladimir Putin. Critics like Clinton ally Neera Tanden have noted just how often Stein appears on the Putin-controlled cable network RT. And a gushing video Stein recorded after her appearance at a democracy conference in Moscow earlier this year sparked all sorts of speculation on the part of Team Clinton about a broader Cyrillic conspiracy to undermine the Democratic nominee that included Trump, his former aide Paul Manafort and Hillary-hating WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange, whom Stein has spoken about in heroic terms. When I asked her whether Putin is a despot, I got a yes-and-no answer, with traces of Trumpian ambivalence. “To some extent, yes, but there could be a whole lot worse,” Stein said when I asked about the reportedly rigged Russian elections this year. “When we needlessly provoke him and endanger him and surround him with war games — this is sort of the Cuban missile crisis on steroids … and I don’t think this is a good idea.” Moreover, she doesn’t think Russia was behind the hacking of the Democratic National Committee email system or that Putin is trying to sway the election in Trump’s favor — despite U.S. officials’ claims to the contrary and media reports that the Russian president is hell-bent on seeing Clinton defeated. “I don’t think we have evidence — there is really no hard evidence” of Putin’s meddling, she said. “We need to take a deep breath on this. This really doesn’t seem to be happening.” The other controversy ensnaring Stein is questions over her commitment to vaccinations, after comments she made earlier this year expressing sharp skepticism about the Food and Drug Administration and its willingness to buck corporate interests to produce safe formulations. On this topic she is less equivocal, and says she sees zero link between autism and vaccinations, although she remains concerned about the developmental impact of chemicals included in shots given to small children. Stein is extremely fastidious about her health (she sipped on an organic berry smoothie before our talk) and is acutely conscious of the environment, and not only in the abstract sense. At one point during our chat, after a bout of coughing, she pointed to the well-worn hotel carpet and told me the chemicals used to cover up the dirt are so toxic she spreads sheets on the floor every time she’s in a big-chain hotel. She is an ex-marathoner who clears her email inbox every morning during a brisk six-mile walk and has no detectable body fat. Thus, it is one of the small jokes in a big-joke 2016 that both Stein and Johnson are ultra-buff exercise freaks who are in far better shape than the puffier major-party candidates. As we were discussing Trump and Clinton’s dueling doctor’s notes, she offered the following declaration: “I am healthy, yes. I assume I have the lowest blood pressure of any candidate,” she said running a long finger down the medical office-type clipboard, stuffed with clips and talking points, that she totes everywhere. Cool. Trust but verify. Clinton provided her numbers — could she produce hers? “Last I recall it was around 110/70,” Stein said. “I’m sorry. Hillary Clinton has a 100/70,” I said. A few minutes into the podcast, an aide had handed Stein a note informing her she had (as expected) been locked out of the debates, and she responded with a smiling shrug. The blood-pressure revelation elicited a graver response. “Are you serious?” Stein said, pausing — before offering Clinton a challenge. “Man. … Well, I would be happy to run a race with her anytime.”
